VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

About the pagination of this eBook
This eBook contains a multi-volume set.
To navigate the front matter of this eBook by page number, you will
need to use the volume number and the page number, separated by a
hyphen.
For example, to go to page v of volume 1, type “1-v” in the Go box at
the bottom of the screen and click "Go."
To go to page v of volume 2, type “2-v”… and so forth.

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine
Volume 1
Edited by
David S. Bruyette, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)
Chief Medical Officer, Anivive Lifesciences, Long Beach, CA, USA

SECTION EDITORS
Nick Bexfield, BVetMed, PhD, DSAM, DipECVIM‐CA, PGDipMEdSci, PGCHE, FHEA, MRCVS
University of Cambridge

Johnny D. Chretin, DVM, DACVIM (O)
TrueCare for Pets

Linda Kidd, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM)
Western University of Health Sciences

Stephanie Kube, DVM, DACVIM (N)

Veterinary Neurology and Pain Management

Catherine Langston, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)
Ohio State University

Tina Jo Owen, DVM, DACVS
Washington State University

Mark A. Oyama, DVM, MSCE, DACVIM‐Cardiology
University of Pennsylvania

Nathan Peterson, DVM, DACVECC
VCA West Los Angeles Animal Hospital

Lisa V. Reiter, DVM, DACVD
McKeever Dermatology Clinics

Elizabeth A. Rozanski, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), DACVECC
Tufts University

Craig Ruaux, BVSc (Hons), PhD, MACVSc, DACVIM (SAIM)
Massey University

Sheila M.F. Torres, DVM, MS, PhD
University of Minnesota

VetBooks.ir

This edition first published 2020
© 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by law. Advice on how to obtain permission to reuse material
from this title is available at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
The right of David S. Bruyette to be identified as the author of the editorial material in this work has been asserted in accordance with law.
Registered Office
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
Editorial Office
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
For details of our global editorial offices, customer services, and more information about Wiley products visit us at www.wiley.com.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats and by print‐on‐demand. Some content that appears in standard print versions of
this book may not be available in other formats.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientific research, understanding, and discussion only and are not intended and should
not be relied upon as recommending or promoting scientific method, diagnosis, or treatment by physicians for any particular patient. In view
of ongoing research, equipment modifications, changes in governmental regulations, and the constant flow of information relating to the use of
medicines, equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to review and evaluate the information provided in the package insert or instructions for
each medicine, equipment, or device for, among other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and
precautions. While the publisher and authors have used their best efforts in preparing this work, they make no representations or warranties with
respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any
implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives, written
sales materials or promotional statements for this work. The fact that an organization, website, or product is referred to in this work as a citation
and/or potential source of further information does not mean that the publisher and authors endorse the information or services the organization,
website, or product may provide or recommendations it may make. This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged
in rendering professional services. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a
specialist where appropriate. Further, readers should be aware that websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when
this work was written and when it is read. Neither the publisher nor authors shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages,
including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
Library of Congress Cataloging‐in‐Publication data applied for
ISBN 9781118497067
Cover image: Cell images (left, middle) © Kateryna Kon/Shutterstock, Cell image (right) © David Bruyett, Dog and Cat image © David Bruyette
Cover design by Wiley
Set in 10/12pt Warnock by SPi Global, Pondicherry, India
10

9

8 7

6

5 4

3

2

1

VetBooks.ir

­Dedication
To CB Chastain, Dick Nelson and Ed Feldman for trying their best to make me a better clinician. For someone interested in internal medicine and endocrinology I could not have had better mentors.
To all of my former students, interns and residents, thanks so much for always keeping me honest and forcing me to
try to stay ahead of those I was supposed to be teaching.
To all the wonderful folks at Wiley (Erica Judisch, Gillian Whitley, Purvi Patel, Holly Regan-Jones, and Katrina Maceda)
that made this book possible and tried their best to keep me on track. You turned the idea into reality and improved
the book at every step in the process.
To my amazing children McKenna, Taylor, Ivy and Cole, thanks for letting me be a part of your lives. Being your Dad
is the best job in the world.
To my amazing wife and best friend Maya. You make my life complete and I look forward to sharing every day with
you.

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

vii

Contents
Preface xix
List of Contributors xxi
About the Companion Website xxix
VOLUME I
Section 1

Evaluation and Management of the Patient 1

1

The Concept of One Medicine 3
Lonnie J. King

2

Statistical Interpretation for Practitioners 7
Philip H. Kass

3

Using Data for Clinical Decision Making 17
Philip H. Kass

Section 2

Endocrine Disease 27

4

Principles of Endocrinology 29
Robert Kemppainen

5

Neuroendocrinology 35
Maya Lottati

6

Feline Acromegaly 43
David S. Bruyette

7

Pituitary‐Dependent Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs and Cats 49
David S. Bruyette

8

Polyuria and Polydipsia 65
Jennifer L. Garcia

9

Canine Hypothyroidism
David S. Bruyette

10

Feline Hyperthyroidism 75
David S. Bruyette

71

VetBooks.ir

viii

Contents

11

Hypoadrenocorticism in Dogs and Cats 81
Patty Lathan

12

Diabetes Mellitus in Dogs and Cats 93
Jacquie S. Rand

13

Hypoglycemia in Patients without Diabetes Mellitus: Evaluation and Management 103
Rhett Nichols

14

Canine Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndromes
Deborah Greco

Section 3

113

Cardiovascular Disease 117

15

Approach to the Patient with Suspected Cardiovascular Disease 119
Ingrid Ljungvall and Jens Häggström

16

Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease 127
Valérie Chetboul

17

Electrocardiography 165
Anna R.M. Gelzer and Marc S. Kraus

18

Pathophysiology of Heart Failure 175
Barret J. Bulmer

19

Management of Heart Failure 185
Steven Rosenthal and Mark A. Oyama

20

Ventricular Arrhythmias 199
Amara H. Estrada and Romain Pariaut

21

Supraventricular Arrhythmias 205
Romain Pariaut and Amara H. Estrada

22

Systemic Hypertension 219
Rebecca L. Stepien

23

Pulmonary Hypertension 225
Heidi B. Kellihan

24

Congenital Heart Disease 231
Brian A. Scansen

25

Valvular Heart Disease 245
Michele Borgarelli

26

Canine Myocardial Disease 253
M. Lynne O’Sullivan

27

Feline Myocardial Disease 267
Virginia Luis Fuentes

VetBooks.ir

Contents

28

Pericardial Disease 275
Ashley B. Saunders and Sonya G. Gordon

Section 4

Respiratory Disease 287

29

A Respiratory Pattern‐Based Approach to Dyspnea 289
Christopher G. Byers

30

Feline Bronchial Asthma 297
Christine M. Serafin

31

Canine Chronic Bronchitis 305
Kevin Kumrow

32

Pulmonary Thromboembolism 313
Robert Goggs

33

Surgical Approaches to Thoracic Disease 325
Raegan Wells

34

Pleural Effusion 333
Ashley Allen and Gareth Buckley

Section 5

Critical Care Medicine 345

35

Approach to the Patient in the Critical Care Setting 347
Sarah Allen

36

Fluid Therapy 355
Teresa Rieser

37

Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation 365
Nathan Peterson

38

Respiratory Monitoring in Critical Care 373
Mathew Mellema

39

Acute Respiratory Failure 381
Matthew Mellema

40

Mechanical Ventilation 393
Kate Hopper and Mathew Mellema

41

Approach to the Patient with Shock 403
James W. Barr

42

Cardiogenic Shock 413
Nathan Peterson and James W. Barr

43

Septic Shock 421
James W. Barr

ix

VetBooks.ir

x

Contents

44

Disorders of Heat and Cold 431
Sarah Allen

45

Acute Poisoning 437
Ben O’Kelley

46

Medical Management of Trauma and Burns 445
Nathan Peterson

47

Venomous Snake Bites 459
Nathan Peterson

Section 6

Gastrointestinal Disease 467

48

Gastrointestinal Imaging 469
Susanne M. Stieger‐Vanegas

49

Gastrointestinal Endoscopy 507
Craig Ruaux

50

Diseases of the Oral Cavity and Salivary Glands 533
Maria M. Soltero‐Rivera and Alexander M. Reiter

51

Gastritis and Gastric Ulceration in Dogs and Cats 547
Katie Tolbert and Emily Gould

52

Disorders of the Esophagus 557
Silvia Funes and Craig Ruaux

53

Motility Disorders of the Alimentary Tract 563
Reto Neiger and Silke Salavati

54

Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency in Dogs and Cats 583
Panagiotis G. Xenoulis

55

Pancreatitis in the Dog 591
Caroline Mansfield

56

Pancreatitis in the Cat 601
Craig Ruaux

57

Rectoanal Diseases – Medical and Surgical Management 609
Craig Ruaux and Milan Milovancev

58

Dysbiosis and the Use of Pre‐, Pro‐ and Synbiotics 621
Jan S. Suchodolski

59

Diagnosis and Management of Chronic Enteropathies 627
Karin Allenspach

Section 7
60

Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts 639

Approach to the Patient with Liver Disease 641
Emma O’Neill

VetBooks.ir

Contents

61

Imaging in Hepatobiliary Disease 659
Esther Barrett

62

Metabolic, Toxic, and Neoplastic Diseases of the Liver 677
Jan Rothuizen

63

Feline Inflammatory Liver Disease 687
Nicki Reed

64

Canine Inflammatory Liver Disease 695
Nick Bexfield

65

Cirrhosis and its Consequences 705
Katherine Scott

66

Portosystemic Shunts and Microvascular Dysplasia 713
Geraldine Hunt

67

Diseases of the Gallbladder and Extrahepatic Biliary Ducts 721
Ben Harris

Section 8

Neurologic Disease 727

68

The Neurologic Examination 729
Alexander de Lahunta

69

Central Nervous System Trauma 741
Simon R. Platt

70

Seizures and Movement Disorders 759
Michael Podell

71

Disorders of the Forebrain 773
Sam N. Long

72

Vestibular Disease 789
Tammy Stevenson

73

Meningoencephalitis and Meningomyelitis 795
Christopher L. Mariani

74

Diseases of the Neuromuscular Junction 803
David Lipsitz

75

Myopathies 811
Marguerite F. Knipe

76

Myelopathy 815
Joan R. Coates

77

Neuroophthalmology 823
Bradford J. Holmberg

xi

Contents

VOLUME II

VetBooks.ir

xii

Section 9
Part 1

Infectious Disease 829

Diagnostic Considerations 831

78

Epidemiology of Infectious Disease 833
Peggy L. Schmidt and Helen T. Engelke

79

Laboratory Diagnosis of Infectious Diseases 839
Laia Solano‐Gallego and Gad Baneth

Part 2

Select Infectious Diseases and Disease Agents 849

80

Canine Distemper 851
David S. Bruyette

81

Canine Herpesvirus 855
Yvonne Drechsler

82

Canine Viral Enteritis
Margaret C. Barr

83

Viral Papillomatosis 861
Margaret C. Barr

84

Canine Influenza Virus 865
Ellen Collisson

85

Feline Parvovirus 869
Margaret C. Barr

86

Feline Coronavirus 873
Yvonne Drechsler

87

Feline Leukemia Virus 877
David S. Bruyette

88

Feline Immunodeficiency Virus 883
Tom Phillips

89

Feline Viral Upper Respiratory Tract Disease 887
Yvonne Drechsler

90

Rabies in Dogs and Cats 891
Emily Beeler and Karen Ehnert

91

West Nile Virus 899
Tracey McNamara

92

Ebola Virus 901
Linda Kidd

857

VetBooks.ir

Contents

93

Ehrlichiosis and Anaplasmosis 903
Pedro P. Vissotto de Paiva Diniz

94

Salmon Poisoning Disease 913
Pedro P. Vissotto de Paiva Diniz

95

Wolbachia pipientis Infection 917
Pedro P. Vissotto de Paiva Diniz

96

Bartonellosis 919
Pedro P. Vissotto de Paiva Diniz

97

Hemotropic Mycoplasma 927
Séverine Tasker

98

Nonhemotropic Mycoplasma, Ureaplasma, and L‐Form Bacteria 931
Joachim Spergser

99

Spotted Fever and Typhus Group Rickettsia 937
Linda Kidd

100

Lyme Borreliosis 941
Meryl P. Littman

101

Leptospirosis 945
Katharine F. Lunn

102

Yersiniosis 951
Maria Grazia Pennisi

103

Tularemia 955
Linda Kidd

104

Q Fever 959
Linda Kidd

105

Brucellosis 963
Erin E. Runcan and Marco A. Coutinho da Silva

106

Tetanus and Botulism 967
Andrea Fischer

107

Anthrax 971
Wayne E. Wingfield and Jerry J. Upp

108

Actinomycosis, Nocardiosis, and Mycobacterial Infections 977
Joanna Whitney and Vanessa R. Barrs

109

Fungal Infections 985
Jane E. Sykes

110

Protozoal and Protozoa‐Like Infections 1003
Gad Baneth and Laia Solano‐Gallego

xiii

VetBooks.ir

xiv

Contents

111

Coccidia 1023
Chris Adolph

112

Surgical, Traumatic, and Bite Wound Infections 1029
Laura L. Nelson

113

Canine Infectious Respiratory Disease Complex 1035
Jonathan Dear
Part 3

Therapeutic Considerations 1039

114

Antimicrobial Therapy in Dogs and Cats 1041
Katrina R. Viviano

115

Antifungal Therapy 1049
Daniel S. Foy
Part 4

Special Topics 1055

116

Nosocomial and Multidrug‐Resistant Infections 1057
Jason W. Stull and J. Scott Weese

117

Management of Infectious Disease in Kennels and Multicat Environments: Creating a Culture of
Compliance 1063
Frank Bossong
Section 10

Renal and Genitourinary Disease 1067

118

Disorders of Sodium and Water Homeostasis 1069
Julien Guillaumin and Stephen DiBartola

119

Disorders of Phosphorus and Magnesium 1079
Rosanne Jepson

120

Acute Kidney Injury 1089
Adam E. Eatroff

121

Glomerular Disease 1101
Shelly L. Vaden

122

Obstructive Uropathy 1109
Edward Cooper and Brian A. Scansen

123

Urolithiasis in Small Animals 1123
Alice Defarges, Michelle Evason, Marilyn Dunn, and Allyson Berent

124

Prostatic Diseases 1157
Serge Chalhoub

125

Management of Chronic Kidney Disease 1165
Jessica Quimby

VetBooks.ir

Contents

126

The Role of Dialysis 1175
Adam E. Eatroff

127

Micturition and Associated Disorders 1181
Julie K. Byron

128

Urinary Tract Infections 1189
Nicole Smee

Section 11

Oncologic Disease 1197

129

Approach to the Cancer Patient 1199
Lisa DiBernardi

130

Biology of Cancer and Cancer Genetics 1205
Mary‐Keara Boss

131

Endocrine Manifestations of Cancer: Ectopic Hormone Production 1213
Cory Brown

132

Paraneoplastic Syndromes 1217
Cory Brown

133

Lymphoid Leukemias, Myeloid Neoplasia, and Myelodysplastic Syndrome 1223
Angela R. Kozicki

134

Lymphomas 1231
Kristine Elaine Burgess

135

Plasma Cell Disorders 1241
Orna Kristal

136

Central Nervous System Tumors in Dogs and Cats 1247
David Ruslander

137

Cancer of the Nose and Mouth 1253
Lauren Askin Quarterman

138

Tumors of the Eye and Ocular Adnexa 1261
Erin M. Scott and Paul E. Miller

139

Cancer of the Heart 1271
Nick A. Schroeder and Lisa DiBernardi

140

Cancer of the Airway and Lung 1277
Joanne L. Intile

141

Cancer of the Esophagus and Stomach 1283
Avenelle I. Turner

142

Cancer of the Small and Large Intestine 1287
Edwin Brodsky

xv

VetBooks.ir

xvi

Contents

143

Exocrine Pancreatic Cancer 1293
Avenelle I. Turner

144

Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors 1297
Karen Eiler

145

Liver and Biliary Tract Tumors 1303
Amanda K. Elpiner

146

Tumors of the Urinary Tract 1307
Pedro A. Boria

147

Tumors of the Male Reproductive System 1311
Trina Hazzah

148

Gynecologic Cancers 1317
Trina Hazzah

149

Mammary Cancer 1321
Julie Bulman‐Fleming

150

Tumors of Bone and Joint 1327
Stephanie L. Shaver, William T.N. Culp, and Robert B. Rebhun

151

Soft Tissue Sarcomas 1333
Lauren Askin Quarterman

152

Hemangiosarcoma 1339
Christine B. Oakley and John D. Chretin

153

Melanoma 1347
Philip J. Bergman

154

Nonmelanoma Skin Cancers 1353
Barbara E. Kitchell

155

Mast Cell Neoplasia 1359
Zachary M. Wright

156

Apheresis in Companion Animals 1369
Steven Suter

Section 12

Skin and Ear Diseases 1373

157

Approach to the Patient with Dermatologic Disease 1375
Lisa V. Reiter

158

Principles of Therapy of Dermatologic Diseases 1397
Sandra N. Koch

159

Atopic Dermatitis 1403
Alison Diesel

VetBooks.ir

Contents

160

Allergic Skin Diseases 1413
Patrick Hensel

161

Cutaneous Adverse Food Reactions 1419
Ralf S. Mueller

162

Autoimmune and Immune‐Mediated Skin Diseases 1423
Nicole A. Heinrich

163

Approach to Alopecia 1433
Linda A. Frank

164

Canine Sterile Papular and Nodular Skin Diseases 1441
Sandra Diaz

165

Parasitic Skin Diseases 1449
Elizabeth E. Toops

166

Bacterial Pyodermas 1461
Jennifer R. Schissler

167

Otitis 1471
Sue Paterson

168

Cutaneous Manifestations of Systemic Disease 1481
Kinga Gortel

169

Superficial Necrolytic Dermatitis 1491
Mitchell D. Song

170

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases 1495
Lisa V. Reiter and Sheila M.F. Torres

Section 13

Diseases of Bone and Joint 1507

171

Skeletal Development and Homeostasis 1509
Matthew J. Allen and Gert J. Breur

172

Metabolic Bone Diseases 1521
Keren E. Dittmer

173

Osteoarthritis in Small Animals 1529
Steven A. Martinez

174

Developmental Orthopedic Diseases 1537
Gert J. Breur, Nicolaas E. Lambrechts, and Heather A. Towle Millard

Section 14
175

Social and Ethical Issues in Veterinary Medicine 1553

Canine and Feline End of Life Care 1555
Robin Downing

xvii

VetBooks.ir

xviii

Contents

Section 15

Preventive Care 1565

176

Role of Immunization 1567
Melissa Kennedy

177

Behavior Triage for Internists and the General Practitioner 1571
Karen Lynn C. Sueda

Section 16
Index 1583

Laboratory Support 1581

VetBooks.ir

xix

Preface
Internal medicine is hard. Progress in science and technology makes it almost impossible to keep abreast of
recent advances and on top of that, all of us want to balance our life both at work and home. Is there enough
time in the day for everything?
There are a variety of ways in which we learn and the
path is not the same for everyone. For those of us with an
interest in internal medicine, and I’m assuming that
includes the reader of this book, we rely on a number of
resources. Our colleagues, continuing education seminars, the literature, professional educational networks,
and reference textbooks. A concern of mine over the past
few years has been the increasing reliance on technology
to arrive at a clinical diagnosis rather than emphasizing
the need to understand physiology and the value of a
complete history and a thorough physical examination.
We feel increasing pressure to arrive at a specific and
definitive diagnosis and, more importantly, to arrive at
that diagnosis almost immediately.
Your goal in internal medicine is not to arrive at a diagnosis. I would much prefer to see a pet respond to my
treatment and recover without a definitive diagnosis
than to arrive at a definitive diagnosis at necropsy. If you
are successful in achieving a diagnosis, that can be very
rewarding. However, your goal should be to accurately
identify problems and address those problems in a logical, timely, and cost‐effective manner, always weighing
the risk/benefit of running myriad diagnostics versus
improving the quality of life of your patient and the pet
owner. While not every pet owner will be able to afford
or desire to follow each and every one of our recommendations, it is our job to make sure that whatever decision
the owner makes is based on being fully informed.
Illness is really physiology gone awry. If you have an
understanding of what is normal, it makes your job of
identifying the abnormal much easier. The body has a
limited repertoire of responses to an insult so often many
diseases will have very similar clinical presentations.

While we all like to make lists of the 20 differential diagnoses for a given patient’s abnormalities, it’s important to
recognize that in clinical practice, common things occur
commonly and those differentials should be at the top of
your rule‐out list.
There are numerous excellent textbooks on the market
and I use many of them on a daily/weekly basis. Some
serve as definitive reference works for the topic under discussion. Some are brief, bullet point, clinically oriented
texts that one can use to find something quickly. What I
thought was currently lacking was a text that would be
continually updated, provide enough background physiology to help the reader understand normal versus abnormal, and provide useful and, more importantly, clinically
relevant material to help you with your patients.
The goal of this text was to first identify section editors
who were recognized experts in their field both academically and clinically. The section editors then identified
topics they felt were of greatest clinical importance and
selected authors who could translate this information
into a text that would be used every day. I hope we have
achieved that goal. We will be updating the text online
with new information and updated references on a quarterly basis, adding additional sections and chapters with
future editions, and uploading podcasts consisting of
interviews with the authors to highlight and emphasize
the material in the text and any recent advances in the
field.
We hope that you will find the text helpful and all
credit for that success goes to the authors. Any omissions
or errors lie with me so please let me know both the good
and the bad so we can improve things going forward.
As my favorite philosopher once said “It’s a magical
world, Hobbes, ol’ buddy, let’s go exploring.”
All the best and enjoy exploring the mysteries of
medicine.
Dave

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

xxi

List of Contributors
Chris Adolph, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVM (Parasitology)

Zoetis Inc.
Tulsa, OK, USA
Ashley Allen, DVM, DACVECC

College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL, USA
Matthew J. Allen, VetMB, PhD

Department of Veterinary Medicine
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
Sarah Allen, DVM, DACVECC

Massachusetts Veterinary Referral Hospital
Woburn, MA, USA
Karin Allenspach, Dr.Med.Vet., PhD, DECVIM‐CA

College of Veterinary Medicine
Iowa State University
Ames, IA, USA
Gad Baneth, DVM, PhD, DECVCP

School of Veterinary Medicine
Hebrew University
Rehovot, Israel
James W. Barr, DVM, DACVECC

BluePearl Veterinary Partners
Tampa, FL, USA
Margaret C. Barr, DVM, PhD

College of Veterinary Medicine
Western University of Health Sciences
Pomona, CA, USA

Vanessa R. Barrs, BVSc (Hons), MVetClinStud, MACVSc
(Small Animal), FACVSc (Feline), GradCertEd (Higher Ed)

University of Sydney
Sydney, Australia
Emily Beeler, DVM, MPH

Veterinary Public Health Program
Los Angeles County Department of Public Health
Los Angeles, CA, USA
Allyson Berent, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

The Animal Medical Center
New York, USA
Philip J. Bergman, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Oncology)

Katonah‐Bedford Veterinary Center
Clinical Studies, VCA Antech
Bedford Hills, NY, USA
Nick Bexfield, BVetMed, PhD, DSAM, DECVIM‐CA,
PGDipMEdSci, FHEA, MRCVS

The Queen’s Veterinary School Hospital
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
Michele Borgarelli, DVM, PhD, DECVIM (Cardiology)

Virginia‐Maryland Regional College of
Veterinary Medicine
Blacksburg, VA, USA
Pedro A. Boria, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Oncology)

Blue Pearl Veterinary Partners
Northfield, IL, USA
Mary‐Keara Boss, DVM, PhD, DACVR (Radiation Oncology)

Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO, USA
Frank Bossong, DVM

Esther Barrett, MA, VetMB, DVDI, DECVDI, MRCVSt

Wales and West Imaging
Chepstow, UK

College of Veterinary Medicine
Western University of Health Sciences
Pomona, CA, USA

VetBooks.ir

xxii

­List of Contributors

Gert J. Breur, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVS

Johnny D. Chretin, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)

College of Veterinary Medicine
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA

TrueCare for Pets
Studio City, CA, USA

Edwin Brodsky, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)

College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Missouri
Columbia, MO, USA

Veterinary Medical Center of Long Island
West Islip, NY, USA
Cory Brown, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Joan R. Coates, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Neurology)

Ellen Collisson, MS, PhD

VetScan Mobile Diagnostics
Powell, OH, USA

College of Veterinary Medicine
Western University of Health Sciences
Pomona, CA, USA

David S. Bruyette, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Edward Cooper, VMD, MS, DACVECC

Anivive Lifesciences
Long Beach, CA, USA
Gareth Buckley, MA, VetMB, MRCVS, DACVECC

College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL, USA
Julie Bulman‐Fleming, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)

Veterinary Cancer Group
Tustin, CA, USA
Barret J. Bulmer, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Cardiology)

Tufts Veterinary Emergency Treatment & Specialties
Walpole, MA, USA
Kristine Elaine Burgess, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)

Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine
Tufts University
North Grafton, MA, USA
Christopher G. Byers, DVM, DACVECC, DACVIM (SAIM), CVJ

CriticalCareDVM.com
Omaha, NE, USA
Julie K. Byron, DVM, MS, DACVIM (SAIM)

College of Veterinary Medicine
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA

College of Veterinary Medicine
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA
William T.N. Culp, VMD, DACVS, ACVS Founding
Fellow of Surgical Oncology

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA, USA
Jonathan Dear, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA, USA
Alice Defarges, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Ontario Veterinary College
University of Guelph
Guelph, ON, Canada
Alexander de Lahunta, DVM, PhD,
DACVIM (Neurology), DACVP

College of Veterinary Medicine
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
Sandra Diaz, DVM, MS, DACVD
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences

Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA

Serge Chalhoub, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Stephen DiBartola, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
University of Calgary
Calgary, AB, Canada

Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA

Valérie Chetboul, DVM, PhD, DECVIM‐CA (Cardiology)

Lisa DiBernardi, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology), DACVR
(Radiation Oncology)

National Veterinary School at Alfort
Maisons‐Alfort, France

Gulf Coast Veterinary Specialists
Houston, TX, USA

VetBooks.ir

­List of Contributors

Alison Diesel, DVM, DACVD

Michelle Evason, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA

Atlantic Veterinary College
University of Prince Edward Island
Charlottetown, PE, Canada

Pedro P. Vissotto de Paiva Diniz, DVM, PhD

Andrea Fischer, DVM, DECVN, DACVIM (Neurology)

College of Veterinary Medicine
Western University of Health Sciences
Pomona, CA, USA
Keren E. Dittmer, PhD, BVSc, DACVP

School of Veterinary Science
Massey University
Palmerston North, New Zealand
Robin Downing, DVM, MS, DAAPM, DACVSMR

The Downing Center for Animal Pain Management, LLC
Windsor, CO, USA
Yvonne Drechsler, PhD

College of Veterinary Medicine
Western University of Health Sciences
Pomona, CA, USA
Marilyn Dunn, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vétérinaire
University of Montreal
Saint‐Hyacinthe, QC, Canada
Adam E. Eatroff, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

ACCESS Specialty Animal Hospitals
Culver City, CA, USA
Karen Ehnert, DVM, MPVM, DACVPM

Veterinary Public Health Program
Los Angeles County Department of
Public Health
Los Angeles, CA, USA
Karen Eiler, DVM, MS, DACVIM (SAIM)

VCA West Los Angeles Animal Hospital
Los Angeles, CA, USA
Helen T. Engelke, BVSc, MPVM, DACVPM, MRCVS

College of Veterinary Medicine
Western University of Health Sciences
Pomona, CA, USA

Ludwig‐Maximilians University
Munich, Germany
Daniel S. Foy, MS, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), DACVECC

College of Veterinary Medicine
Midwestern University
Glendale, AZ, USA
Linda A. Frank, DVM, MS, DACVD

College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Tennessee Institute of Agriculture
Knoxville, TN, USA
Virginia Luis Fuentes, MA, VetMB, PhD, CertVR, DVC,
MRCVS, DACVIM (Cardiology), DECVIM (Cardiology)

Royal Veterinary College
University of London
Hatfield, Herts, UK
Silvia Funes, DVM, MS, DACVIM (SAIM)

VCA Bay Area Veterinary Specialists and
Emergency Hospital
San Leandro, CA, USA
Jennifer L. Garcia, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Sugar Land Veterinary Specialists and VetCompanion
Houston, TX, USA
Anna R. M. Gelzer, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Cardiology),
DECVIM‐CA (Cardiology)

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA
Robert Goggs, BVSc, PhD, DACVECC, DECVECC

Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine
Companion Animal Hospital
Ithaca, NY, USA
Sonya G. Gordon, DVM, DVSc, DACVIM (Cardiology)

VCA Great Lakes Veterinary Specialists
Cleveland, OH, USA

College of Veterinary Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA

Amara H. Estrada, DVM, DACVIM (Cardiology)

Kinga Gortel, DVM, MS, DACVD

University of Florida
Gainesville, FL, USA

Tri Lake Animal Hospital and Referral Centre
Lake Country, BC, Canada

Amanda K. Elpiner, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)

xxiii

VetBooks.ir

xxiv

­List of Contributors

Emily Gould, DVM, MS

College of Veterinary Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
Deborah Greco, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM)

Desert Veterinary Specialists
Palm Desert, CA, USA
Julien Guillaumin, DVM, DACVECC

Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO, USA
Jens Häggström, DVM, PhD, DECVIM‐CA (Cardiology)

Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences
Uppsala, Sweden
Ben Harris, MA, VetMB, CertSAM, MRCVS

Northwest Veterinary Specialists
Sutton Weaver, Cheshire, UK

Rosanne Jepson, BVSc, MVetMed, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM),
DECVIM-CA, PGCertVetEd, FHEA, MRCVS

Royal Veterinary College
University of London
London, UK
Philip H. Kass, BS, DVM, MPVM, MS, PhD

Population Health and Reproduction
Davis, CA, USA
Heidi B. Kellihan, DVM, DACVIM (Cardiology)

University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI, USA
Robert Kemppainen, DVM, PhD

Auburn University
Auburn, AL, USA
Melissa Kennedy, DVM, PhD, DACVM

College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Tennessee
Knoxville, TN, USA
Linda Kidd, DVM, PhD, DACVIM

Trina Hazzah, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)

VCA West Los Angeles Animal Hospital
Los Angeles, CA, USA
Nicole A. Heinrich, DVM, DACVD

McKeever Dermatology Clinics
Eden Prairie, MN, USA
Patrick Hensel, Dr. Med.Vet., DACVD, DECVD

Tierdermatologie
Basel, Switzerland
Bradford J. Holmberg, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVO

Animal Eye Center
Little Falls, NJ, USA
Kate Hopper, BVSc, DACVECC, PhD

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA, USA
Geraldine Hunt, BVSc, MVetClinStud, PhD, FACVSc

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA, USA
Joanne L. Intile, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)
College of Veterinary Medicine

North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC, USA

College of Veterinary Medicine
Western University of Health Sciences
Pomona, CA, USA
Lonnie J. King, DVM, MS, MPA, DACVPM

The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA
Barbara E. Kitchell, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
(Internal Medicine, Oncology)

VCA Veterinary Care Animal Hospital and
Referral Center
Albuquerque, NM, USA
Marguerite F. Knipe, DVM, DACVIM (Neurology)

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA, USA
Sandra N. Koch, DVM, MS, DACVD

College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Minnesota
St Paul, MN, USA
Angela R. Kozicki, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)

Bluepearl Veterinary Partners
Southfield, MI, USA
Marc S. Kraus, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM, Cardiology),
DECVIM‐CA (Cardiology)

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA

VetBooks.ir

­List of Contributors

Orna Kristal, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)

Veterinary Specialty and Emergency Hospital
Wan Chai, Hong Kong
Stephanie Kube, DVM, DACVIM (Neurology)

Veterinary Neurology and Pain Management
Center of New England
Walpole, MA, USA
Kevin Kumrow, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Orchard Park Veterinary Medical Center
Orchard Park, NY, USA
Nicolaas E. Lambrechts, DVM, DECVS, DACVSMR

College of Veterinary Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO, USA
Catherine Langston, VM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA
Patty Lathan, VMD, DACVIM (SAIM)

College of Veterinary Medicine
Mississippi State University
Mississippi State, MS, USA
David Lipsitz, DVM, DACVIM (Neurology)

Veterinary Specialty Hospital
San Diego, CA, USA
Meryl P. Littman, VMD, DACVIM (SAIM)

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA
Ingrid Ljungvall, DVM, PhD, DECVIM‐CA (Cardiology)

Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences
Uppsala, Sweden
Sam N. Long, BVSc, PhD, DipECVN

Centre for Animal Referral and Emergency
Melbourne, Australia
Maya Lottati, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM)

Caroline Mansfield, BSc, BVMS, MVM, PhD,
MANZCVS, DECVIM-CA

Melbourne Veterinary School
University of Melbourne
Melbourne, Australia
Christopher L. Mariani, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Neurology)

College of Veterinary Medicine
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC, USA
Steven A. Martinez, DVM, MS, DACVS, DACVSMR

College of Veterinary Medicine
Washington State University
Pullman, WA, USA
Tracey McNamara, DVM, DACVP

College of Veterinary Medicine
Western University of Health Sciences
Pomona, CA, USA
Mathew Mellema, DVM, PhD, DACVECC

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA, USA
Heather A. Towle Millard, DVM, MS, DACVS‐SA

Blue Pearl Pet Hospital
Overland Park, KS, USA
Paul E. Miller, DVM, DACVO

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Wisconsin‐Madison
Madison, WI, USA
Milan Milovancev, DVM, DACVS‐SA

School of Veterinary Medicine
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR, USA
Ralf S. Mueller, Dr. Med.Vet., DACVD, FANZCVSc

Centre for Clinical Veterinary Medicine
Ludwig‐Maximilians‐University of Munich
Munich, Germany
Reto Neiger, Dr.Med.Vet., PhD, DACVIM (SAIM),
DECVIM-CA

TrueCare for Pets
Studio City, CA, USA

Small Animal Clinic Hofheim
Hofheim, Germany

Katharine F. Lunn, BVMS, MS, PhD, MRCVS, DACVIM (SAIM)

Laura L. Nelson, DVM, MS, DACVS

College of Veterinary Medicine
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC, USA

College of Veterinary Medicine
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC, USA

xxv

VetBooks.ir

xxvi

­List of Contributors

Rhett Nichols, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Antech Diagnostics
Farmingdale, NY, USA
Christine B. Oakley, DVM

VCA Veterinary Specialists of the Valley
Woodland Hills, CA, USA
Ben O’Kelley, DVM, DACVECC

BluePearl Veterinary Partners
Tampa, FL, USA
Emma O’Neill, BSc, BVSc, PhD, DSAM, DECVIM‐CA, MRCVS

School of Veterinary Medicine
University College Dublin
Dublin, Eire
M. Lynne O’Sullivan, DVM, DVSc, DACVIM (Cardiology)

Atlantic Veterinary College
University of Prince Edward Island
Charlottetown, PEI, Canada
Tina Jo Owen, DVM, DACVS

Washington State University
Pullman, WA, USA
Mark A. Oyama, DVM, MSCE, DACVIM (Cardiology)
Department of Clinical Sciences and Advanced Medicine

University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA

Romain Pariaut, DVM, DACVIM (Cardiology),
DECVIM-CA (Cardiology)

College of Veterinary Medicine
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
Sue Paterson, MA, VetMB, DVD, DECVD, FRCVS

Veterinary Dermatologicals
Altrincham, Cheshire, UK
Maria Grazia Pennisi, DVM, PhD

Specialist Applied Microbiology
University of Messina
Messina, Italy
Nathan Peterson, DVM, DACVECC

VCA West Los Angeles Animal Hospital
Los Angeles, CA, USA
Tom Phillips, DVM, MS, PhD

Deceased
Formerly College of Veterinary Medicine
Western University of Health Sciences
Pomona, CA, USA

Simon R. Platt, BVM&S, FRCVS, DACVIM
(Neurology), DECVN

College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Georgia
Athens, GA, USA
Michael Podell, MSc, DVM, DACVIM (Neurology)

Chicago Veterinary Emergency and Specialty Center
Chicago, IL, USA
Lauren Askin Quarterman, DVM, DACVR
(Radiation Oncology)

PetCure Oncology
San Jose, CA, USA
Jessica Quimby, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM)

Ohio State University Veterinary Medical Center
Columbus, OH, USA
Jacquie S. Rand, BVSc, DVSc, MANZVS, DACVIM (SAIM)

School of Veterinary Science
University of Queensland
Gatton, Queensland, Australia
and
Australian Pet Welfare Foundation
Kenmore, Queensland, Australia
Robert B. Rebhun, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Oncology)

Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA, USA
Nicki Reed, BVM&S, CertVR, DSAM (Feline), DECVIM‐CA,
MRCVS

Veterinary Specialists
West Lothian, Scotland, UK
Alexander M. Reiter, Dipl.Tzt., Dr.Med.Vet.,
DAVDC, DEVDC

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA
Lisa V. Reiter, DVM, DACVD

McKeever Dermatology Clinics
Eden Prairie and Inver Grove Heights, MN, USA
Teresa Rieser, DVM, DACVECC

Veterinary Specialty Care
Mt. Pleasant, SC, USA
Steven Rosenthal, DVM, DACVIM (Cardiology)

CVCA Cardiac Care for Pets
Towson, MD, USA

VetBooks.ir

­List of Contributors

Jan Rothuizen, DVM, PhD, DECVIM‐CA

Erin M. Scott, DVM, DACVO

Department of Clinical Science of
Companion Animals
Utrecht University
Utrecht, The Netherlands

College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA

Elizabeth A. Rozanski, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), DACVECC

VCA Alameda East Veterinary Hospital
Denver, CO, USA

Tufts University
Medford, MA, USA
Craig Ruaux, BVSc (Hons), PhD, MACVSc, DACVIM (SAIM)

School of Veterinary Science
Massey University
Palmerston North, New Zealand
Erin E. Runcan, DVM, DACVT

Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA
David Ruslander, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology), DACVR
(Radiation Oncology)

Veterinary Specialty Hospital of the Carolinas
Cary, NC, USA
Silke Salavati, Dr.Med.Vet., PhD, DipECVIM‐CA, MRCVS

Royal School of Veterinary Studies
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, Scotland
Ashley B. Saunders, DVM, DACVIM (Cardiology)

College of Veterinary Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
Brian A. Scansen, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Cardiology)

Katherine Scott, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Christine M. Serafin, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

The Animal Surgical Center of Michigan
Flint, MI, USA
Stephanie L. Shaver, DVM, DACVS

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA, USA
Marco A. Coutinho da Silva, DVM, MS, PhD, DACT

Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA
Nicole Smee, DVM, MS, DACVIM

Las Vegas Veterinary Specialty Center
Las Vegas, NV, USA
Laia Solano‐Gallego, DVM, PhD, DECVCP

Facultat de Veterinária
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain
Maria M. Soltero‐Rivera, DVM, DAVDC

VCA San Francisco Veterinary Specialists
San Francisco, CA, USA
Mitchell D. Song, DVM, DACVD

Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO, USA

VETMED Specialty Referral and 24‐Hour Emergency
Care Veterinary Hospital
Phoenix, AZ, USA

Jennifer R. Schissler, DVM, MS, DACVD

Joachim Spergser, Dipl.Tzt., Dr. Med.Vet., DECVM

College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO, USA
Peggy L. Schmidt, DVM, MS, DACVPM

College of Veterinary Medicine
Kansas State University
Manhattan, KS, USA

Institute of Microbiology
University of Veterinary Medicine
Vienna, Austria
Rebecca L. Stepien, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Cardiology)

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Wisconsin‐Madison
Madison, WI, USA

Nick A. Schroeder, DVM, DACVIM (Cardiology)

Tammy Stevenson, DVM, DACVIM

LeadER Animal Specialty Hospital
Cooper City, FL, USA

Veterinary Specialty Hospital
San Diego, CA, USA

xxvii

VetBooks.ir

xxviii

­List of Contributors

Susanne M. Stieger‐Vanegas, DVM, PhD, DECVDI

Avenelle I. Turner, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)

Carlson College of Veterinary Medicine
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR, USA

Veterinary Cancer Group
Culver City, CA, USA

Jason W. Stull, VMD, MPVM, PhD, DACVPM

Midtown Animal Hospital
Gering, NE, USA

Department of Veterinary Preventive Medicine
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA
Jan S. Suchodolski, MedVet, Dr. Med.Vet., PhD, AGAF,
DACVM

College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
Karen Lynn C. Sueda, DVM, DACVB

VCA West Los Angeles Animal Hospital
Los Angeles, CA, USA
Steven Suter, VMD, MS, PhD, DACVIM

Canine Bone Marrow Transplant Unit
North Carolina State University College of
Veterinary Medicine
Raleigh, NC, USA
Jane E. Sykes, BVSc, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM)

Jerry J. Upp, DVM

Shelly L. Vaden, DMV, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM)

College of Veterinary Medicine
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC, USA
Katrina R. Viviano, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM), DACVCP

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Wisconsin‐Madison
Madison, WI, USA
J. Scott Weese, DVM, DVSc, DACVIM (SAIM)

Ontario Veterinary College
University of Guelph
Guelph, ON, Canada
Raegan Wells, DVM, DACVECC

Phoenix Veterinary Referral and Emergency Center
Phoenix, AZ, USA
Joanna Whitney, BSc, BVSc, PhD, MVetStud, MACVS
(SMAnimMed, ECC)

University of California, Davis
Davis, CA, USA

Small Animal Specialist Hospital
North Ryde, NSW, Australia

Séverine Tasker, BSc, BVSc (Hons), PhD, DSAM, DACVIM‐CA,
PGCertHE, MRCVS

Wayne E. Wingfield, MS, DVM, DACVS, DACVECC

Bristol Veterinary School
University of Bristol
Bristol, UK
Katie Tolbert, DVM, PhD, ADCVIM (SAIM)

College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
Elizabeth E. Toops, DVM, MS, DACVD (Dermatology)

Virginia Veterinary Specialists
Charlottesville, VA, USA
Sheila M.F. Torres, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVD

College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Minnesota
St Paul, MN, USA

Department of Clinical Sciences
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO, USA
Zachary M. Wright, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)

VCA Animal Diagnostic Clinic
Dallas, TX, USA
Panagiotis G. Xenoulis, DVM, Dr. Med.Vet., PhD

College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX

VetBooks.ir

xxix

About the Companion Website
This book is accompanied by a companion website:
www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical
The website includes:
Podcasts

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1

Section 1
Evaluation and Management of the Patient

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

3

1
The Concept of One Medicine
Lonnie J. King, DVM, MS, MPA, DACVPM
Department of Veterinary Preventive Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA

Today’s world is rapidly changing, complex, and progressively more interconnected. The convergence of people,
animals, and our environment has created a new dynamic
characterized by a profound and unprecedented interdependence in which the health of all three domains is now
inextricably linked and elaborately connected. Over the
last three decades, approximately 75% of new emerging
human diseases have been zoonotic. The human–animal
interface is expanding, accelerating, and becoming
increasingly more consequential. At the same time, we
have permanently altered a significant portion of our
environment, ecosystems, and habitats and have created
a new ecological milieu that is changing both the conditions of our human–animal interface and the conditions
for microbial adaptation and the emergence and reemergence of infectious diseases worldwide.
Our new interdependence includes social, economic,
political, and biological conditions that are creating new
threats to the health of people, animals, and our environment. We can no longer focus on these threats separately
from each other. Our contemporary challenge is to create and implement a new mindset and strategies to
address our threats to health based on a holistic and integrated approach with a special emphasis on prevention
and attacking problems closer to their origin that is often
within the animal and environmental domains. This
approach is the essence of the concept of One Health.
One Health can be defined as the collaborative effort
of multiple disciplines – working locally, nationally, and
globally to attain optimal health for people, animals,
and our environment. The scope of One Health is
­impressive, broad, and growing. Much of the recent
focus on One Health has been limited to emerging
infectious diseases yet the concept clearly embraces
environmental and ecosystem health, social sciences,
biodiversity, ecology, noninfectious diseases and chronic
diseases and much more.

While the concept of One Health is not new, it has
enjoyed a new recognition based on today’s complex
challenges to our health. The veterinary profession is
especially well equipped through our broad training in
herd health, comparative medicine, epidemiology, problem solving, and disease ecology to play an important
role in implementing new One Health strategies.

­Factors Driving One Health
In a publication entitled Microbial Threats to Health:
Emergence, Detection, and Response, authors from the
Institute of Medicine suggested that a group of factors have
simultaneously converged to create a “perfect microbial
storm” [1]. The most important of these f­ actors include:
adaptation of microbes
global travel and transportation
●● host susceptibility
●● intent to do harm
●● climate change
●● economic development and land use
●● human demographics and behavior
●● a breakdown of both public and animal health
infra­structures.
●●
●●

­The Human Domain
The world population has a growth rate of 1.2% per year
and the next century will represent a period of exponential growth. We add approximately 10 000 people per
hour to our global population every day. Approximately
90% of the world’s population growth is occurring in the
developing countries where we are most concerned
about a lack of adequate public and animal health infrastructure. In addition, almost 1 billion people live in

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

4

Section 1 Evaluation and Management of the Patient

periurban or slum settings in the developing world’s largest cities and these sites are where the most rapid growth
in our human populations will continue. Concurrently,
there is unprecedented immigration, translocation, and
movement of people worldwide. Unique diasporas have
emerged and there are large numbers of immunocompromised individuals dispersed throughout the US and
global populations who are especially susceptible to
infections involving food‐ and water‐borne illnesses.

­The Animal Domain
While there is also legitimate concern about the approximately 800 million people who are undernourished, we
are concurrently observing a relative increase in wealth
in the developing world and as per capita incomes rise,
people eat more calories and consume different products, including a demand for meat and protein from animal sources. Thus, a new agricultural phenomenon is
emerging – the Livestock Revolution; we will need to
increase protein from animal sources by 50% over the
next several decades. We will also need to increase food‐
animal production with minimal impacts on the environment and our ecosystems. Veterinarians will be
engaged with ecologists to help ensure the sustainability
of our lands.
At the same time, companion animals and pets are also
rapidly increasing globally and there are untold numbers
of wildlife that are increasingly involved at the human–
animal interface and responsible for carrying and transmitting more and more zoonotic diseases. West Nile
virus, Lyme disease, Nipah, Hendra, and hantaviruses
are some important examples.
With a new appreciation of the need for detecting and
identifying human infectious disease threats at animal
and ecosystem level, our scope of disease surveillance
must also be expanded to include these domains.
Currently, 80% of select agents are zoonotic which further emphasizes the need for integrating animal disease
surveillance into human disease surveillance programs.
In addition to the benefits of earlier detection and warning, surveillance within these domains will give us new
insights and analyses on disease prediction and new possibilities to prevent future disease occurrences and exposures. Thus, animal disease surveillance has taken on a
new importance and relevance.
Until we address the underlying factors that lead to disease emergence and reemergence, we will continue to
address infectious disease problems one at a time and
based on reactive responses. A new commitment is necessary to refocus our efforts to prevent and control diseases in ways that also address these underlying conditions
and the animals, animal products, and their vectors.

For example, human exposure to Borrelia burgdorferi,
the etiologic agent of Lyme disease, is maintained and
spread based on the complex relationships among wildlife populations, tick life cycles, host preferences, habitat,
ecosystem, and landscape design and other dynamics of
this disease ecology. Effective prevention and control
may need to focus on ecologic interventions rather than
treating the human illness after exposure and infection.
Thus, rather than a narrow focus on humans and their
interactions with pathogens, we need to focus on the
dynamic interplay among humans, animals, and animal
products, and our changing environment – in other
words, a One Health approach.

­Role for Companion Animal Experts
The purpose of including this introduction on One
Health for a text on internal medicine is to help create a
new awareness of the concept across the veterinary profession and to suggest that companion animal practitioners also have new opportunities, as well as obligations, to
support public health in the future.
Practitioners can be extremely helpful and contribute
in the following ways:
enhance surveillance for emerging and zoonotic
diseases
●● identify cases of zoonoses that will then prevent
human illnesses
●● educate clients regarding One Health and zoonotic
diseases
●● be involved in a potential surge capacity in case a significant epidemic or natural disaster calls for your
support
●● promote the human–animal bond but with knowledge
of both the benefits and potential negative impacts of
the human–animal interface, including wildlife.
●●

­Conclusion
Our global interdependence and growing convergence
of animals, animal products, and people ensure that
diseases will continue to be a significant threat to
health. There is nothing on the horizon suggesting that
the era of the perfect microbial storm will lessen or be
abated. The factors creating this reality are well
entrenched and emerging and reemerging zoonoses
are growing and expanding in scope, scale, and impact.
These diseases now have a much greater impact and
influence beyond health. Global outbreaks of SARS
and influenza have demonstrated how such diseases
create immense economic losses in goods, services,

VetBooks.ir

1 The Concept of One Medicine

travel, and trade in addition to their profound health
costs and consequences.
Contemporary societal issues such as global trade and
commerce, movements and migrations of populations,
changes and insults to our ecosystems, population
growth in developing countries, the Livestock Revolution,
and disruptions of the environment are helping to create
a complex, nonlinear and disruptive world that is riskier
and impacts health in the domains of people, animals,
and our environment. The ability to improve and optimize health in the future will depend on working in these
three domains concurrently, holistically, and synergistically. A One Health mindset and accompanying actions
are now a necessity and no longer just a concept. In order
to reconcile our significant contemporary challenges and
threats with our habitual, narrow and traditional thinking in medicine, new levels of thinking across disciplines
and professions will become the new normal.
Veterinarians are becoming essential leaders in this

movement and a new concept of community health,
including veterinary medicine, is emerging.
Public health and animal health are no longer the
domain of any single discipline, profession or boundary;
rather, they require the work of epidemiologists, clinicians, ecologists, veterinarians, entomologists, engineers, and many more experts coming together to
provide new insights and perspectives using new scientific and technological tools. Addressing, predicting, and
preventing diseases certainly demand the richness of
new scientific and medical teams.
For veterinary medicine, our horizon has never been
richer nor our possibilities more promising. Our profession’s challenge is to be relevant and meet the changing
needs of society regarding public health, global food systems, ecosystem management, and biomedical research.
One Health is the framework, mindset, and new collective
purpose to help define our expanding responsibilities,
including, and beyond, traditional clinical medicine.

­Reference
1 Institute of Medicine Committee on Emerging Microbial

Threats to Health in the 21st Century, Smolinski M,
Hamburg MA, Lederburg J. Microbial Threats to Health:

Emergence, Detection, and Response. Washington, DC:
National Academies Press, 2003.

5

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

7

2
Statistical Interpretation for Practitioners
Philip H. Kass, BS, DVM, MPVM, MS, PhD
Department of Population Health and Reproduction, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA, USA

The need for an understanding of how to conduct statistical analyses and, more importantly, how to interpret them
derives from a natural tension between aspiration and
reality: the desire to make encompassing statements concerning the characteristics and causal properties about
populations of animals, juxtaposed with the inability to
study more than a small sample of them. Statistical inference therefore provides the necessary linkage between
using samples to make inferences about populations.

­External Validity
It is often taken as a matter of faith that studies conducted
in relatively circumscribed subpopulations (such as a cohort
of patients seen at an individual hospital in a defined period
of time) can have relatively generalizable findings. For
example, a hospital‐based study examining the relative clinical efficacy of two or more chemotherapeutic regimens to
treat newly diagnosed canine lymphoma by inducing remission may motivate the authors to make recommendations
for adoption well beyond the hospital’s patient catchment
area. When are such generalizations justified?
Sampling of populations is required to scientifically
justify extrapolating results from sample‐based studies
to target populations. Thus, to make scientific inferences
about a population, it is necessary to study a representative sample. In many cases, the sample size need not be
particularly large, and can be obtained through random
(or more complex) sampling schemes. The process of
random sampling ensures representative selection, and
that in turn provides the key link between a study sample
and a target population.
Because few studies are actually conducted using true
sampling of a target population, the ability to generalize
study findings (that is, having “external validity”) typically
depends on prior medical belief and knowledge, as well as

key assumptions. For example, the initial epidemiological
research into the association between tobacco smoking and
lung cancer was performed in the 1950s in a cohort of male
British doctors [1]. Technically, the findings of this research
strictly applied to the entire population of male British doctors who were contemporaries of the study subjects. The
choice to generalize these findings – namely, that the incidence of lung cancer was many‐fold higher among smokers
than nonsmokers – to other populations rested on key
assumptions motivated by scientific reasons independent of
the actual research. These assumptions included that the
effect of tobacco smoking on lung cancer incidence should
not meaningfully vary by gender, occupation, country of origin, ethnic identity, and birth cohort. Nothing in the original
research could have provided evidence to support these
assumptions; nevertheless, they helped create the basis for
the landmark 1964 report in the US officially affirming a
causal link between tobacco smoking and lung cancer [2].
A more recent example of the dangers of extrapolating
study results to nonstudy populations can be found in an
article on the association between mitotic index (MI)
and survival in dogs diagnosed with mast cell tumors [3].
The authors found a substantially lower survival in dogs
seen at a California veterinary medical teaching hospital
whose MI was 5 or fewer versus those whose MI was 6 or
greater. In contrast, Elston et al. performed similar analyses on dogs from Brazil and recommended somewhat
different MI cut‐off values [4]. The original authors
responded by underscoring the difficulty of externally
validating studies:
This underscores the fallibility of classification
schemes in clinical veterinary medicine: they may
work well in a study population and its corresponding reference population but may not perform nearly as well in a target population of
inherently different animals or where measurement standards may not necessarily be completely

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

8

Section 1 Evaluation and Management of the Patient

concordant. The latter can be influenced by how
different pathologists measure, count, and ultimately determine MI, and whether such determinations are so precise as to be perfectly replicable
by others. Such studies are then relegated to
determining average effects across potentially heterogeneous patient populations even within a
community, much less between countries. Thus,
patient characteristics such as age, breed, sex, and
owner propensity for diagnosis (including biopsy)
would be expected to vary, perhaps substantially,
between institutions such as ours and Elston
et al.’s. [5]
These illustrations should presumably compel veterinarians to be circumspect about relying too heavily on
any single study, particularly one conducted in a geographically restricted region, and for authors to exercise
restraint in advocating wider than justified implications
for a single study. Although the heterogeneity existing
across populations may have a negligible impact on the
universality of study findings, a cautious approach to
generalizability is often warranted.

­Internal Validity
Unlike external validity, which relies on information not
usually obtained in a study to make inferences beyond
the bounds of a study population, internal validity
depends on the relative presence or absence of two
sources of error pervasive to all clinical studies: imprecision (random error) and invalidity (systematic error).
Imprecision has multiple formal statistical definitions
and interpretations, but can best be understood as how
variable the results are expected to be from multiple
studies measuring the same quantity. As an example, if a
veterinarian were to repeatedly weigh a patient using a
scale, precision would imply obtaining similar weights
each time; conversely, imprecision implies considerable
disagreement in weights with each attempt. Standard
deviations, standard errors, variances, and ranges are all
statistical measures for quantifying imprecision. We can
make two broad qualitative statements about variability
without resorting to mathematical formulas: (1) the further apart observations are from each other, the more
imprecise any summary statistic based on them will be;
and (2) the larger a study is, the more precise any statistic
derived from it will be. This has an intuitive appeal: the
findings from a large study are more likely to be accepted
as more precise than those from a small study. Provided
there are no biases, the source of statistical variability in
a study is typically ascribed to random error.

It would be a grievous error, however, to accept a
study’s outcomes solely on the basis of high precision.
Invalidity, another source of error in studies and equivalently called bias, is a distinctly different statistical measure, and represents the disparity between what one
empirically measures in a study and what one strives to
measure (namely, factual truth). Returning to the previous example, if a hospital scale is miscalibrated, then
regardless of how precise or imprecise the replicate
measurements are, the average weight will invariably be
incorrect (biased), with the degree of the bias proportional to the degree of miscalibration.
All medical research is potentially susceptible to
imprecision and bias, and it is only through circumspect
study design that these errors can be prevented or controlled. Such errors exist on a quantitative continuum
(parenthetically often reduced to crude descriptors, such
as “very” imprecise or “small” bias), so it becomes important to recognize that all studies must be judged by both
error criteria and not just one (or neither). Such lack of
circumspection is pervasive, even in academic settings,
and helps explain the often contradictory results one so
often reads about in the popular media [6]. It also underscores the often unappreciated theme that even very
large‐sample studies are susceptible to bias, and despite
their exceedingly high precision can conceivably be as
misleading as a much smaller study.

­Hypothesis Testing
Perhaps the most obvious manifestation of the use of statistical analysis in clinical research is through much misunderstood hypothesis testing. Although investigators
and clinicians typically want to know if the differences
between study groups are real, or if the association
between risk factors and health outcomes is real, hypothesis tests are unable to answer these questions. Moreover,
the P‐values so ubiquitously reported in clinical articles
fail to inform readers about the probabilities that measured differences or associations are real. In reality, their
interpretation is surprisingly counterintuitive.
Consider the example of comparing the average (mean)
alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels between young
dogs and geriatric dogs. The average in young dogs is
40 μ/L, and in geriatric dogs is 80 μ/L. The null hypothesis
is that the averages in the two groups are equal; the two‐
sided (meaning that either group could have a higher/
lower average than the other) alternative hypothesis is
that they are unequal. A two‐group Student’s t‐test is performed, and a P‐value of 0.10 is calculated. If the level of
significance (α) is 0.05, then the difference is not statistically significant. What can one conclude from this?

VetBooks.ir

2 Statistical Interpretation for Practitioners

First, it would be an error to state that there was “no
difference” between the groups. Clearly, there was a difference (of 40 μ/L). It would, however, be correct to state
that because the null hypothesis of no group difference
was not rejected, there was no significant difference
between the groups, assuming the assumptions of the
statistical model are correct (because (P = 0.10) > (α =
0.05)).
Second, the P‐value does not provide a quantitative
assay of the probabilities that the null or alternative
hypotheses are correct. Conventional (superiority)
hypothesis testing is predicated on the veracity of the
null hypothesis, and so does not provide any assessment
of its truth. Instead, the P‐value addresses an entirely different question: how likely (probabilistically speaking) is
it that one would observe differences at least as large as
the one found in the study (40 μ/L) when the null hypothesis is true? In other words, instead of the P‐value equaling the probability that the null hypothesis is true given
the data observed in the study, it provides the probability
of observing the difference in the data observed (or more
extreme) given the null hypothesis is true. It follows that
“large” P‐values indicate substantial concordance with
the null hypothesis, while “small” P‐values indicate poor
concordance with the null hypothesis (presumably motivating its rejection in favor of its alternative).
Third, a P‐value is only numerically correct under a
particular statistical model. With the Student’s t‐test
example, the underlying model assumes that the ALT
values in each group are approximately normally distributed. If the assumption of normality is violated, however,
the P‐value will no longer be correct; the greater the
departure of the data distribution from normality, the
more incorrect the P‐value will be.
Fourth, another assumption is that the study data are
independent, meaning that knowing one individual’s
ALT value does not allow the ability to predict another
individual’s ALT value. In this example, such an assumption is reasonable when each individual contributes only
one ALT value. However, when replicates from a single
individual are included, it is plausible to assume that
knowing an individual’s value at one time can better predict the same individual’s value at another time than the
value from a different individual. Such a violation of the
data independence assumption leads to the estimation of
an incorrect P‐value; typically, the use of correlated
(nonindependent or dependent) data underestimates P‐
values, and hence more type I statistical errors (improperly rejecting the null hypothesis) arise.
Fifth, it is important to recognize that statistical analysis is more than the analysis of single numbers (i.e., point
estimates, as in averages) in groups; instead, it is more
correctly described as the analysis of variability. For this
reason, the presence or absence of statistical significance

is more than just reflective of the magnitude of differences or associations and the chosen level of significance;
it is also a function of the variance of the point estimates.
Because such variances are inversely proportional to
sample sizes, two studies with identical differences or
associations can have completely different P‐values: the
smaller study’s differences could be nonsignificant, while
the larger study’s differences may be significant.
Sixth, it directly follows that any group differences or
associations can eventually be made statistically significant if the study size becomes sufficiently large. To illustrate this, two random samples of 25 individuals each
were created, one assuming blood hemoglobin was normally distributed with a mean of 15 g/dL and standard
deviation of 2 g/dL, and the other with a mean and standard deviation of 15.1 and 2 g/dL, respectively. No one
would seriously argue that a hemoglobin difference of
0.1 g/dL is clinically important, and indeed it is not significant at α = 0.05 (P = 0.79). However, if the two groups
were constructed to have 2500 individuals each, with the
same means and standard deviations, this same clinically
unimportant difference (0.1 g/dL) becomes statistically
significant (P = 0.023). This underscores an important
distinguishing principle of statistical analysis: statistical
significance is distinctly different from and does not
imply medical importance. In a large enough study, even
trivial and unimportant differences can become statistically significant; in a small study, differences that appear
to be worthy of medical pursuit may be statistically insignificant. In recognition of this principle, alternative
methods of hypothesis testing have been developed that
instead of examining superiority of one group over
another, evaluate whether groups are noninferior or
equivalent based on a determination of what constitutes
an acceptably important difference or association [7].
Finally, each decision to reject or not reject a null
hypothesis following hypothesis testing is prone to error.
What is often unappreciated is that the more tests that
are performed, the greater the probability that at least
one decision will be incorrect. In a clinical setting, this is
perhaps most manifest when performing clinical laboratory testing panels to screen for hematologic or chemical
abnormalities in blood. Reference ranges for blood
parameters are typically constructed to encompass
approximately 95% of normal animals, implying that 5%
of normal animals will have values falling outside the
ranges.
When a reference range is appropriate for a patient’s
age, sex, and any other factors that can influence a particular blood parameter, it is reassuring that a normal animal’s value will fall within the reference range 95% of the
time. However, a universally accepted practice is to run
laboratory panels simultaneously evaluating many
parameters. Suppose, for example, that a blood chemistry

9

VetBooks.ir

10

Section 1 Evaluation and Management of the Patient

panel contains 30 different parameters to evaluate.
Although each separate parameter has a 5% probability of
being incorrect in a normal animal, when considering all
parameters the probability of at least one error rises to
78.5%. In other words, a veterinarian should be surprised
if at least one parameter does not fall outside the reference range even in a healthy patient.
Another related problem arises when using screening
tests with imperfect properties (false‐positive and ‐negative results) in populations with low prevalences of illnesses. Even when the test properties are excellent, with
error rates less than 5%, if a disease is rare enough in a
population of patients being screened, there can paradoxically be more false‐positive results than true‐positive results. This should be discomforting to veterinarians
whose clinical decisionmaking depends on the veracity
of diagnostic testing.
One approach to resolving this issue (apart from running the test again to see if the result was aberrant) is to
use screening tests judiciously, reserving them for
patients with a heightened suspicion of actual illness. In
other words, clinical judgment and experience are as
integral to the use and interpretation of diagnostic tests
as contrasting the actual test results to reference ranges.
Such circumspection serves to elevate the likelihood of
illness in the patient being tested, or analogously the
prevalence of the illness in the population being screened.
This will contribute to making fewer unjustified conclusions about abnormal results in otherwise healthy
patients.

­Parametric versus
Nonparametric Tests
All statistical tests have assumptions underlying their use.
Those that assume that data follow a particular probability distribution function (also known as the sampling
model) are called parametric tests (by virtue of the fact
that the functions have one or more parameters in them).
Probably the most common distribution function used in
parametric statistical analyses is the normal distribution
(with two parameters: the mean and standard deviation).
As noted earlier, Student’s two‐group t‐test assumes that
the data in each group are approximately normally distributed. Other well‐known parametric tests also rely on
normality: the paired t‐test assumes the differences are
approximately normally distributed; analysis of variance
and least‐squares linear regression assume the model
residuals (the difference between observed and predicted
values) are approximately normally distributed.
How can a clinician know if data are normally distributed? Various approaches exist, including distributional
tests (for example, Shapiro–Wilk, Shapiro–Francia,

Kolmogorov–Smirnov tests) and plots (for example, normal probability plots). Such tests assume data are normally distributed; rejection of the null hypothesis
indicates incompatibility with the null hypothesis of
normality.
The problem with such tests is that they are notoriously inadequate to detect departures from normality
when sample sizes are small. For example, consider the
following six data points: 100, 100, 80, 70, 50, 50. This is
a U‐shaped distribution and so is clearly not normally
distributed. Nevertheless, a Shapiro–Wilk test fails to
reject the null hypothesis that the data are normally distributed when α = 0.05 (P = 0.22), so if we relied on this
test result we would erroneously conclude that the sample data derived from a population with a normal distribution. Interestingly, if this dataset is doubled in size (n =
12), then the Shapiro–Wilk test would become significant (P = 0.019) and the null hypothesis of normality
would be rejected.
When sample sizes are small or when normality is an
untenable assumption, then alternative statistical tests
are sometimes available. These tests are called nonparametric tests, because they do not assume that data follow
a particular distribution, and hence are also known as
distribution‐free tests. Table 2.1 contains a list of the
most commonly used nonparametric tests, as well as
their equivalent parametric test (if one exists).
These tests have more statistical power (for example,
the ability to reject the null hypothesis when it is false)
than parametric tests when data do not conform to a
parametric distribution (such as normality), and are
almost as powerful as parametric tests when the data
do conform to a parametric distribution. When the
assumption of normality is questionable based on statistical tests or the sample size is too small for reliable
testing, nonparametric tests are preferable whenever
possible.

­Describing Data Distributions
For data that are approximately normally distributed, it
is customary to describe the center of the distribution
with the sample average (i.e., mean), and to describe the
dispersion around the mean with either the standard
deviation or the standard error of the mean (i.e., the
standard deviation divided by the square root of the sample size). When data are not normally distributed, however, it is generally advisable to describe the data with
statistics that do not assume a symmetric distribution
around the mean. Preferable measures to use include
medians, ranges, and percentiles of the data (for
­example, the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles provide a 95%
­percentile‐based interval).

Table 2.1 Commonly used parametric and equivalent nonparametric statistical tests in biomedical research.
Types of data

Continuous

Categorical

Type of statistical problem

Parametric test

Nonparametric test

Two independent samples

Student’s t

Wilcoxon‐Mann‐Whitney

Two dependent samples

Paired t

Wilcoxon signed rank

Three or more independent samples

Analysis of variance
(one‐way)

Kruskal‐Wallis

Three or more ordered independent
samples

Jonckheere‐Terpstra

Unordered 2 × 2 table

Fisher’s exact

Unordered R × C tablea
Single ordered R × C table

Pearson’s Chi‐square
a

Kruskal‐Wallis

Doubly ordered R × C tablea

Jonckheere‐Terpstra

Two dependent samples

McNemar’s (two levels)
Marginal homogeneity
(three or more levels)

K independent ordered proportionsb
K dependent samples
Ordinal
a
b

Cochran‐Armitage trend

Repeated measures analysis of
variance (one‐way)

Association of two samples

Friedman

Pearson correlation

Spearman correlation

R = number of rows, C = number of columns.
K = number of proportions or samples, K > 2.

Figure 2.1 Histogram showing a hypothetical
asymmetric data distribution. The green line
illustrates the poor fit of a normal (Gaussian)
distribution to the data.

Frequency

VetBooks.ir

2 Statistical Interpretation for Practitioners

0

5

10

15

20

25

Data value

To illustrate this point, Figure 2.1 shows a histogram of
a data distribution that is clearly not normally distributed. Superimposed over the histogram is a curve of a
normal distribution whose shape is completely determined by the mean and standard deviation of the actual
data. Because the curve fails to closely approximate the
histogram, the mean and standard deviation used to

­create the curve similarly fail to describe the center and
dispersion of the data. For example, the mean = 7.5 while
the median (i.e., the 50th percentile) is only 6.0. Similarly,
the range of the data extends from 1 to 24, but a 95%
confidence interval of the data distribution based on the
mean and standard deviation would have a lower bound
less than 0, which is less than the smallest possible

11

Section 1 Evaluation and Management of the Patient

observed value. This underscores the point that when
data do not conform to a particular parametric distribution, it is preferable to use a method of describing the
data that does not depend on specifying a particular
distribution.
Graphically representing such data is likewise inappropriate when using bar charts based on means and error
bars using standard deviations or standard errors. One
indispensable way of graphically portraying such data is
through the use of a box and whiskers plot, as shown for
the data above in Figure 2.2.
The advantage of such graphs is that they are constructed based only the data, and not on any distributional assumptions (such as normality). The lower and
upper ends of the box correspond to the 25th and 75th
percentiles respectively; the horizontal line within the
box corresponds to the 50th percentile (i.e., the median),
the bars (i.e., the “whiskers”) above and below the box
contain all data above and below 1.5 times the vertical
width of the box (i.e., the interquartile range), and the
individual points beyond the whiskers represent
extreme (outlying) values. Figure 2.2 reinforces the
observation from the histogram that the data are
skewed towards higher values, which causes the mean
to be larger than the median. This type of plot is also
valuable in assessing symmetry of a data distribution
(asymmetric distributions should not be described with

25

20

Data value

VetBooks.ir

12

15

10

5

0

Figure 2.2 Box and whiskers plot for data shown in Figure 2.1.
Lower and upper ends of the box represent the 25th and 75th
percentiles, respectively; the orange line within the box equals the
50th percentile (median), the bars (“whiskers”) above and below
the box contain all data above and below 1.5 times the
interquartile range, and individual points beyond the whiskers
represent outliers.

means and standard deviations) and for identifying outliers that may represent data errors.
Another common error arises when replicate measurements are taken from the same patient over time.
This arises, for example, when two or more treatments
are successively tested in patients with before/after comparisons, or when monitoring blood values over time. As
mentioned earlier, n replicate measurements taken from
a single individual cannot be treated as equivalent to single measurements coming from n different individuals.
Figure 2.3 illustrates this principle by examining before/
after measurements taken on five patients at different
times. Both panel 1 (left) and panel 2 (right) contain the
identical 10 points but panel 1 ignores the pairing within
individuals, and a regression line fitted to the 10 points
suggests a negative correlation between the measurements over time. Panel 2, in contrast, links the before/after
pairs within individuals and an entirely different picture
emerges: every individual’s values actually increased over
time. Ignoring such pairing not only obscures actual
effects but also in cases such as this suggests a paradoxical
reversal of effects. Therefore, in studies where two or
more measurements are taken from the same patients
over time, it is important to not combine the patients’ values at individual time points through the use of histograms, boxplots, or other graphical representations. Panel
B is often called a “spaghetti plot” because it can, with
larger numbers of individuals, take on an appearance of
many intertwined lines across two or more times.

­Measures of Association and Effect
As noted earlier, the construct and interpretation of the
P‐value is unsatisfying, if not bewildering to consumers
of statistical analyses who are not well versed in their
subtleties. The preoccupation with statistical testing in
the medical literature should presumably be subordinate
to and supplanted by a more favorable inclination
towards estimation: the mathematical calculation of statistics that measure the magnitude of differences and
associations in data. The imperative for this is no more
evident than in the often seen but erroneous exposition
that “no differences were found from a set of analyses
because none were statistically significant.”
Among the most common intuitively appealing measures of association are those conjoined from descriptive
measures of prevalence and incidence.
Prevalence
Prevalence represents the proportion of individuals in a
population who, at a single point or restricted period of
time, possess a health characteristic of interest, as in

Figure 2.3 Scatterplots showing before and after
measurements taken on five individuals. Panel 1 (left)
contains a regression line with a negative slope
estimated ignoring the pairing within individuals.
Panel 2 (right) shows the paired observations,
demonstrating that all measurements within
individuals increased over time, in contrast to the
incorrect impression conveyed in panel 1.

1

2

10
Before/after measurements

VetBooks.ir

2 Statistical Interpretation for Practitioners

5

0
0

2

4

6

8

0

2

4

6

8

Time

­having a disease (or conversely being disease free). The factors that constitute why an individual possesses such a
health outcome are intertwined, reflecting contributions
from the risk of developing the outcome, the probabilities of recovering, succumbing, or remaining with it over
a short or long time (i.e., its duration), and the probability of remaining in the population. Because the contribution of the risk of developing the outcome, also known as
incidence, cannot be isolated from the effects of the
other respective factors influencing prevalence, prevalence measures cannot serve as surrogates for measures
of risk, incidence, or effects.
To illustrate this, suppose 100 dogs are born in January
2015 and all become chronically infected with a virus in
their first three months of life so that their three‐month
risk of infection is 100%. Also suppose that infection
only begins to be cleared after 18 months of age and is
eliminated at 24 months of age. Then consider another
100 dogs born in January 2016, which all become
infected in their first three months as well. Therefore,
the three‐month risk of infection in both groups is 100%.
Unlike the other dogs, these dogs begin to clear their
infection almost immediately (perhaps due to vaccination or postinfection treatment), and by six months are
disease free.
However, suppose this incidence information was
unknown, and a cross‐sectional study of both sets of
dogs (n = 200) is performed on June 30, 2016 (i.e., there
is no attrition from the combined population). On this
date, the prevalence in all 200 dogs will precisely be 50%
because the prevalence will be 0% in the 6‐month‐old
dogs (n = 100) and 100% in the 18‐month‐old dogs (n =
100). It would be an error, however, to use these prevalence figures to claim that older age is a risk factor for
infection because, unknown to the study investigator,

100% of the dogs under three months of age developed
the infection; if we assume recovery from infection confers immunity, it is impossible to even address the issue
of age above 3 months as a risk factor. This underscores
the fallacy of using prevalence to infer risk when factors
that affect risk also affect recovery or mortality or leaving a population.
Prevalence nevertheless has value in quantifying the
relative burden or presence of a health outcome in a population at a particular point in time. Clinicians may, for
example, use disease prevalence to guide their pharmaceutical inventories or preventive medicine programs.
Measures of relative prevalence can also be informative
in hypothesis generation. To understand this, suppose
the prevalence of antibodies to a particular organism is
found more frequently in dogs with immune‐mediated
polyarthritis than in dogs without arthritis. This is no
guarantee that the antibody response associated with
infection of the organism causally leads to cross‐reactivity with synovial membranes or joint surfaces, because
there is no way by measuring only prevalence to distinguish infection occurring prior to onset of polyarthritis
from infection occurring afterwards. Such a finding
could, however, lead to experimental confirmation (or
refutation) of the hypothesis that infection leads to polyarthritis. Serologic surveys are frequently used for this
hypothesis‐generating purpose.
Cumulative Incidence
In contrast, incidence is more appropriate for inferring
risk (which can be defined as the average probability of
developing a health outcome of interest in a specified
time interval). Incidence, by definition, is predicated on
the initial absence of the outcome among the members

13

VetBooks.ir

14

Section 1 Evaluation and Management of the Patient

of a population at risk of experiencing the outcome. The
population is then followed forward in time, and within
a specific time period cumulative incidence is defined as
the proportion of the individuals initially at risk that
newly develop the outcome (assuming no individuals
have been lost to follow‐up), and can only strictly fall
between 0 and 1. If 300 Yorkshire terriers were followed
from birth for five years without any dental interventions, and at the end of this time the presence of tooth
resorption was found in 100 dogs, then the five‐year
cumulative incidence of tooth resorption would be 0.33
(assuming that there were no dogs that spontaneously
recovered from it).
Cumulative incidence alone is not a measure of association. However, comparing two or more cumulative
incidences under different conditions allows such associations to be quantified. Suppose that in addition to the
finding in Yorkshire terriers above, the five‐year cumulative incidence of tooth resorption in border collies was
also measured as 0.10. Two important statements can
now be made about these two figures. First, that over the
five‐year follow‐up period the difference in cumulative
incidences between Yorkshire terriers and border collies
is 0.20 (0.30 – 0.10). Second, that over the five‐year follow‐up period there is a three‐fold increase (0.30/0.10) in
the cumulative incidence in Yorkshire terriers compared
to border collies. These two measures of association are
known as the cumulative incidence difference and the
cumulative incidence ratio, respectively. Other terms
that remain in use include risk difference and attributable risk for the former, and risk ratio and relative risk for
the latter (these terms should be used with caution, however, because risk implies causation, and statistical measures are distinct from causal measures without
corresponding strong causal assumptions that must be
invoked).
Nevertheless, the cumulative incidence ratio is particularly well suited to effectively communicating relative impacts of factors on health in clinical practice
because of its intuitive understandability. Statistical novices can appreciate, for example, a statement such as:
“The incidence of parvovirus in unvaccinated puppies
under 6 months of age is 10‐fold greater than in vaccinated puppies.”
Our understanding of how vaccines, the immune system, and viral infections work could also reasonably
allow us to modify this statement by substituting the
word “risk” for “incidence.” Such strong biologic knowledge is not always apparent, however, which should
motivate caution when using words with causal interpretations like “risk” or “likelihood.” Physicians would have
no hesitancy in making the correspondence between the
association of tobacco smoke with lung cancer and heart
disease with the statement that the risk of lung cancer

and heart disease is greater among smokers than nonsmokers. However, no one would seriously entertain
making such a correspondence between the association
of carrying matches with lung cancer and heart disease
and any causal effect. Therefore, statements about “risk”
differences and ratios are best reserved for situations
where the justification for alleging a causal relation is
supported by knowledge other than purely statistical.
Incidence Rates
When patients are not all followed for the same amount
of time, the cumulative incidence should not be utilized
because the reasons for loss to follow‐up (known as right
censoring) could be related to the risk of the outcome
developing. Instead, another, less intuitive measure of
incidence that allows for different follow‐up in each individual is the incidence rate (also sometimes called the
hazard rate). In contrast to cumulative incidence, a proportion that has an interpretation always linked to a
defined period of time, the incidence rate in a population
is a joint function of the number of new (incident) outcome occurrences divided by the sum of the individual
times at risk of an outcome among the members of the
population, and is expressed as the number of outcomes
per unit of time (for example, days, months, years, etc.).
Incidence rates are analogous to speeds; across populations, they estimate the average number of outcomes
expected to occur per quantity of time.
Incidence rates have particular utility in studies measuring the time from onset of follow‐up to when an event
occurs. Such events can be recovery, death, remission, or
other outcomes. One of the most common applications
for incidence rates is in survival studies of comparative
treatment efficacy, where particular interest is in the rate
of death (or, conversely, survival).
Suppose that in Yorkshire terriers the incidence rate of
tooth resorption = 0.3 case/dog‐year (or, equivalently, 30
cases/100 dog‐years). This can be interpreted to mean
that if 100 dogs were each followed for one year, that 30
cases would be expected; it can also be interpreted to
mean that if 50 dogs were each followed for two years, 30
cases would be expected, and so on. The independence
of the incidence rate from the number of individuals is
perhaps best understood through the analogy of measuring the average speed of automobiles: whether 60 cars
each travel one mile in one minute or one car travels 60
miles in 60 minutes, under both scenarios the total distance traveled is 60 miles, the total amount of time traveled is 60 minutes, and the speed is 60 miles per hour.
As with cumulative incidence, it is frequent to see incidence rates compared on a ratio scale to measure relative
associations; these are called incidence rate ratios or hazard ratios. An incidence rate ratio greater than 1 implies

VetBooks.ir

2 Statistical Interpretation for Practitioners

that the rate of the outcome occurring under the numerator condition (such as treatment A) is faster than the
rate under the denominator condition (such as treatment
B); conversely, an incidence rate ratio between 0 and 1
indicates that the rate of the outcome occurring under
the numerator condition is slower than the rate under
the denominator condition.
Returning to the above example, if the rate of resorption in Yorkshire terriers is 30 cases/100 dog‐years, and
the rate of resorption in border collies is 10 cases/100
dog‐years, then the incidence rate ratio is 3.0. Not only
does this indicate that the rate of developing tooth
resorption is three times faster in Yorkshire terriers compared to border collies, but it also means that the time to
developing tooth resorption is less in Yorkshire terriers,
and that the proportion of dogs remaining free of tooth
resorption (i.e., “surviving”) is greater in border collies at
all times.

­Incidence Odds and Incidence
Odds Ratios
Perhaps the least understood yet ubiquitously found
measure of association in the veterinary medical literature is the odds ratio. Although odds ratios arise under
different study designs (both experimental and nonexperimental), and their interpretations can vary, these differences are less critical than the properties they share as
measures of association and potential impact of factors
on the incidence of health outcomes. In order to understand odds ratios, it is necessary to first understand the
statistical meaning of an odds.
Probabilities are measures of the likelihood of an event
occurring, and are only strictly between (and including)
0 and 1; a probability of 0 implies impossibility and a
probability of 1 implies inevitability. The odds is another
measure of likelihood, and is calculated as the probability of an event occurring divided by the probability of an
event not occurring (note that the sum of these two
probabilities must equal 1). When the probability of an
event occurring equals 0, the odds equals 0. However,
when the probability of an event occurring equals 1, then
the probability of an event not occurring equals 0, and
the odds (which would equal 1 divided by 0) is undefined
but infinitely large.
The restricted range for probabilities versus the infinitely large range for odds necessarily makes the former
more understandable and desirable when communicating biostatistical findings. For example, if the probability of a 14‐year‐old cat developing hyperthyroidism in
the ensuing years of its life is 0.60 (which can equivalently be expressed as 60%), then the odds of developing

hyperthyroidism is 1.5 (but there is no percentage
equivalent). This leads to two related but important
findings. First, as the probability approaches 1, the odds
becomes unintelligibly large (for example, a probability
of 0.95 corresponds to an odds of 19, while a probability
of 0.999 corresponds to an odds of 999). Second, when
the probability is small (between 0 and 0.05), such as
with the incidence of a rare disease, the odds is similarly
small (between 0 and 0.053, respectively). This implies
that for rare events, probabilities and odds are nearly
equal, and for interpretive purposes are essentially
interchangeable.
While odds, just like probabilities, can be expressed as
unconditional (not depending on the values of other factors) estimates, it is more common to see them expressed
as conditional odds; for example, the odds of developing
tooth resorption among Yorkshire terriers is a conditional statement because it only applies to Yorkshire terriers and not other dog breeds. Just as ratios of two
different cumulative incidences and two different incidence rates can be calculated to measure proportionate
changes in incidence between two levels of a variable, so
can ratios of odds. Returning to the earlier example of
the cumulative incidence of tooth resorption, if the five‐
year cumulative incidence in Yorkshire terriers is 0.3 and
the five‐year cumulative incidence in border collies is
0.1, then the five‐year incidence odds in the two breeds
are 0.43 and 0.11, respectively. Therefore, the odds ratio
relating five‐year incidence of tooth resorption in
Yorkshire terriers compared to border collies is 0.43/0.11
= 3.86. This can be contrasted with the cumulative incidence ratio of 3.00, and the disparity between the two
measures primarily arises because the odds in (0.43)
does not closely approximate the cumulative incidence
(0.3) in Yorkshire terriers because the latter is not rare.
Just as cumulative incidence, as a probability, is much
more comprehensible than an incidence odds, so the
cumulative incidence ratio is more comprehensible than
an incidence odds ratio. Knowing in the above example
that the cumulative incidence ratio = 3.0 makes the interpretation straightforward: the five‐year cumulative incidence in Yorkshire Terriers is three times the incidence
in border collies. In the absence of any biases, we could
attach a causal interpretation to this and claim that the
average five‐year risk of dental resorption in Yorkshire
terriers is three times the corresponding risk in border
collies.
In contrast, no such interpretation can be attributed to
the odds ratio of 3.86 above, because it is not in general
interpretable either as a relative measure of either risks or
incidence rates. While it is legitimate to interpret it literally as a relative odds, other interpretations that include
“risk,” “likelihood,” “probability,” and “cumulative incidence” are incorrect and should not be used. This begs

15

VetBooks.ir

16

Section 1 Evaluation and Management of the Patient

the question: of what value is the incidence odds ratio if it
is interpretatively inferior to other ratio measures?
The answer is that in case–control studies, where
study groups are selected based on whether or not they
possess (cases) or do not yet possess (controls) the outcome of interest, it is not possible to directly calculate
measures of incidence because the ratio of cases to controls is determined by the study investigator. Without the
ability to calculate individual conditional incidence
measures in subgroups, investigators are therefore similarly unable to calculate cumulative incidence or incidence rate ratio measures of association that depend on
knowing individual ones. Fortunately, case–control
studies are often reserved for studying rare diseases,
even conditional on the levels of other variables such as
potential risk factors, so using the aforementioned rarity
condition that interpretatively equilibrates the cumulative incidence and the incidence odds, the incidence
odds ratio can essentially be understood as the cumulative incidence ratio. Subtle modifications in case–control study designs can also sometimes provide more

interpretative latitude in extending such equivalence to
incidence rate ratios [8].

­Conclusion
This chapter addresses many, but certainly not all, of the
most common statistical interpretive issues that face
readers of the veterinary medical literature. Appreciating
these issues is an important avenue to understanding the
basis for evaluating clinical research articles. But statistical analyses only represent one component of medical
research; not addressed here are the myriad issues that
arise in the course of designing and implementing experimental and nonexperimental studies. Because study
design is also inextricably linked to precision and validity
issues, statistical inference complements and cannot be
divorced from causal inference in evidence‐based veterinary medicine. Topics involving the design of studies to
generate data for clinical decision making are the subject
of the following chapter.

­References
1 Doll R, Bradford Hill A. The mortality of doctors in

relation to their smoking habits. 1954; 328(7455):
1451–5.
2 Terry L. Smoking and Health: Report of the Advisory
Committee to the Surgeon General of the United States.
Public Health Service Publication No. 1103. Washington,
DC: Department of Health, Education, and Welfare,
1964.
3 Romansik ER, Reilly CM, Kass PH, Moore PF, London
CA. Mitotic index is predictive for survival. Vet Pathol
2007; 44(3): 335–41.
4 Elston LB, Sueiro FAR, Cavalcanti JN, Konradin M.
Letter to the editor: the importance of the mitotic index
as a prognostic factor for survival of canine cutaneous

mast cell tumors: a validation study. Vet Pathol 2009;
46(2): 362–4.
5 Kass PH, Romansik EM, Reilly CM, Moore PF, London
CA. Letter to the Editor: Author Response. Vet Pathol
2009; 46(2): 364–5.
6 Kass PH. Evidence‐based veterinary medicine:
evaluation of nonexperimental studies. Pulse 2014;
58(5): 16–17.
7 Buhles W, Kass PH. Understanding and evaluating
veterinary clinical research. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2012;
48(5): 285–98.
8 Weng HY, Messam LL. Making inferences from a
case‐control study: implications and sampling. Vet J
2012; 194(3): 282–7.

VetBooks.ir

17

3
Using Data for Clinical Decision Making
Philip H. Kass, DVM, MPVM, MS, PhD
Department of Population Health and Reproduction, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA, USA

The advent of the electronic medical record was accompanied by a new‐found feasibility for veterinary medical
practitioners, either at individual hospitals or through
multiinstitutional collaborations, to gather, analyze,
interpret, and publish their clinical data. While it is still
common to read individual case or case series reports in
medical journals, electronic data and searchable databases extend the ability of veterinarians to design more
sophisticated studies that go beyond the bounds of being
purely descriptive. Such design enhancements allow the
measurement of differences and associations between
two or more factors of interest, and in some cases lead to
estimation of measures of effect that under assumptions
of unbiasedness can lead to causal inferences.
Using clinically derived data to make informed medical decisions is a central tenet underlying the practice of
evidence‐based medicine, an evolving form of scientific
scholarship that seeks to bring objectivity and elucidation to the implementation of medical investigation, and
that exists at the confluence of medicine, basic sciences,
applied mathematics/biostatistics, epidemiology, and
causal inference. Using data analytically is only one
component of evidence‐based medicine, and cannot be
dissociated from equally important others. While collaboration is all but essential in ensuring that these
respective component specialties are well represented,
of most proximate importance to veterinarians seeking
to advance beyond the hypothesis phase of their clinical
research is a fundamental understanding of hospital‐
based epidemiologic study design, for this is the study
type that determines the data collected, and in turn how
it should be analyzed and interpreted [1].
The most common study designs employed in clinical
veterinary research will be considered in subsequent
sections of this chapter. These will be broadly partitioned
into two temporal types. The first involves data measurements taken on an assemblage of patients all present at a
point in time, or on a succession of patients enrolled over

a typically brief period of time to obtain an adequate
total sample size, which are called “cross‐sectional studies.” The second involves those with data on groups of
patients with some defining inclusion criteria collected
over a specified period of time, allowing measurement of
a temporal change in patient characteristics and health
status, which are called “longitudinal” studies. The latter
can be further subdivided into those that are interventional (the clinical analog of experimental), where the
investigators have control over the treatment(s) of primary interest the patients receive, and observational
(nonexperimental), where the investigators can passively
or actively record, but not manipulate, the treatment(s)
of primary interest. The focus here on treatments arises
from the nature of clinical research: any treatment in a
clinical setting should be pursuant to the best interests of
the patient and owner, and should not be any lesser quality of treatment than the accepted standard of care in
veterinary medical practice.
As noted, analyses of treatments are not restricted to
interventional longitudinal studies, although it will be
shown that observational longitudinal studies of treatment effects are prone to potentially severe biases.
Longitudinal studies also need not be restricted to studying treatment effects: intrinsic characteristics of patients,
and how those may be associated with clinical sequelae,
may instead be a primary objective of a researcher.

­Hospital‐Based Cross‐sectional Studies
Cross‐sectional studies are conducted when a clinician
wants to establish an inventory of disease burden,
patient characteristics, and exposure to factors in a population. A shelter veterinarian, for example, may be
interested in knowing the crude proportion of a shelter
population at any defined time point that has clinical
signs of upper respiratory disease. This proportion is

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

18

Section 1 Evaluation and Management of the Patient

called the “prevalence” (see Chapter 2 for examples), and
is contextually tied to a specific point in time. Knowing
such information may be valuable in planning preventive initiatives and having an appropriate inventory of
pharmaceuticals available. Hospitals, however, may not
have an adequate number of patients at a single time to
estimate prevalence, so instead patients fitting inclusion
criteria may be captured over a period of time, and the
frequency of the factor of interest is then obtained as
patients are enrolled. This special type of prevalence is
called “period prevalence” and is contextually defined by
the beginning and end dates of patient accrual (e.g., the
proportion of patients entering a hospital over one
month present with clinical signs of upper respiratory
disease). It is important to note that no assumptions
need be made about when individuals with the outcome
actually developed it; it is sufficient to note that at the
time of measurement, they either had it or did not (the
latter from either never having developed it or from
recovering from it).
Prevalences measured from cross‐sectional studies are
not restricted to being crude (unconditional) measures.
Factor‐specific (conditional) prevalences are also estimable, as in sex‐specific or age‐specific prevalences.
Moreover, such specific measures can be jointly used for
comparative purposes, as in relative prevalences (prevalence ratios). For example, it may be of interest to estimate the proportionate change in the prevalence of feline
leukemia virus (FeLV) infections in intact outdoor males
compared to sterilized outdoor males.
Sampling in cross‐sectional studies can be accomplished in several ways. The most straightforward is to
either study an entire population of individuals or take a
random sample from one. With either approach, individuals can be cross‐classified by their health outcome
status as well as other factors to assess joint associations.
Using the previous example, the prevalence of FeLV can
be measured in intact and sterilized outdoor male cats,
or conversely the prevalence of male sexual status can be
measured in cats with and without FeLV. Prevalence
ratios provide an objective measure of how relatively
common or rare an outcome of interest is between
groups, but should not be used for causal inference (such
as making statements about likelihood, risk, or probability of a health outcome) because when measured simultaneously, it is often not possible to know if prevalence
factors, as putative risk factors, occurred prior to or
after the health outcome occurrence. In addition, such
factors may not potentially alter only disease incidence
but also disease duration and recovery, all of which affect
prevalence. Prevalence ratios, as measures of association, therefore have utility for hypothesis generation but
lack a foundation for making inferences about causal
associations.

An alternative approach to obtaining prevalence
ratios when there is a health outcome is to sample subsets of a population defined by certain characteristics.
For example, an investigator may choose to deliberately
sample a fixed number of sexually intact and sexually
altered male outdoor cats, and subsequently ascertain
the prevalence of FeLV in these two groups. A prevalence ratio relating the prevalence of FeLV in one sexual status group versus the other is estimable, but
not the converse due to the sampling being based on
sexual status.
Another sampling variant of cross‐sectional studies is
the two‐stage prevalence case–control study. This
approach is indicated when a relatively rare disease in a
clinical population is studied, and the goal is to estimate
not the prevalence of the disease but instead factors that
may be associated with it but cannot be readily measured without additional data gathering and consideration of cost/time expenditures. Initially, a cross‐sectional
study is undertaken in a clinical population to ascertain
disease status. When the cost and effort of obtaining
prevalence factor information prohibit procurement of
it for every individual in the population, those with the
rare disease (prevalent cases) can have it measured,
along with only a sample of the remaining nondiseased
individuals (nonprevalent controls). Thus, prevalence
factor information is efficiently obtained only on a subset of the entire population – either all or some of the
diseased individuals and a sample of the nondiseased
individuals. The ratio of individuals in the two groups is
at the discretion of the investigator, although a 1:1 ratio
is statistically the most efficient for a fixed study size.
The prevalence case–control study is the cross‐sectional
counterpart of the (longitudinal) incidence case–control
study discussed later.

­Longitudinal Observational Studies
The distinguishing feature of longitudinal medical studies, compared to cross‐sectional studies, is that individuals are monitored over time, typically being followed
from a state absent a particular health outcome to a later
state that may or may not have experienced a change in
outcome status. The two principal types of such studies
are cohort studies and case–control studies, which differ
in how individuals in them are sampled for study inclusion. Longitudinal studies may also be characterized by
their temporality; relative to the study onset, they can be
retrospective, with historical data being used during the
follow‐up period, or prospective, with future data being
collected following study onset. Less commonly, studies
can be ambispective, with both retrospective and prospective components.

VetBooks.ir

3 Using Data for Clinical Decision Making

Cohort Studies
Assemblages of patients that share one or more defining
conditions, typically diseases or syndromes, are often
referred to as a “case series” but can be more expansively
thought of as a patient cohort. In a hospital setting, such
patients present over a period of time; if the condition is
common then the period of time for sufficient patient
accrual may be brief, but if the condition is rare, it may
take many years for an adequate number of patients to
be enrolled unless a decision is made to extend patient
enrollment to multiple hospitals. While population‐
based (epidemiologic) cohort studies typically study risk
factors for disease incidence, the goal of hospital‐based
cohort studies is different: to study the outcomes of
patients already diagnosed with diseases. Such outcomes are contextual to the specific diseases, but often
include the occurrence of or time to remission, relapse,
development of another disease condition, recovery, or
death. By subdividing cohort members into groups
defined by factors thought to influence the respective
outcomes, it becomes possible to quantify and compare
their effects.
There are two main types of outcomes of interest in
the study of factors affecting cohorts of patients that
share a disease in common. In this example, death will be
the illustrative outcome, and sex will be the hypothesized
determinant of death. The duality of outcomes is:
whether or not death from the disease occurs following its occurrence in patients
●● how long it takes death from the disease to occur (if it
does) following its occurrence in patients.
●●

The first outcome is not as straightforward to evaluate as
might initially appear, because it depends on two related
factors: how long a patient is diseased, and how long a
patient is followed up.
To illustrate these points, consider a patient diagnosed
with immune‐mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA) on
January 1, 2013, and that succumbed to the disease on
January 1, 2019. From the perspective of the investigator,
did death occur? The answer is no if the follow‐up time is
less than six years (although death occurred after six
years, the investigator would not have been aware of it);
the answer is yes if the time period evaluated is longer
than six years. Therefore, the qualified answer to the
question depends on specifying the time of follow‐up
after the diagnosis is made. Clearly, the longer a patient
is followed up, the greater the probability they will die
(although not necessarily from IMHA). By convention,
patients who do not experience the health outcome at
the point that they are no longer observed at risk of it,
because they were lost to follow‐up, withdrew from the
study, recovered, or died from a competing cause, are
called “censored.”

Suppose that the patient was lost to follow‐up after
four years, but was known to be alive up to that time. Did
death from IMHA occur? The answer at the four‐year
time point is no, because the patient was not observed
long enough for death to occur and be recorded.
However, such an individual who did not die from IMHA
after four years should not statistically be treated as
equivalent to a patient still alive after an even longer
period of observation. Because most patients are followed for different periods of time after disease diagnosis, an investigator would provide a distorted impression
of the natural course of the disease by responding to the
simplistic question, “What proportion of patients died?”
A legitimate analysis would instead have to be limited to
specifying an identical follow‐up period for each patient,
such as “What proportion of patients succumbed to
IMHA within one year of diagnosis?” Of course, patients
followed for less than one year would necessarily be
excluded even from this analysis.
Because follow‐up times vary so much in patients
recruited over long periods of time, a preferable analytic
approach takes into account not only if a patient eventually died from the disease, but also how long they were
alive prior to death. The apposite question instead
becomes: “What is the probability of patients dying from
IMHA after accounting for different periods of time
under observation following diagnosis?” The answer, a
probability that depends on the time interval after diagnosis and characteristics of patients that influence survival, will fall between 0 and 1. This kind of analysis is
generically known as a “survival analysis.” One approach
commonly used to estimate these probabilities is called
the “product‐limit method of survival/failure function
estimation” or, equivalently and eponymously, a “Kaplan–
Meier analysis.”
To illustrate the distinction between counting the proportion of patients who die and the probability of a
patient dying as a function of time, consider a hypothetical cohort of 12 patients. Four patients each have either
five, six, or seven years of follow‐up, and within each
group of four patients, two die and two either do not die
or are lost to follow‐up at the end of their follow‐up
period.
The crude proportion of these 12 patients dying is
50%, but that figure is entirely misleading because of
unequal follow‐up times. In contrast, a statistical analysis projects that the probability of dying after five years is
17%, after six years is 38%, and after seven years is 69%.
The latter analysis is valid because it accounts for not
only whether or not death occurred, but also how long a
patient was at risk of dying (by including censored
patients).
It is also possible to estimate the time it takes to reach
a certain probability of death. For example, the time it

19

Section 1 Evaluation and Management of the Patient

takes for an estimated 50% probability of patients to die
is called the median survival time. In the above example,
the median time to death is seven years. With larger
datasets, it would also be achievable to estimate the
time it would take for a 10%, 25%, 75%, 95%, etc. probability of death.
In the less common case that patients are followed for
identical periods of time, or inferences are restricted to
briefer periods that most or all patients were followed
through, it becomes possible to estimate the risk of outcomes for such time periods, either unconditionally or
conditional on possible determinants of the outcomes.
For example, the one‐year risk of death from patients
diagnosed with IMHA conditional on sex can be calculated, and expressed (typically) as a risk ratio (sometimes
referred to as a relative risk). It is conventional to report
ratio statistics accompanied by: (1) their respective 95%
confidence intervals to demonstrate the degree of precision associated with the statistic, and (2) P‐values corresponding to a test of the null hypothesis that the risk
ratio = 1 (i.e., there is no difference in the risks of the
outcome between the groups compared in an analysis),
which are interpretable as the probabilities of finding
risk ratios >1 at least as large (or risk ratios <1 at least as
small) as those observed in the study when the null
hypothesis (of no difference in risks) is correct.
In the preceding paragraph, the phrase “rate of death”
was deliberately not used because a rate is neither a proportion nor a probability. Instead, a rate can be thought
of as a “velocity” – how much of an event occurs as a
function of time (e.g., miles traveled per hour). In this
setting, it is possible to estimate such a rate: the number
of expected deaths for each year(s) of being a patient.
Using the example above, the average (constant) rate of
death equals 0.0833 death/patient‐year as a patient

(obtained by dividing the number of deaths [6] by the
total amount of time all patients spent alive and at risk of
dying [72 years]). Although this number is admittedly
difficult to understand because it is not possible to have
a fractional death, it is better understood when inventorying multiple years as a patient: 8.3 deaths for every 100
patient‐years alive, six deaths for every 72 patient‐years
alive, etc.
Using rate information is invaluable in assessing the
course of a health outcome because it is possible for the
probability of the outcome to be the same across groups
for the same amount of follow‐up, even while the rates of
the outcome occurring are different. To illustrate this,
consider two drugs (drug A and drug B) used to cure a
particular disease, both of which are 100% effective.
However, drug A cures the disease much faster than drug
B, making drug A more desirable than drug B (ignoring
other relevant issues such as cost, side‐effects, etc.). This
is equivalent to saying that the rate of cure under drug A
is higher than the rate of cure under drug B.
We can assign hypothetical numbers to further the
discussion. Suppose the six patients receiving drug A
were cured at 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 weeks following administration; those receiving drug B were cured at 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, and 12 weeks following administration. In both
groups the probability of cure by 12 weeks was 100%.
However, the rate of cure in the drug A group is 0.29
case/week, while the rate of cure in the drug B group is
0.11 case/week (calculations not shown). This is illustrated in the Kaplan–Meier plot in Figure 3.1.
Having now calculated the rates of cure (by drug
group), it becomes possible to finally ask the question:
how does the rate of cure from drug A compare (relatively speaking) to the rate of cure from drug B? The
answer to this is to simply take the rate from drug A and
Figure 3.1 Rate of cure illustrated in a Kaplan–
Meier plot.

1.00
Probability of being diseased

VetBooks.ir

20

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00
0

5

Time (weeks)
Drug A

10
Drug B

15

VetBooks.ir

3 Using Data for Clinical Decision Making

divide it by the rate from drug B; this is called the incidence rate ratio, which is often equivalently reported as
the hazard rate ratio or incidence density ratio. In this
example, the rate ratio = 0.29 / 0.11 = 2.7; this can be
interpreted to mean that the rate of cure from drug A is
2.7 times greater than the rate of cure from drug B, even
though the eventual probability of being cured is 100% in
both drug groups.
When the rates in the two groups being compared are
identical, then no matter what those rates are, the rate
ratio will always equal 1.0. Typical significance tests that
are performed on such cohort data assume that the rate
ratio equals 1.0 – this is the “null hypothesis.” Rejection
of the null hypothesis (using a type I error proportion of
5%) implies that the rate ratios at least as large (or small)
as those observed are unlikely (with a probability of less
than 5%) to have arisen when the null hypothesis and
model assumptions are correct – and thus the data are
relatively incompatible with the null hypothesis. It is
conventional to report rate ratio statistics accompanied
by: (1) their respective 95% confidence intervals to demonstrate the degree of precision associated with the statistic, and (2) P‐values corresponding to a test of the null
hypothesis that the rate ratio = 1 (i.e., there is no difference in the rates of the outcome between the groups),
which are interpretable as the probabilities of finding
rate ratios >1 at least as large (or rate ratios <1 at least as
small) as those observed in the study when the null
hypothesis (of no difference in rates) is correct.
There are, however, compelling reasons not to use hospital‐based cohort studies to study treatment efficacy
between groups of patients. In contrast to intervention
studies, where treatment is randomly assigned, cohort
study patients are intentionally (and, pointedly, non‐randomly) administered a particular treatment by choice.
For example, one treatment may have been available during earlier years of patient enrollment, but was later
superseded by an alternative preferred treatment. A
cohort study comparing these treatments would be unable to discriminate between any possible effects they had
and any effects related to time (such as from amended
standards of care, veterinarian experience and adeptness
at treating cases over time, different clinicians of potentially different abilities treating patients across times,
trends in disease severity seen over time at the hospital,
etc.). In addition, clinicians administer treatments in
part by using their acuity to judge patient severity; one
treatment may be indicated for milder cases, while an
alternative treatment, that may be more costly and risky
but potentially superior, may be earmarked for cases
with the poorest prognoses. Again, it would be problematic for the investigator to distinguish whatever treatment effects may exist that are distinct from the effects
of disease severity (or any other influences) that inspired

a particular treatment regimen by a veterinarian. This
type of bias is called “confounding by indication,” and all
nonrandomized studies of treatment efficacy are potentially susceptible to it. The inability to statistically control for this bias, particularly in retrospective studies
where the reason for selecting a treatment may not be in
the medical record, should presumably dissuade
­investigators from conducting nonrandomized studies of
treatment efficacy.
Case–Control Studies
In one sense, a case–control study is a size‐ and cost‐efficient variant of a cohort study. Both are longitudinal (retrospective or prospective), can be performed on the
same population, and are designed to investigate how
one or more potential measured risk factors may affect
the occurrence of measured specified health outcomes
(such as becoming diseased). An important way in which
they differ is in how populations are sampled for study
inclusion. In cohort studies, investigators take a census
of a population, unconditionally sample it, or sample it
conditional on risk factor status. In contrast, in case–
control studies, investigators always sample conditional
on outcome (typically disease) status, selecting cases and
controls. The studies also differ with respect to the statistical interpretation of their respective effect measures.
Cohort studies, by virtue of their ability to estimate rates
and risks, allow the use of these statistics to construct
comparative measures of putative effect, such as risk
ratios and incidence rate ratios. Case–control studies,
because of their unique sampling design, estimate odds
ratios (see Chapter 2 for a detailed explanation of this
statistic).
For illustration, consider a study designed to test the
hypothesis that vaccination leads to a transient (two
months) increase in the risk of IMHA in dogs. A hospital‐based cohort study could be undertaken by either: (1)
enrolling some or all patients at risk of IMHA to the hospital, assessing their vaccination histories, and observing
the subsequent incidence of IMHA conditional on vaccination histories, or (2) conditionally enrolling dogs
known to have been vaccinated and comparing them to
enrolled dogs confirmed to have not received vaccines,
and then measuring subsequent IMHA incidence. Both
approaches could be done retrospectively, provided vaccination histories were in the medical record and there
was sufficient patient follow‐up to determine if IMHA
occurred, or could be done prospectively by placing the
enrolled dogs with recorded vaccine histories under surveillance for disease onset.
The problem with this approach is that IMHA is a relatively rare disease, and regardless of whether the cohort
study was done retrospectively or prospectively, it would

21

VetBooks.ir

22

Section 1 Evaluation and Management of the Patient

be unlikely to have many cases of IMHA enrolled unless
the population was very large, adversely affecting statistical precision and jeopardizing the ability to make
conclusions. Moreover, it would require comparing vaccination histories on a disproportionately large number
of dogs that never developed IMHA for comparison to
a disproportionately small number of dogs that did,
adversely affecting study efficiency.
If an adequate number of cases exist in a hospital registry (or those of multiple hospitals or diagnostic laboratories, etc.), a far more efficient approach to studying
factors affecting the incidence of a rare disease is to take
a census or sample of the cases from the registry, and for
comparative purposes take a sample of dogs (controls)
never diagnosed with IMHA (but theoretically at risk of
getting it later in life) from the same registry. The ratio of
controls to cases is at the discretion of the investigator; if
resources dictate that only a fixed number of cases and
controls can be included in the study, a 1:1 ratio is most
efficient. If the cost of obtaining risk factor information
on the patients is not an important consideration, then a
ratio of up to 4–5 controls per case is usually sufficient
for statistical precision.
Although controls can be taken at any time during the
period of case accrual, there are distinct statistical and
interpretive advantages to selecting them at the same
time that cases are diagnosed. Such matching on time
can be extended to additional confounders, such as hospital (in a multicenter study) and age, but most other
confounders can be controlled for by an appropriate
matched analysis.
The advantages to matching controls to cases on time
are several‐fold. First, if time itself was a confounder of
the risk factor–disease relationship (i.e., if disease incidence and the distribution of the risk factor in the population change over time), then effective analytic control
of it would almost certainly be impossible without
matching if the period of case accrual was long. Second,
the odds ratio calculated from the case–control study
can be interpreted as a risk ratio when the incidence of
disease is believed to be rare in all categories of the risk
factors (and confounders). Third, if the disease incidence
is not rare, the odds ratio can still be interpreted as an
incidence rate ratio, described earlier for cohort studies.
However, analyses of matched case–control data are
complex when more than one control is matched to a
case, and require a computer with software capable of
performing conditional logistic regression.
The most difficult design issue in case–control studies
is that of proper control selection. Cases can be thought
of as originating from an underlying source population
of individuals at risk of developing the disease, and controls are, simplistically, a sample of that source population. Just as the distribution of risk factors is measured in

the cases, the distribution of the same risk factors is also
measured in controls. Setting aside the issue of matching, conceptually the distribution of risk factors in a control group not subject to selection bias effectively mirrors
that same distribution in the source population. Matching
is a technical violation of this principle, because matching on a confounder alters the distribution of the risk factors in the controls to be more aligned with that of the
cases, but this intentional design feature that leads to an
unintentional selection bias can be remediated through a
proper matched statistical analysis.
The problem with this conception of a control group as
a representative sample of a source population of cases is
one of practicality: for a hospital that is not in a geographically restricted region, it is not at all clear what the
source population is. There are many reasons, known
and unknown, why owners elect to have their pets treated
or not treated, and why they choose one hospital over
another. The reasons why owners make such choices
could be influenced in some way by the very risk factors
being studied, so without appreciating the subtleties of
selecting controls, it is possible to introduce selection
bias into a case–control study.
To illustrate this point, suppose that an investigator at
a community hospital wishes to determine if vaccinations lead to IMHA development, and observes that 50%
of new cases had a history of vaccination in the prior two
months. The odds of exposure to the risk factor is therefore 0.50 / 0.50 = 1.0. To obtain controls, a random survey by the investigator of pet owners in the community
around the hospital reveals that 8.3% of their pets were
vaccinated in the prior two months; the odds of exposure
in the community-based controls is 0.083 / 0.917 =
0.091. The odds ratio relating two‐month prior vaccination to IMHA incidence is 1.0 / 0.091 = 11.0.
The assumption behind using a random sample of
dogs in the community as controls is that they represent
the source population of cases of IMHA seen at the hospital; namely, had those dogs in the community developed IMHA, they would have been brought to the
hospital and undergone the same diagnostic work‐up as
other cases of IMHA. In cases when only a single hospital serves a well‐circumscribed region, this may be a tenable assumption. However, if there are multiple hospitals
that serve communities, the reasons why some owners
select one hospital over another may be related to factors
associated with the study exposure. Moreover, the proportion of owners who are willing to bear the costs of
seeking medical diagnosis and care for their pets for serious illnesses is likely to be lower than the proportion of
people who would seek medical care for their own serious illnesses.
Now suppose that the investigator’s hospital is known
for higher medical costs relative to other hospitals that

VetBooks.ir

3 Using Data for Clinical Decision Making

serve the same community. For economic reasons, some
pet owners utilize less expensive hospitals, and these
owners are less likely (say, 50%, so assuming no month is
any more or less likely for vaccination the two‐month
vaccination percentage is (2 months/12 months) × 50% =
8.3%) to provide consistent vaccination coverage for
their pets. In contrast, the pet owners who utilize the
investigator’s hospital are more likely (90%) to provide
such vaccination coverage; their pets’ two‐month vaccination percentage is substantially higher: (2 months/12
months) × 90% = 15%, with an exposure odds of 0.15 /
0.85 = 0.176 in the hospital-based controls. The odds
ratio relating two‐month prior vaccination to IMHA
incidence is therefore 1.0 / 0.176 = 5.7, almost half that
when using the random community controls.
This illustrates an important point of selecting controls for hospital‐based case–control studies: the source
population of cases to be sampled as controls should be
restricted to those patients who, had they developed the
disease under study, would have gone to the same hospital as the cases, and would have proceeded through
the same mechanism of diagnosis and case ascertainment that occurred for the actual cases. There is no way
to know whether such a hypothetical scenario would
actually hold when randomly sampling members of a
population; even asking the question of owners is conjectural at best.
To accommodate this concern about selection bias, an
alternative approach involves selecting controls with
particular diagnoses from the patient registry at the
same hospital(s) or laboratory(s) that provide the cases.
The singular advantage of this tactic is that whether or
not an owner would utilize a particular hospital is no
longer an issue; what remains unknown, of course, is
what the owner would have done if their dog developed
the actual disease of interest. While this too is conjectural, the choice of control diagnoses provides some
guidance, if not assurance. That is, if alternative diagnoses could be identified for the case illness that are similar
with respect to severity of clinical signs to warranting the
owner to seek medical assistance, cost of diagnosis, and
owner propensity to seek diagnostic confirmation, then
those patients may be acceptable as controls. Using the
IMHA example, diseases would be sought as control
inclusion criteria that required presentation at the same
hospital, with similar laboratory work and diagnostic
procedures performed as that of the cases. Many alternative diagnoses could potentially qualify.
An additional critical requirement to impose on controls is that their medical condition should be unassociated with the exposure(s) of interest in the study (note: in
this context unassociated means no more or less likely to
be exposed than individuals in the source population; it
does not mean unexposed). If this exposure were to

cause both the case and control conditions, then the frequency distribution of exposure in the controls would
become more like that of the cases than of the source
population of cases, leading again to a selection bias, and
specifically to an underestimation of the odds ratio. In
the IMHA example, one diagnosis would be particularly
ill advised: patients diagnosed with immune‐mediated
thrombocytopenia (IMTP). While vaccination may or
may not be associated with its etiology, the hypothesis
that it could lead to IMHA leaves room for the possibility
that it could lead to other immune‐mediated diseases
affecting the bone marrow.
The choice of controls therefore necessarily depends
on a decidedly thorough and insightful understanding of
the relative benefits of particular control diagnoses for
particular exposures and case conditions; acceptable
controls for one hypothesis or study may be unacceptable for another. Control selection is perhaps the most
contentious and challenging component of case–control
study design, and should be carefully considered in
advance of study commencement.
Clinical Trials
The defining characteristic of these studies is their interventional nature; unlike cohort studies, where treatments are not under investigator control, in clinical trials
investigators have the ability to randomly assign treatments to their patients in a way that allows valid estimation of their effects. Although many experimental
designs exist and have been adapted for clinical settings,
this section will focus on the two most common: the randomized masked clinical trial, and the cross‐over trial.
Randomized Masked Clinical Trials

The drawback of using hospital‐based cohort studies to
evaluate treatment efficacy, as noted earlier, is that of
confounding by indication; it is difficult, if even at all
possible, to distinguish actual treatment effects from
those of the underlying indications (which may or may
not be consciously evident) for treatment choice.
Random assignment of treatment, known as “randomization,” is the most powerful tool an investigator has to
avoid this source of bias. The goal of randomization is
beguilingly simple: to establish distinct but comparable
groups of individuals whose incidence of the outcome of
interest would be essentially identical if none received
the treatment of interest. With such established groups,
it could then be possible to isolate the treatment’s effect
if administered to one of them [2].
Randomization itself is not a guarantee of group comparability, however. Consider two patients enrolled in a
study to compare a novel treatment to a placebo in treating a disease. Unknown to the investigator, one patient

23

VetBooks.ir

24

Section 1 Evaluation and Management of the Patient

was doomed to die from the illness regardless of treatment, and the other would have inevitably recovered
even if treatment had been withheld; thus the correct
(but unknown) interpretation would be that treatment
could not have any effect on survival. Clearly, the two
groups, composed of one individual each, are not comparable in the sense that their outcomes (death versus
survival) would differ even if both received the placebo.
But if treatment had been randomized, the study would
remain invariably confounded, leading to incorrect conclusions. If the doomed individual received the treatment, then without knowing the individual was doomed
the inference would erroneously be that treatment
resulted in the patient’s death. Conversely, if the recovered individual received the placebo, the incorrect conclusion would be that treatment prompted a recovery.
This example underscores an important characteristic
and drawback of randomization: its effectiveness in
establishing group comparability is proportional to the
study size. In small studies, the possibility of group
imbalances of characteristics or risk factors that could
influence health outcomes cannot be discounted, but
fortunately declines as study size increases. Sample size
calculations therefore take on importance when undertaking a randomized study, and would be expected in any
study proposal seeking approval from an institutional
review board.
Sample size estimation for randomized studies is not
trivial, however, and it is a fallacy to believe that there is
a universal sample size that is adequate for all clinical trials. For example, information required to perform a sample size calculation to determine if two group means
significantly differ requires an investigator to know a
priori the type I (α) and type II (β) error percentages (the
latter is one minus the “study power”), whether the test
will be one‐ or two‐tailed, the standard deviations of the
outcome measurements in both groups, and the minimum difference in means the investigator believes is
medically important enough to warrant a finding of statistical significance (the null hypothesis is that the means
are equal, or equivalently the difference in means is zero).
If instead the goal is to determine if the proportions of
individuals in two groups that experience an outcome
significantly differ, then the two expected proportions
that are medically important enough to find significantly
different must alternatively be specified (in addition to α
and β). Issues related to sampling, sample size, and power
can become complex [3], and separate calculations for
these would ideally be undertaken for every independent
hypothesis test in a study, with the necessary sample size
being the largest of all the ones calculated. Once a study
is completed, however, there is little value or justification
in performing post hoc sample size or power calculations
because the sample size has already been determined,

and for any statistical test performed there was either
sufficient power (i.e., p ≤ α) or not (i.e., p > α) for a particular significance test.
The above examples present clinical trial outcomes as
means and proportions. However, it is not uncommon
in clinical trials to instead use interval‐scaled ordinal
variables, such as pain or severity indices, when quantitative measurements are unavailable. These variables
generally require nonparametric statistical analyses for
group comparisons, as well as for sample size and power
calculations, rather than ones that assume that the
group outcomes follow a normal (Gaussian) distribution. Nonparametric methods are invaluable for clinical
research, particularly when sample sizes are small and
underlying distributional assumptions are tenuous (as
with interval‐scaled data), and are discussed in more
detail in Chapter 2.
Cross‐over Trials

In studies of medical interventions with transient effects,
there can be a distinct advantage of using each patient as
her or his own control. Earlier, when groups composed
of randomized individuals were compared, there was
always an assumption that they were similar with respect
to the distribution of unknown or unmeasurable variables (confounders) that could influence the outcome.
This assumption becomes tenuous when group‐specific
sample sizes are small or there is so much variability in
these factors that the groups would still not be comparable. In this case, sequentially administering different
treatments to the same individual allows them to “cross
over” between exposure states, permitting within‐individual comparisons and controlling for confounding by
intrinsic patient characteristics.
This approach requires two important assumptions.
One is “temporal stability”: that time itself is not a determinant of the study outcome. It implies that over the
study period, the incidence of the outcome remains constant in the absence of any treatments. The second is
“causal transience”: that order of treatment administered
(e.g., an experimental drug versus placebo) is irrelevant
because there are no carry‐over effects of either treatment (i.e., the effects of both are transient), which implies
an eventual return to an original state. To make this
assumption more tenable, a “wash‐out” period is typically
included between treatment options, being sufficiently
long to ensure that any effects have become dissipated.
Measurements are characteristically taken at multiple
times under the different treatments, allowing the assessment of time effects, treatment effects, and the interaction between these two main effects. It is also possible to
extend such studies to include evaluating the effects of
subgroups of different individuals, such as those defined
by age and sex categories.

VetBooks.ir

3 Using Data for Clinical Decision Making

Studies where individuals serve as their own controls
lead to collection of dependent data, in which measurements from the same individual are correlated. This
arises, for example, when readings are taken from both
eyes, when blood parameters are sequentially monitored,
or when drug concentrations are evaluated for half‐lives.
Conventional statistical procedures assume that data are
independent, but when data are paired or repeatedly collected from the same individual, the independence
assumption is violated, which leads to invalid hypothesis
test results, typically erroneously low P‐values and higher
than planned type I error proportions. Analysis of
dependent data typically requires specialized statistical
methods, from Student’s t‐tests or the nonparametric
Wilcoxon signed‐rank tests for paired data, to one‐way
repeated measures analysis of variance or the nonparametric Friedman test for sequential observations, to multivariate models, such as mixed effects analysis of variance
or linear regression models for more complex designs.

­Conclusion
Using data to make causal inferences is a hallmark of evidence‐based medicine, but no inferences will be correct
if the evidence used to establish them is flawed. Research
can generate new knowledge, but it can also embed
flawed conclusions in the literature if sedulous attention
is not afforded to proper study design and conduct. Even
the most sophisticated statistical methods cannot supplant biases that insidiously enter studies through flaws
in study design. Despite the zeal that investigators have
for finding statistically significant study results, reported
point and variance estimates, confidence intervals, and
P‐values will be incorrect unless great care is exercised in
designing and establishing the central features of a clinical study: thoughtful selection of comparison groups,
unbiased and masked collection of information, diligent
follow‐up of patients, proper specification of statistical
models, and verification of the model assumptions.

­References
1 Buhles W, Kass PH. Understanding and evaluating

veterinary clinical research. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
2012; 48(5): 285–98.
2 Lecouteur RA. It’s time. Vet Surg 2007; 36(5): 390–5.

3 Hulley SB, Cummings SR, Browner WS, Grady

DG, Newman T. Designing Clinical Research,
4th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 2013.

25

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

27

Section 2
Endocrine Disease

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

29

4
Principles of Endocrinology
Robert Kemppainen, DVM, PhD
Department of Anatomy, Physiology and Pharmacology, Endocrine Diagnostic Service, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, USA

­Overview of Endocrinology
The classic definition of an endocrine tissue is a ductless
gland specialized to release a hormone into the blood­
stream to act on a distant target. Glands such as the
pituitary, thyroid, islet cells in the pancreas, and adrenal
fit this characterization. It is increasingly clear, however,
that many (if not all) tissues in the body release sub­
stances into the blood (or at least locally) in a regulated
fashion and these substances influence the activity of
other cells. Examples include leptin and adiponectin
from adipose tissue, natriuretic factors from the heart,
and erythropoietin from the kidney.
Hormones regulate a vast array of biologic processes,
including, but not limited to, fuel mobilization, storage, and
distribution; maintenance of electrolyte concentrations in
extracellular fluid; and control of metabolic rate. Each
­system employs checks and balances; most utilize some
form of negative feedback control to maintain homeostasis.
While some systems have as their principal goal mainte­
nance of a steady level of a metabolite or electrolyte, others
employ moving set points or thresholds that adapt to chang­
ing conditions. As an example of the latter, stress causes
activation of the pituitary‐adrenal system and increased
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) release stimulates
release of cortisol from the adrenal cortex. Normally,
­elevated cortisol concentrations suppress ACTH secretion
via negative feedback, but in some long‐term stressful
­situations, this negative feedback is overridden so that high
ACTH concentrations in circulation are maintained in
the presence of the steroid negative feedback signal.

­Chemical Classes of Hormones
Classic hormones comprise three main chemical types.
Each class has a different means of synthesis, storage,
and mechanism of action on targets.

Protein/Polypeptide Hormones
Hormones in this class are composed at minimum of
three amino acids. Some consist of subunits (e.g., the
pituitary hormones luteinizing hormone [LH], follicle‐
stimulating hormone [FSH], and thyroid‐stimulating
hormone [TSH]) and may have additional modifications
including additions of sugar residues (glycosylation),
phosphates, and disulfide bonds.
Protein/polypeptides hormones are manufactured
by classic transcription/translation of genes that are
expressed in high amounts in the endocrine tissue of
­origin. Encoded in the genes are sequences that direct
these molecules to the regulated secretory pathway,
resulting in the storage of the hormone in vesicles, ready
for release by exocytosis in response to the appropriate
signal. The nature of this signal differs depending on the
system involved. Most endocrine cells that produce and
release hormones of this class store significant amounts
of the hormone and have the ability to release a large
amount of product if needed. Continual stimulation of
release often causes induction of the gene necessary for
its synthesis.
Protein/polypeptide hormones are released into cir­
culation through the specialized capillaries in their
­tissue of origin and most circulate free or unbound in
blood. Exceptions exist; for example, insulin‐like
growth factor‐1 (IGF‐1) and growth hormone are
bound to varying extent to plasma proteins. In the case
of IGF‐1, the binding is significant, accounting for the
prolonged half‐life of this hormone. By contrast, most
other protein/polypeptide hormones have relatively
short half‐lives, usually in the range of several minutes
(e.g., the half‐life of ACTH is less than 15 minutes).
Protein/polypeptide hormones act on target cells by
binding receptors located on the cell surface (see later),
rapidly activating specific signal transduction systems
in target cells.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

Steroids

­Hormones in Circulation

Steroid hormones include the adrenocortical hormones
(e.g., cortisol, aldosterone), reproductive steroids (e.g.,
estrogen, testosterone), and vitamin D. They are manu­
factured in their tissues of origin from cholesterol. In
turn, most of the cholesterol used for synthesis is trans­
ported in blood, taken up, and stored in the endocrine
tissue. Each endocrine cell expresses a unique set of
enzymes used in the conversion of cholesterol to final
product. These cells typically possess large amounts of
smooth endoplasmic reticulum and enzymatic conver­
sions occur in this location as well as other intracellular
sites (e.g., mitochondria). The final products accumu­
late and simply diffuse out of the cell because of their
hydrophobic nature.
Steroids are relatively insoluble in water and are
found in circulation bound to carrier proteins, includ­
ing globulins and albumin. Because of this protein
binding, steroids generally have longer half‐lives in
blood than proteins/polypeptides. While the free or
unbound portion is available to enter and act in target
cells, the loosely bound albumin fraction is available to
deliver steroid to targets as well. The globulin‐bound
portion serves as a reservoir, buffering steroids in cir­
culation and also assisting in delivery to tissues by
releasing bound steroid as the complex permeates
through tissues. Steroids act on target cells primarily
by binding to intracellular receptors; the receptor hor­
mone complex then binds to specific DNA sequences
and affects rates of gene transcription. Steroids are
removed by the liver and kidney. Active hormones are
inactivated by processes including removal of double
bonds, conjugation to glucuronic acid and sulfate, and
excretion in urine and feces.

Concentrations of hormones in circulation may vary sig­
nificantly depending on a variety of circumstances.
Specific hormones show characteristic secretory pat­
terns in blood. For example, ACTH and cortisol show
periodic and, to some degree, irregular spikes and
troughs throughout the day (Figure 4.1). Stressful condi­
tions elevate levels of both of these hormones. In addi­
tion, ACTH and cortisol levels may also vary with time of
day. In humans, ACTH and cortisol levels in circulation
are higher in the early morning hours. This circadian
variation is significantly less (or absent) in dogs and cats.
By contrast, T4 levels in blood do not change as dramati­
cally and instead are relatively steady, varying by approxi­
mately 15–20% during the day (see Figure 4.1). Growth
hormone is secreted in bursts or pulses and in humans,
greatest levels are observed shortly after going to sleep.
These patterns of secretion and resultant normal fluc­
tuations have practical consequences. For example, rest­
ing cortisol measurement is of little value in the diagnosis
of hyperadrenocorticism. Overall, cortisol levels are
greater in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism but because
of the normal fluctuating nature of its secretion, values
overlap when comparing single baseline levels between
dogs with normal adrenals and dogs with hyperadreno­
corticism. An additional confounding factor in evaluat­
ing baseline cortisol concentrations is that stress
associated with blood sample collection may result in an
elevated cortisol level. The fact that T4 concentrations
are more stable throughout the day permits the use of
resting or baseline T4 determination as a screening test
for hypothyroidism in dogs and hyperthyroidism in cats.

Hormones Made from Amino Acids
The principal hormones in this chemical class are the
catecholamines and thyroid hormones, which are
derived from the amino acid tyrosine by different
means. Catecholamines (epinephrine and norepineph­
rine) are made by a series of enzymatic events involv­
ing hydroxylation, decarboxylation, and methylation
in adrenal medullary cells. Catecholamines have short
half‐lives in blood and bind to receptors on the cell
surface. By contrast, thyroid hormones (T4 and T3)
are made in thyroid follicles (colloid) by iodination
and coupling of iodinated tyrosines and are stored in
thyroglobulin until colloid is taken up into the thyroid
follicular cells, broken down, and T4 and T3 are
secreted. Thyroid hormones behave much like ster­
oids; they are carried in blood primarily in protein‐
bound form and act on target cells by binding to
intracellular receptors.

­Hormone Receptors
Receptors for the majority of protein/polypeptide
­hormones (and catecholamines) reside on the target cell
150
Hormone concentration

VetBooks.ir

30

Cortisol
T4

125
100
75
50
25
0
0

4

8

12

16

20

24

Hours

Figure 4.1 Fluctuations in levels of cortisol and T4 in a healthy
dog during the day. Levels of cortisol show significant random
variation, while levels of T4 are relatively stable.

VetBooks.ir

4 Principles of Endocrinology

surface. Hormone binding results in a subtle change in
the three‐dimensional structure of the receptor and this
signal is carried into the cell where it is transduced into a
message(s) that affects cellular biochemistry.
Cell surface receptors can be classified by their struc­
ture and the nature of the signaling pathway that they
activate. Many protein/polypeptide hormones bind to G‐
protein (guanosine‐protein) coupled receptors. This large
family of receptors possess 7‐transmembrane spanning
domains and transfer signals to another membrane pro­
tein complex (the G‐protein) consisting of three subunits
(alpha, beta, and gamma). The alpha subunit at rest is
bound to a GDP, hormone‐receptor binding causes the
G‐alpha to replace the guanosine 5’‐diphosphate (GDP)
with guanosine 5’‐triphosphate (GTP), resulting in activa­
tion of the G‐protein and dissociation of its subunits. The
free subunits then carry the signal to other downstream
proteins, including enzymes (e.g., adenylyl cyclase) or ion
channels. Hormone activation of a G‐protein does not
always result in activation of a cellular process, but may
instead result in inhibition. For example, some G‐alpha
subunits (Gi), when activated, suppress the activity of
adenylyl cyclase, reducing cyclic AMP production in cells.
Other types of cell surface receptors are enzymes
themselves. For example, the insulin receptor has tyros­
ine kinase activity, meaning that after insulin binds, the
intracellular portion of the receptor acts to place phos­
phates on tyrosine residues on the receptor itself and on
substrate molecules that contact the activated receptor.
Cell surface receptor activation can activate many
pathways in target cells, employing signal amplification
and cross‐talk. Signaling may also reach the nucleus,
therefore affecting gene transcription.
Cell surface receptor number can change with condi­
tions. Exposure to high levels of the activating hormone
can result in receptor downregulation and reduce the
target tissue response. In other situations, target cells
express more receptors which can result in upregulation
of the response. In many cases, “spare receptors” are pre­
sent on targets, meaning that only a small percentage of
receptors need to be occupied in order to obtain a maxi­
mal response in the cell.
Steroid and thyroid hormones principally affect their
targets by binding to intracellular receptors followed by
movement and binding of the hormone receptor com­
plex to specific regions on DNA. This binding then
affects (positively or negatively) the rate of gene tran­
scription and ultimately the production of certain cell‐
specific proteins. The receptor molecules act in pairs.
Thyroid hormone entry into target cells has been shown
to be mediated by specific cell membrane transporters
such as monocarboxylate transporter 8 and organic
anion transporting polypeptide 1C1. Similar transport­
ers have not been identified for steroid hormones.

Evidence exists for steroid and thyroid hormone effects
that do not involve the classic genomic signaling path­
way, and in fact, membrane receptors for both steroids
and thyroid hormones have been identified. In addition,
these hormones may act inside cells by binding their
receptors and then the hormone–receptor complex
interacts with intracellular proteins, such as transcrip­
tion factors, without the need to bind DNA. It is believed
that much of the antiinflammatory activity of glucocorti­
coids comes about through this process, where the glu­
cocorticoid receptor complex binds to nuclear factor
kappa B (NFkappaB), preventing this molecule from
stimulating the production of proinflammatory genes.
In general, activation of cell surface receptors results
in rapid responses in target cells while the effects of
steroid and thyroid hormones take longer to become
apparent. This difference can be illustrated by compar­
ing the response to ACTH (protein hormone) to that of
thyroid hormone. When performing an ACTH response
test, a post‐ACTH blood sample is usually collected at
one hour for cortisol measurement, the time it takes for
the ACTH‐induced cortisol secretion to reach maxi­
mum levels in circulation. On the other hand, noticea­
ble clinical responses in a dog with hypothyroidism
treated with T4 replacement therapy require several
days (increase in activity) to weeks (stimulation of hair
regrowth) to become apparent.

­Regulation of Hormone Secretion
Although control of each endocrine system is unique,
negative feedback is a dominant feature in most, if not
all, systems. The nature of the feedback signal depends
on the system; in some cases, it is an ion (calcium in the
case of the parathyroid) or fuel molecule (glucose in the
case of insulin) while in others it is a hormone itself (cor­
tisol in the case of the ACTH‐adrenal axis). Regulatory
control in some systems is multifaceted and more com­
plex; for example, regulation of aldosterone involves the
renin‐angiotensin system with sensing mechanisms tied
to extracellular fluid volume and sodium levels. In oth­
ers, such as calcium and parathyroid hormone, the rela­
tionship is straightforward with the parathyroid gland
responding rapidly to a decline in calcium levels in the
blood with an increase in secretion of parathyroid hor­
mone that, in turn, works to restore calcium levels to a
set point.
Feedback relationships are central to diagnostic testing
and to localizing disease. Dexamethasone suppression
testing relies on feedback, as this potent glucocorticoid
activates negative feedback in the hypothalamus and
pituitary, suppressing ACTH secretion and thus secretion
(and therefore blood levels) of cortisol. ACTH‐secreting

31

Section 2 Endocrine Disease
200
175
Cortisol (nmol/L)

VetBooks.ir

32

150
125
Hyperadrenocorticism

100
75
50

Normal

25
0
0

4

8

Hours

Figure 4.2 Low‐dose dexamethasone (Dex) suppression patterns
in dogs. Administration of Dex activates negative feedback in the
hypothalamus and pituitary, resulting in a decline in ACTH
secretion. In turn, the drop in ACTH rapidly results in a decline in
levels of cortisol from the adrenal. In dogs with normal pituitary‐
adrenal function, cortisol levels are suppressed (stay below the
dotted line) at four and eight hours after Dex. The pituitary tumor
present in dogs with pituitary‐dependent hyperadrenocorticism
possesses resistance to feedback, so cortisol levels are not
suppressed below the normal cut‐off value at both time points.

pituitary tumors in canine hyperadrenocorticism (corti­
cotroph tumors) have an inherent degree of resistance to
feedback and therefore affected dogs do not demonstrate
the same feedback responsiveness to a low dose of dexa­
methasone as do unaffected dogs (Figure 4.2).
Insulinomas also have abnormalities in negative feed­
back. Whereas the normal beta cell responds to a drop in
circulating glucose levels by shutting off insulin secretion,
in patients with insulinomas, the tumor cells do not
respond appropriately to this decline in glucose and insu­
lin secretion is maintained in the face of hypoglycemia.
Documentation of an elevated insulin level in blood col­
lected from a fasted animal experiencing hypoglycemia is
diagnostic for this tumor. Levels of parathyroid hormone
(PTH) should be evaluated in conjunction with calcium
(total or free) levels. If normal parathyroid gland function
is present, the presence of hypercalcemia will be accom­
panied by low levels of PTH. However, hypercalcemia
occurring in conjunction with an elevated PTH concen­
tration is consistent with a defect in parathyroid gland
feedback, most likely related to a parathyroid adenoma
(primary hyperparathyroidism).

­Endocrine Disease
Endocrine diseases usually manifest as hypo‐ or hyper­
function of an endocrine tissue. In many cases, the cause
of hypofunction involves the immune system (autoim­
mune attack) resulting in a gradual destruction of the

endocrine tissue. Examples include primary hypothyroid­
ism in dogs and hypoadrenocorticism (Addison disease)
in dogs and cats. The immune‐mediated destruction and
gradual loss of hormone secretion activate negative feed­
back mechanisms so that a period of compensation typi­
cally occurs. For example, levels of TSH would be expected
to rise in dogs with primary hypothyroidism, possibly
even before clinical signs are noted. Eventually, the
immune‐mediated destruction results in loss of sufficient
endocrine tissue so that the hormone secretion declines
to the point that clinical signs of deficiency are seen.
Often, endocrine hyperfunction conditions result
from overactivity of endocrine cells associated with
either hyperplasia or neoplasia. Often, these affected
cells not only possess increased cell division rates but
also lose (or show lessened) negative feedback control.
Examples include the most common form of hyper­
adrenocorticism in dogs (pituitary‐dependent hyper­
adrenocorticism), primary hyperparathyroidism, and
insulinoma. Feline hyperthyroidism is associated with a
similar process occurring in follicles; these cells show
increased activity (resulting in excessive secretion of T4)
in the absence of trophic drive from TSH.
Endocrine diseases can result from many other poten­
tial mechanisms. Mutations in receptors can render them
incapable of responding to the hormone ligand or can
result in continual activation in the absence of hormone.
In other situations, diseases occur as a consequence of
receptor insensitivity to the hormone in the absence of
mutations. For example, in type 2 or noninsulin‐depend­
ent diabetes, the insulin receptor has reduced responsive­
ness to insulin, often related to obesity.

­Hormone Measurement
For many years, radioimmunoassay (RIA) was the stand­
ard method used to measure hormone concentration in
blood. RIA employed a radioactive‐tagged version of the
hormone and an antibody made against it. Nontagged
hormone, either in the form of standard, purified hor­
mone or present in patient sample, was mixed with the
tagged hormone and competed for a limited number of
antibody‐binding sites. In this way, displacement curves
were generated, so that tubes containing increasing
amounts of nontagged hormone displaced tagged hor­
mone from antibody. Standard curves were generated by
adding known amounts of nontagged hormone to tubes,
and radioactivity in tubes with patient sample was then
compared to that from the standards. Use of radioactiv­
ity as the mode of detection allowed for a high level of
sensitivity in RIA, a must when attempting to measure
substances circulating in pico‐ (10−12) or nano‐ (10−9)
gram amounts.

VetBooks.ir

4 Principles of Endocrinology

While some diagnostic laboratories still use RIA, most
hormone determinations today are made using reporters
other than radioactivity. The basic methodology is simi­
lar to RIA (competitive binding to antibodies) but the tag
employed is nonradioactive, using methods such as
chemiluminescense or an enzyme label (as in enzyme‐
linked immunosorbent assay [ELISA]). Another method
that is particularly well suited to the measurement of
protein hormones employs two antibodies, directed
against different regions of the molecule. The presence
of the hormone allows for formation of a “sandwich”
complex, which is reported by a tag present on one of the
antibodies.
Measurement of hormones in companion and domes­
tic animals presents some special challenges. Many
assays are commercially available to measure hormones
in samples from humans. Some, but not all, of these can

be used to measure the hormone in samples from other
animal species. Considerations involved in determining
the usefulness of such assay methods include the fact
that circulating levels of a particular hormone can vary
significantly across species (e.g., T4 levels are approxi­
mately four times higher in humans compared with dogs
and cats), protein binding differs across species and
other materials in serum or plasma (e.g., lipid content)
can impact results obtained in a particular assay. Protein
hormones can vary structurally across species and this
may have a profound effect on the usefulness of an assay
to validate across species. For example, TSH levels
­cannot be determined in samples from dogs or cats using
human TSH assay methods. Especially in the case of
­protein hormones, users should contact the reference
laboratory to determine if the assay has been validated
for use in that species.

­Further Reading
Chakravarti B, Chattopadhyay N, Brown EM. Signaling
through the extracellular calcium‐sensing receptor
(CaSR). Adv Exp Med Biol 2012; 740: 103–42.
Dooley R, Harvey BJ, Thomas W. Non‐genomic actions of
aldosterone: from receptors and signals to membrane
targets. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2012; 350(2): 223–34.
Finch NC, Syme HM, Elliott J. Parathyroid hormone concen­
tration in geriatric cats with various degrees of renal
function. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 241(10): 1326–35.

Peterson ME. More than just T₄: diagnostic testing for
hyperthyroidism in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2013; 15(9):
765–77.
Rutter GA, Pullen TJ, Hodson DJ, Martinez‐Sanchez A.
Pancreatic β‐cell identity, glucose sensing and the
control of insulin secretion. Biochem J 2015; 466(2):
203–18.

33

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

35

5
Neuroendocrinology
Maya Lottati, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM)
TrueCare for Pets, Studio City, CA, USA

Neuroendocrinology refers to the orchestration between
the nervous system and the endocrine system to maintain homeostasis by regulating various bodily functions
such as stress responsiveness, growth and development,
and metabolism. To achieve homeostasis, the body
appropriately senses and responds to alterations in the
external and internal environment through the modulation of chemical messengers, or hormones. The key players of the neuroendocrine system are the hypothalamus
and pituitary gland which are intricately linked via secretory peptides and neuronal connections, as well as target
end‐organs (adrenal, thyroid, gonads, liver, and breast
tissue) whose role is to exert a physiologic response.
These players are integrated with one another through a
series of feedback loops that allow controlled secretions
of endocrine hormones throughout the body. In this way,
the hypothalamus, pituitary gland, and target tissues
regulate physiologic function. Alterations to these pathways and regulatory mechanisms may result in hormone
disturbances that lead to disease processes.

­Anatomic Considerations of the
Hypothalamus and Pituitary System
The Hypothalamus
The hypothalamus is a highly specialized region of the
posterior forebrain that is critical to regulation of vital
bodily functions, including temperature regulation,
immune function, growth, stress responsiveness, water
balance, sexual behavior and reproduction, and metabolism. It is situated below the thalamus just above the
midbrain, and arises from the diencephalon during
embryologic development.
The hypothalamus is composed of neurosecretory
neurons that produce various peptide hormones and
biogenic amines (dopamine), which enter the circulatory

system and act as endocrine hormones on distant target
tissues. The unique capability of the hypothalamus to
convert neural signals into hormonal output is called
neuroendocrine transduction.
Hypothalamic hormones enter the general circulation
in one of two ways (Figure 5.1). Some hypothalamic hormones are transported along axons to the median eminence where they enter the portal circulation to reach
the anterior pituitary. Here, they stimulate or inhibit
anterior pituitary hormone release into the general
­circulation. Other hypothalamic nuclei have axons that
terminate at the posterior pituitary. These particular
hypothalamic hormones (e.g., vasopressin and oxytocin)
are transported to the posterior pituitary where they can
be released into the general circulation. The intermediate lobe of the pituitary gland is under direct neural control by the hypothalamus.
Hypophysiotropic hormones can be releasing or inhibitory in nature. The hypothalamic and pituitary hormones and their primary effects are listed in Table 5.1.
The Pituitary Gland
The pituitary gland is referred to as the hypophysis, and
it is situated beneath the hypothalamus at the base of the
brain. It is securely nestled within a depression of the
sphenoid bone called the sella turcica whose shape is
described as “saddle‐like.” The pituitary is composed of
an anterior lobe (AL; adenohypophysis) and a posterior
lobe (PL; neurohypophysis). Their diverse function is a
reflection of their distinct embryologic origin.
Adenohypophysis and Intermediate Lobe

The adenohypophysis is the glandular portion of the
pituitary gland. During embryologic development, it
arises from an ectodermal pouch (Rathke’s pouch) growing upwards from the oral cavity. In many mammalian
species, there is a distinct intermediate lobe (IL) that

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

VetBooks.ir

36

Hypophysiotropic
hormones

GHRH
TRH
GnRH
CRH
Others

NL

IL
AL

Pituitary hormones

ACTH GH PRL TSH LH FSH

σ MSH

VP

OT

Figure 5.1 Schematic representation of the hypothalamus and pituitary gland. Hypothalamic hormones are released into the
hypophyseal portal circulation for delivery to the anterior pituitary (AL) where they stimulate or inhibit release of the anterior pituitary
hormones. The posterior pituitary (NL) is the direct neural extension of the hypothalamus. Vasopressin (VP) and oxytocin (OT) are
produced by hypothalamic nuclei, and traverse the hypothalamic‐pituitary stalk to reach the NL where they are stored for release.
The intermediate lobe (IL) is under direct neuronal control by the hypothalamus. Source: Mol and Meij 2008. Reproduced with permission
of Elsevier.

develops along with the adenohypophysis but is kept separate by a thin membranous remnant of Rathke’s pouch.
Therefore, it is often described as part of the adenohypophysis. The IL is absent or underdeveloped in humans.
The adenohypophysis contains specialized secretory
cells that are classified according to the product(s)
they secrete; thyrotrophs (thyroid‐stimulating hormone
[TSH]), gonadotrophs (luteinizing hormone [LH] and
follicle‐stimulating hormone [FSH]), somatotrophs
(growth hormone [GH]), lactotrophs (prolactin [PRL]),
and corticotrophs (adrenocorticotropic hormone
[ACTH]). The IL is primarily composed of melanotrophs
(alpha‐melanocyte‐stimulating hormone [alpha‐MSH]),
which cause pigmentation of hair and skin. The composition of AL secretory cells varies between mammalian
species, but is approximately as follows in humans;
somatotrophs 50%; lactotrophs 15%; corticotrophs 20%;
gonadotrophs 10%; and thyrotrophs 5%.
These secretory products are further classified into
three families according to their structure and function:
glycoprotein hormones, somatomammotropic hormones, and derivatives of proopiomelanocortin (POMC).
Glycoprotein Hormones

The glycoprotein hormones include TSH produced
by thyrotropin cells, and LH and FSH produced by

­gonadotropin cells. Each hormone is a peptide made up
of single alpha and beta subunit. The amino acid sequence
of the alpha subunit is homologous between the glycoprotein hormones, while the beta subunit is unique.
Thyroid‐Stimulating Hormone Thyroid‐stimulating hormone is involved in the regulation of energy homeostasis
and metabolism. TSH is secreted in response to thyrotropin‐releasing hormone (TRH), which is produced in
the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus. Upon
release, TSH circulates to the thyroid gland where it
stimulates follicular cells to synthesize and release the
thyroid hormones triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine
(T4) into the circulation. As thyroid hormone levels rise,
they exert negative feedback on the hypothalamus and
pituitary gland to suppress TRH and TSH production,
respectively, thereby decreasing thyroid hormone production. Somatostatin (SS), a hypophysiotropic hormone
that is also produced by pancreatic islet D cells and gut
mucosa, is also a known inhibitor of TSH release.
Luteinizing Hormone and Follicle‐Stimulating Hormone

Luteinizing hormone and FSH, known collectively as the
gonadotropins, regulate sex steroid ­
synthesis and
­reproduction. In females, FSH regulates ovarian follicular development, and LH stimulates ­
ovulation and

VetBooks.ir

5 Neuroendocrinology

Table 5.1 Hypothalamic‐pituitary hormones and their primary functions
Endocrine gland

Hormone

Primary function

Target

Hypothalamus

Thyrotropin‐releasing
hormone (TRH)

Stimulates the release of thyroid‐stimulating
hormone (TSH) and prolactin (PRL)

Anterior pituitary

Gonadotropin‐releasing
hormone (GnRH)

Stimulates the release of luteinizing hormone
(LH) and follicle‐stimulating hormone (FSH)

Corticotropin‐releasing
hormone (CRH)

Stimulates the release adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH) and proopiomelanocortin
(POMC)‐derived peptides

Growth hormone‐
releasing hormone
(GHRH)

Stimulates the release of growth hormone (GH)

Prolactin‐releasing
hormone (PRLH)

Stimulates the release of prolactin (PRL)

Somatostatin (SS)

Inhibits the release of GH and thyroid‐stimulating
hormone (TSH)

Dopamine (AKA
prolactin‐inhibiting
hormone)

Inhibits the release of PRL

Vasopressin

Regulates blood volume

Distal convoluted tubules and
collecting ducts of kidney

Stimulates smooth muscle contraction

Blood vessels

Posterior
pituitarya

Oxytocin

Anterior pituitary

a
b

Stimulates uterine contraction during parturition

Uterine smooth muscle

Stimulates milk ejection during lactation

Myoepithelial cells of mammary
gland ducts

ACTH

Stimulates the release of glucocorticoids and sex
steroids

Adrenal cortex

GH

Promotes growth and development

Various tissuesb

Prolactin

Stimulates milk production

Mammary tissue

TSH

Stimulates the release of thyroid hormone

Thyroid gland

FSH

Stimulates estrogen production and promotes
ovarian follicle development in the female.
Stimulates spermatogenesis in the male

Gonads

LH

Stimulates progesterone production and promotes
ovarian follicle maturation in the female.
Stimulates testosterone production in the male.

These hormones are synthesized in the hypothalamus and released from the posterior pituitary gland.
See GH section.

­maintenance of the corpus luteum. Together, the gonadotropins stimulate production of the sex hormones
estradiol and progesterone. In male gonads, LH stimulates testosterone production by Leydig cells, and FSH
stimulates Sertoli cell proliferation and maintains sperm
quality.
Gonadotropin secretion is pulsatile, and release is
stimulated by gonadotropin‐releasing hormone (GnRH)
binding to the anterior pituitary. LH and FSH circulate
to target tissues and stimulate sex hormone production.
As gonadotropin levels rise, LH and FSH exert negative
feedback on the hypothalamus and pituitary to decrease
their own production. Sex hormone products also feed

back on the hypothalamus and pituitary gland to variably regulate gonadotropin production. Testosterone and
estrogen inhibit LH and FSH release by the anterior
pituitary, while estradiol may have variable effects on
gonadotropin production depending on its plasma concentration, a feature that may be important during various stages of reproduction. High levels of estradiol exert
positive feedback on GnRH to promote sustained
­gonadotropin release, while low levels negatively feedback to inhibit hypothalamic GnRH and pituitary
­gonadotropin release. Inhibin, a protein produced by
ovarian granulosa cells in females and by Sertoli cells in
males, inhibits FSH release both by direct feedback on

37

VetBooks.ir

38

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

its ­production by the pituitary and indirectly by altering
GnRH receptor sensitivity. Activin, a protein produced
by the ovaries, and dopamine are known stimulators
of FSH release. Endogenous opioids have an inhibitory
influence on gonadotropin production through alteration of GnRH secretion.
Somatomammotropic Hormones

Growth hormone and prolactin (PRL) are grouped
together as the somatomammotropic hormones. Their
amino acid sequences are similar, which may account for
some common functions.
As the name suggests, GH regulates
growth and development. In young animals, it stimulates
growth of connective tissue, long bones, muscles, and
endocrine glands. GH is a metabolic counterregulatory
hormone, which opposes the actions of insulin and raises
glucose by stimulating hepatic gluconeogenesis and
impairing glucose uptake in muscle. GH stimulates lipolysis in adipose tissue, which results in increased circulating free fatty acids, and has an anabolic effect on protein
synthesis. GH stimulates production of insulin‐like
growth factor 1 (IGF‐1) by hepatocytes. IGF‐1 is a primary mediator of the effects of GH.
Growth hormone is a single‐chain polypeptide containing two disulfide bridges. The sequence is highly
conserved among species; the sequences of canine and
feline GH differ by only one amino acid, while those of
canine and porcine GH are identical. Receptors for GH
have been identified throughout the body, but are found
in the highest concentrations in skeletal muscle, liver,
adipose tissue, heart, kidneys, lungs, and cartilage. This
diffuse distribution in part explains GH’s diverse effects.
GH receptors are known to have altered sensitivity to
various secretagogues throughout life, which aids in
preferential growth and development in young, and specialized metabolic function in adults.
Growth hormone secretion is pulsatile, and results
from the complex interactions between growth hormone‐releasing hormone (GHRH), SS, and peripheral
factors (both neural and hormonal). GH release is primarily a reflection of the delivery and binding of hypothalamic GHRH to pituitary somatotropic cells. SS is a
known inhibitor of GH secretion, thus high GHRH and
low SS levels result in GH release. SS is a more potent
inhibitor of GH release than of TSH release.
Insulin‐like growth factor 1 is secreted in response to
GH, but is also responsive to systemic alterations in
energy balance and nutrition. Low levels of IGF‐1 stimulate GH release. As GH and IGF‐1 levels rise, they
feed back on the hypothalamus to decrease GHRH and
increase SS secretion, which results in reduced production of GH. Ghrelin, an endogenous ligand produced by

Growth Hormone

enteral cells of the stomach, is a potent GH secretagogue. Other factors known to directly or indirectly
influence GH secretion include nutritional states, stress,
sex steroids, and exercise. For example, GH secretion
is stimulated by alpha‐adrenergic agonists and inhibited by beta‐adrenergic agonists and hyperglycemia.
Estradiol modulates GH levels indirectly via inhibitory
effects on SS.
Prolactin is involved in the regulation of lactation and reproduction. PRL works together with sex steroids to stimulate mammary gland development and
regulate milk production during lactation. Although
PRL is secreted in the male, its physiologic role is not yet
fully elucidated.
Prolactin is a single‐chain polypeptide containing
three disulfide bridges. There is significant sequence variation between species. PRL secretion is pulsatile, and
stimulated by the hypothalamic hormones prolactin‐
releasing hormone (PRLH) and TRH. PRL is also released
in response to the neural stimulation of suckling during
lactation. The definitive identity of PRLH is not yet
known, but vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) has been
suggested. PRL release is inhibited by dopamine, which is
also referred to as prolactin‐inhibiting hormone. In the
regulation of PRL release, the inhibitory component is
known to predominate over the stimulatory component.
Upon binding to its receptors in lactotropic cells,
dopamine inhibits PRL release. PRL, in turn, acts in a
short feedback loop by circulating and binding to PRL
receptors on dopaminergic neurons in the hypothalamus. PRL release is also stimulated by oxytocin and angiotensin II, and inhibited by gamma‐aminobutyric acid
(GABA). Unlike other hypophyseal hormones, PRL is
not subject to typical feedback inhibition by target tissue
hormone products. Instead, its release is solely regulated
through hypothalamic input and the suckling reflex.

Prolactin

Proopiomelanocortin‐Derived Peptides

Proopiomelanocortin is a large prohormone which
encodes numerous secretory products (Figure 5.2). It is
synthesized by corticotropic cells of the anterior pituitary and melanotropic cells of the IL. Proteolytic enzymes
hydrolyze POMC into ACTH and beta‐lipotropin (beta‐
LPH). These products are then further cleaved into
alpha‐MSH, which stimulates melanin production by
epithelial cells and leads to darkening of skin, beta‐
endorphin (an endogenous opioid), and other related
peptides. The function of many of these peptides is not
yet fully understood and remains under investigation.
Proopiomelanocortin synthesis is under direct neural control by the hypothalamus primarily through
inhibitory dopaminergic innervation. Thus, dopamine
exerts tonic inhibition of POMC release under normal

VetBooks.ir

5 Neuroendocrinology

Signal peptide

γ1,2MSH
γ3MSH

JP

MSH

β-MSH

CLIP

γ-END

ACTH

pro-γMSH
N-POC

Enk

β-END

γ-LPH
β-LPH

Figure 5.2 Schematic representation of proopiomelanocortin (POMC) and production of ACTH and related peptides. POMC contains four
major domains: the signal peptide domain; the N‐terminal peptide domain (N‐POC) which contains the (pro) gamma‐MSH peptide and
joining peptide (JP); the ACTH domain which contains melanocyte‐stimulating hormone (MSH) and corticotropin‐like intermediate lobe
peptide (CLIP); and the beta‐lipotropin (beta‐LPH) domain which generates metenkephalin (Enk) and the endorphin (END) family of
peptides. Vertical lines represent potential sites of proteolytic cleavage. Source: Mol and Meij 2008. Reproduced with permission of
Elsevier.

circumstances.
Corticotropin‐releasing
hormone
(CRH) will stimulate POMC production, which results
in ACTH release.
Adrenocorticotropic Hormone Adrenocorticotropic hormone is a glycoprotein hormone that regulates the synthesis and release of cortisol. Its binding to adrenal
cortical cells stimulates production of glucocorticoids,
sex steroids, and, to a lesser extent, mineralocorticoids.
ACTH also regulates growth of the adrenal cortex as evidenced by high ACTH causing hypertrophy of the adrenal cortex, and absent ACTH causing atrophy.
Adrenocorticotropic hormone secretion is pulsatile,
and stimulated by the hypothalamic hormones CRH and
vasopressin. These hormones act synergistically to stimulate ACTH release, but stress will variably modulate
their production by the hypothalamus.
Adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulates cortisol
release, and as cortisol levels rise, they feed back on the
hypothalamus and pituitary to inhibit production of
CRH and ACTH, respectively. Hypothalamic dopamine
exerts tonic inhibition of ACTH release through dopaminergic neural connections terminating on the IL.
Some factors that directly or indirectly influence ACTH
release include leptin, vasoactive intestinal peptide
(VIP), neuropeptide Y, cholecystokinin (CCK), cytokines
such as interleukin‐1 and tumor necrosis factor‐alpha,
serotonin agonists, and beta‐adrenergic agonists.
Additionally, ACTH release is triggered by exercise and
hypoglycemia.
Neurohypophysis

The neural portion of the pituitary is called the neurohypophysis, and it is composed of axons that extend downward as a large bundle from the hypothalamus. During
embryologic development, the neurohypophysis and
hypothalamus both arise from the diencephalon and
remain connected through life.

The hormones oxytocin and vasopressin are synthesized by the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei of the
hypothalamus. They are transported to the neurohypophysis through direct neuronal projections, and are
stored in secretory vesicles in axon terminals. Upon
appropriate neurogenic stimulation, they are released
into the general circulation where they travel to distant
target tissues and exert a physiologic effect.
Vasopressin; Antidiuretic Hormone, Arginine Vasopressin

Vasopressin (VP) regulates blood volume through alteration of water excretion in the kidneys. It also promotes
vascular smooth muscle contraction, and stimulates
ACTH release. These diverse effects are mediated by
vasopressin receptors: V1 in vascular smooth muscle,
V2 in the kidney epithelium, and V3 in the anterior
pituitary.
Vasopressin secretion is pulsatile, and hypothalamic
production is primarily stimulated when high plasma
osmolality (hemoconcentration) or a significant decrease
in blood volume (hypovolemia) is detected. In the
absence of circulating VP, the epithelial cells lining the
distal convoluted tubules and collecting ducts in the kidney are largely impermeable to water. As such, large volumes of dilute filtrate are excreted into the urine. Upon
release, circulating VP binds to VP2 receptors and
enhances the permeability of water‐selective channel
proteins (aquaporins) to water in renal epithelial cells.
This results in the passive diffusion of water into the
interstitial space due to the medullary osmotic gradient,
thereby restoring blood volume and suppressing VP production by the hypothalamus.
The binding of VP to V1 receptors in blood vessels
results in vasoconstriction through activation of calcium
channels (vasopressor effects). VP binding to V3 receptors in the anterior pituitary stimulates ACTH release.
The production of VP is stimulated by CRH and angiotensin II, and inhibited by glucocorticoids.

39

VetBooks.ir

40

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

Oxytocin

Oxytocin (OT) regulates lactation and parturition.
Similar to VP, OT is produced in hypothalamic nuclei,
and transported to the posterior pituitary where it is
stored for release. OT release is stimulated by suckling,
during lactation, and in response to vaginal or cervical
distension. Dopamine and opioids are also known to
modulate OT secretion from the posterior pituitary, as
well as extrareproductive factors such as stress.
In the uterus, OT binds to its receptors and stimulates the myometrium to contract. The sensitivity of
uterine receptors to circulating OT is variable during
different stages of reproduction. Receptor sensitivity is
reduced during pregnancy, and greatly enhanced at
the time of delivery when OT stimulates contraction of
uterine smooth muscle and results in expulsion of
the newborn. This OT‐mediated uterine contraction
is ­
further augmented by the presence of estrogen,
which increases at parturition. Conversely, OT‐­
mediated uterine contraction is inhibited by progesterone, which is high throughout pregnancy but plummets
at parturition.
During lactation, OT release is triggered by suckling.
Circulating OT stimulates contraction of myoepithelial
cells in mammary gland ducts, which results in milk
ejection. As for PRL, its function in the male is not fully
understood.

Cerebral Cortex

Hypothalamus

TRH

Pituitary

TSH

Thyroid Gland

Thyroid
Hormone

Target Tissue

­Regulation of the
Neuroendocrine System
The neuroendocrine system tightly regulates hormone
production by means of feedback mechanisms, which
help ensure optimal hormone levels and activity. The
hypothalamus and pituitary gland synthesize various
regulatory hormones – both releasing and inhibitory in
nature – that circulate to target endocrine glands (such
as adrenal, thyroid, gonads) and modulate hormone
release. These hormones bind to receptors in target tissues to generate a physiologic response, for example GH
stimulating growth in long bones. This pathway is
referred to as the hormone cascade, and it allows amplification of a signal in a closed system. When sufficient
amounts of target hormone are produced, the target hormone exerts feedback on the hypothalamus and pituitary
gland to inhibit previous steps in the pathway. Often
there is also negative feedback on the hypothalamus by
pituitary hormones, a principle referred to as short‐loop
feedback.
An excellent example of typical feedback regulation is
illustrated by the thyroid hormone pathway (Figure 5.3).
The hypothalamus produces TRH, which reaches
the anterior pituitary via the portal circulation. Here, it

Figure 5.3 Typical feedback control of hormone secretion in the
neuroendocrine system. The hypothalamus releases thyrotropin‐
releasing hormone (TRH) in response to a stimulus. TRH stimulates
the anterior pituitary to releases thyroid‐stimulating hormone
(TSH). TSH targets cells in the thyroid gland to produce thyroid
hormone, which circulates to target cells and elicits a response
(increase energy expenditure). Thyroid hormone exerts negative
feedback on the hypothalamus and pituitary to downregulate TRH
and TSH production, respectively. Plus signs indicate stimulation
of hormone production and release; minus signs indicate
inhibition hormone production and release.

stimulates release of TSH, which then is transported in
the blood to the thyroid gland where it stimulates production of thyroid hormone. As thyroid hormone levels
rise above a certain threshold, there is negative feedback
on production of TRH and TSH, which thereby decreases
thyroid hormone production. Subsequently, as thyroid
hormone levels decay, negative feedback is relieved
on the hypothalamus and pituitary, and production of
­thyroid hormone is once again restored through the
­hormone cascade. Neuroendocrine regulation predominantly relies on negative feedback, but there are instances
when positive feedback is used in which target hormones
influence the hypothalamus and pituitary to further augment their own production.

VetBooks.ir

5 Neuroendocrinology

­Vascular Supply
The vascular organization of the neuroendocrine system
is responsible for the effectiveness of feedback regulation and the hormone cascade. The hypothalamus
receives arterial blood from the circle of Willis, while the
pituitary gland is supplied by the superior and inferior
hypophyseal arteries (branches of the internal carotid
artery). The hypophyseal portal circulation connects the
hypothalamus with the anterior pituitary, thereby allowing direct transport of hypophysiotropic hormones to
their corresponding hypophyseal receptors. Venous
blood from the pituitary drains into the cavernous sinus
where it enters the systemic circulation to reach target
glands and tissues. Short portal veins connect the
­posterior and anterior lobes of the pituitary. A small
portion of pituitary outflow is thought to ascend in retrograde to the hypothalamus where it can directly
­participate in regulation of hypophyseal hormone production. It is important to note that the blood–brain
barrier is incomplete surrounding the portal system,
which ensures exposure to circulating hormones emanating from peripheral tissues.

­Regulation of Hormone Secretion
Hypothalamus
The hypothalamus is responsible for integrating sensory
stimuli from the external environment with input from
the internal environment to maintain homeostasis.
Therefore, neuroendocrine transduction is regulated not
only by hormonal feedback but also by neural input from
higher brain centers that convey information about the

external environment such as temperature, light, pain,
and other sensory stimuli.
In the hypothalamus, cell bodies responsible for hormone synthesis are anatomically intermingled, and there
is often redundancy in production of a single hormone
by separate hypothalamic nuclei. A single hypothalamic
hormone may exert an effect on multiple pituitary hormones, and multiple hypothalamic hormones may influence regulation of a single hypophyseal hormone. This
overlap and redundancy throughout the neuroendocrine
system allows for a high degree of regulation.
Pituitary Gland
Pituitary hormone regulation is not only under hormonal
feedback but is also influenced by central and peripheral
neural input, an example of which is illustrated by lactation and nursing. Suckling activates sensory pathways
leading to the hypothalamus that trigger release of PRLH
and TRH, and inhibit release of dopamine (prolactin‐
inhibiting hormone), and result in PL secretion by the
anterior pituitary. Concurrently, suckling stimulates
release of OT by the posterior pituitary, and together PRL
and OT stimulate milk production and initiate milk ejection in mammary glands, respectively. Central factors
also influence pituitary hormone release, as is seen when
on occasion lactating mothers expel a small amount of
milk upon the thought of their baby. The images stimulate
the cerebral cortex, which results in release of OT and
contraction of myoepithelium in mammary gland ducts.
The majority of pituitary hormones are released in a
pulsatile manner, therefore regulation of target organs
and tissues relies not only on absolute hormone concentrations but also on the frequency and amplitude of hormone pulses.

­Further Reading
Goldman L, Schafer AI. Goldman‐Cecil Medicine, 25th
edn. St Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2012.
Kaneko JJ, Harvey JW, Bruss ML. Clinical Biochemistry of
Domestic Animals, 6th edn. Cambridge, MA: Academic
Press, 2008.

Malven PV. Mammalian Neuroendocrinology. Boca Raton,
FL: CRC Press, 1993.
Rijnberk A, Kooistra HS. Clinical Endocrinology of Dogs
and Cats: An Illustrated Text, 2nd edn. Hanover,
Germany: Schlütersche, 2010.

41

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

43

6
Feline Acromegaly
David S. Bruyette, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)
Anivive Lifesciences, Long Beach, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
and Epidemiology
Feline acromegaly is a disease characterized by excessive
growth hormone secretion leading to a wide array of
clinical signs caused by the hormones’ effects on multi­
ple organ systems. These effects can be divided into two
major classes. The first are the catabolic actions of
growth hormone that include insulin antagonism, lipoly­
sis, and gluconeogenesis with the net effect of promoting
hyperglycemia. The second are the slow anabolic (or
hypertrophic) effects of growth hormone, which are
mediated by insulin‐like growth factors. Growth hor­
mone stimulates production of insulin‐like growth fac­
tors in several different tissues. Insulin‐like growth
factor‐1 (IGF‐1), which is produced in the liver, is thought
to be the key factor that facilitates the anabolic effects of
growth hormone that are responsible for the characte­
ristic appearance of acromegalic people, dogs, and cats.
Growth hormone is produced in the pars distalis (ante­
rior pituitary), specifically by acidophilic cells, called
somatotrophs. The release of growth hormone is regu­
lated by many factors, the most important of which is
growth hormone‐releasing hormone (GHRH) produced
by the hypothalamus. Recently, another hormone, ghrelin,
has also been identified as a potent stimulator of growth
hormone release. Ghrelin is produced by the stomach and
released following ingestion of a meal.
Release of growth hormone is inhibited by the hypo­
thalamic hormone somatostatin as well as by growth
hormone and IGF‐1 via negative feedback. Feline acro­
megaly is typically the result of a functional adenoma of
the pituitary that releases growth hormone despite nega­
tive feedback resulting in excessive growth hormone
production and release.
Feline acromegaly, thought to be an uncommon ­disease
until recently, is likely underdiagnosed. Three studies have

examined the incidence of acromegaly in the ­diabetic cat
population. A recent study in the United Kingdom meas­
ured IGF‐1 levels in variably controlled diabetic cats. Of
the 184 cases, 59 (32%) had markedly increased IGF‐1
concentrations. Eighteen of these 59 cats underwent pitu­
itary imaging, confirming a diagnosis of acromegaly in
17/18 (94%). A second study examined 225 cats with vari­
ably controlled diabetes and 40 (17.8 %) had markedly
high IGF‐1 concentrations. In the largest study to date, of
1222 cats with diabetes, 323 (26.4 %) had IGF‐1 suggesting
acromegaly and 90% had a pituitary mass upon imaging
(CT or MRI). This suggests that 18–32% of diabetic cats
may have concurrent acromegaly and acromegaly may be
one of the most important predisposing factors to feline
diabetes through the induction of insulin resistance.
Etiology
Acromegaly in humans is usually sporadic, but up to 20% of
familial isolated pituitary adenomas are caused by g­ ermline
sequence variants of the aryl‐hydrocarbon‐receptor inter­
acting protein (AIP) gene. The AIP gene is associated with
xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes and endocrine disrupt­
ing chemicals in the environment, such as bisphenol A and
PBDEs, have been linked to both feline acromegaly and
hyperthyroidism. Feline acromegaly has similarities to
human acromegalic families with AIP mutations. A recent
study sequenced the feline AIP gene, to identify sequence
variants and compare the AIP gene sequence between
feline acromegalic and control cats, and in acromegalic sib­
lings. A single nonsynonymous single‐nucleotide polymor­
phism (SNP) was identified in exon 1 (AIP:c.9T > G) of two
acromegalic cats and none of the control cats, as well as
both members of one sibling pair. The region of this SNP is
considered essential for the interaction of the AIP protein
with its receptor. This sequence variant has not previously
been reported in humans. Two additional synonymous

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

44

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

sequence variants were identified (AIP:c.481C > T and
AIP:c.826C > T). This was the first molecular study to
investigate a potential genetic cause of feline acromegaly
and identified a nonsynonymous AIP SNP in 20% of the
acromegalic cat population evaluated, as well as in one of
the sibling pairs evaluated.

­History and Clinical Signs
Feline acromegaly most commonly affects middle‐aged to
older, male castrated cats. In one study, 13 of 14 cats with
acromegaly were males with an average age of 10.2 years.
This association may be biased, however, as most cats
that are diagnosed with acromegaly present for insulin‐
resistant diabetes mellitus, which is also more common in
older, male castrated cats. Based on available data, there is
no known breed association for acromegaly.
Most patients with acromegaly present for insulin‐
resistant diabetes mellitus (insulin doses greater than
1.5–2.2 units/kg BID) with concurrent weight gain
rather than weight loss. Growth hormone has effects
on all the tissues in the body and therefore the disease
has a range of clinical signs. Physical characteristics of
acromegaly include increased body weight, a broad­
ened face, enlarged feet, protrusion of the mandible
(prognathia inferior), increased interdental spacing,
stertorous breathing, organomegaly, and a poor hair­
coat. Cardiovascular signs include the presence of a
heart murmur, hypertension, arrhythmia, associated
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Neurologic dis­
ease associated with feline acromegaly is uncommon
but can occur with a pituitary macroadenoma.
Neurologic signs that have been observed with acro­
megaly include dullness, lethargy, abnormal behavior,
circling, and blindness. Glomerulopathy and second­
ary renal failure have also been associated with feline
acromegaly. Histopathologic evaluation of the kidneys
from acromegalic cats has revealed thickening of the
glomerular basement membrane and Bowman’s cap­
sule, periglomerular fibrosis, and degeneration of the
renal tubules. Arthropathy and peripheral (diabetic)
neuropathy have been shown to cause lameness in
acromegalic cats.

­Diagnosis
Diagnosis of feline acromegaly starts with clinical suspi­
cion, using a thorough history, signalment, and clinical
signs. Many of the abnormalities in the minimum data­
base of affected cats reflect concurrent diabetes mellitus
and include erythrocytosis, hyperglycemia, increased

liver enzymes (ALT, ALP), hypercholesterolemia, hyper­
phosphatemia, hyperglobulinemia, azotemia, glucosuria,
ketonuria, proteinuria, and isosthenuria.
Growth hormone concentration is a common diagnos­
tic for acromegaly in humans, but assays specifically for
feline growth hormone are not widely available. An assay
using ovine GH as the antigen has been validated for use
in cats, but is only available in Europe. However, even if
an assay were available, growth hormone concentrations
alone may not be a reliable diagnostic for acromegaly.
Growth hormone production is cyclic and levels may
vary throughout the day. A single high value may not
necessarily be diagnostic for acromegaly. Additionally, it
has been shown that growth hormone may be elevated in
nonacromegalic diabetic cats. This may be due to the
fact that portal insulin is required for the liver to produce
IGF‐1. In diabetics being treated with insulin subcutane­
ously, portal insulin concentrations will remain low,
resulting in decreased IGF‐1 production and theoreti­
cally decreased inhibition of GH release. In addition, GH
levels may also not be elevated early in the course of the
disease, but later typically increase significantly.
Insulin‐like growth factor‐1 is the endocrine assay most
commonly used to diagnose feline acromegaly and is
widely available through the Michigan State University
Diagnostic Center for Population and Animal Health
(www.animalhealth.msu.edu/Forms/F.ADM.7.pdf ).
Unlike GH, IGF‐1 concentrations are less likely to fluctu­
ate over the course of the day as the majority of IGF‐1
is protein bound, giving it a longer half‐life in the body. In
addition, IGF‐1 increases in response to chronically ele­
vated GH concentrations and is thought to be a reflection
of GH levels over the previous 24 hours. However, just as
with GH, elevations in IGF‐1 concentration alone may not
be diagnostic for acromegaly. One study found that IGF‐1
levels in nonacromegalic cats on long‐term insulin treat­
ment (>14 months) had higher levels of IGF‐1 than non­
diabetics. It was proposed that insulin treatment allowed
for beta cell regeneration and increased portal insulin,
leading to elevations in IGF‐1. A subsequent study evalu­
ating IGF‐1 levels in confirmed acromegalics, diabetics,
diabetics, and healthy cats found that acromegalic diabet­
ics had significantly higher levels of IGF‐1 than diabetics
and nondiabetics. This study concluded that IGF‐1 was
84% sensitive and 92% specific for diagnosing feline acro­
megaly. No correlation between long‐term insulin use and
elevations in IGF‐1 concentrations was found in this study.
Diagnostic Imaging
Radiographic findings associated with feline acromegaly
are related to the hypertrophic effects of excessive GH.
Hyperostosis of the calvarium, spondylosis of the spine,
and protrusion of the mandible are common findings.

VetBooks.ir

6 Feline Acromegaly

Periosteal reaction, osteophyte production, soft tissue
swelling, and collapse of joint spaces are signs associated
with the degenerative arthropathy linked to feline acro­
megaly. Thoracic radiographs may reveal cardiomegaly
(hypertrophic cardiomyopathy) and/or congestive heart
failure. Nonspecific signs such as abdominal organo­
megaly (hepatic, renal, and adrenal) may be revealed by
abdominal ultrasound.
Advanced imaging is needed to document the presence
of a pituitary macroadenoma. Computed tomography
(CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are both
useful for identifying pituitary masses. However, one study
found MRI to be the more sensitive imaging modality. The
presence of a pituitary tumor alone is not diagnostic for
feline acromegaly as other functional tumors of the pitui­
tary may also result in insulin‐resistant diabetes, such as
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)‐producing tumors
in patients with Cushing disease. Conversely, the absence
of a pituitary mass does not rule out acromegaly as there
have been reported cases where a patient had a negative
MRI but a pituitary mass was identified at necropsy and
histopathology confirmed a GH‐secreting adenoma.
Histopathology
Histopathology is needed for definitive diagnosis which
makes antemortem diagnosis challenging. However, with
advancements in surgical procedures such as transsphe­
noidal hypophysectomy, surgical excisional biopsy is pos­
sible. The main histopathologic change associated with
acromegaly is acidophil proliferation in pituitary tumors.
Adrenocortical Function Testing
There is no single test for the diagnosis of feline acro­
megaly. Clinical suspicion based on a thorough history
and physical exam is essential. As stated earlier, the most
common presenting complaint for patients with acro­
megaly is insulin resistance with weight gain. The two
most common causes of insulin resistance in cats are
hyperadrenocorticism and acromegaly. Both of these
diseases can be associated with a pituitary mass and
bilateral adrenomegaly. As such, all suspected acromeg­
alics should undergo adrenocortical testing via the
ACTH stimulation test and/or low‐dose dexamethasone
suppression test. Normal results on these tests would
then be an indication to screen for acromegaly.

­Treatment
Medical Treatment
Somatostatin is a hypothalamic hormone that acts on
the pituitary to inhibit GH release. Somatostatin analogs

are commonly used in human medicine for the treat­
ment of acromegaly and have efficacy rates of 50–60%.
The somatostatin analog octreotide has been evaluated
in a small number of feline acromegalics with limited
success. One study in four cats found no change in GH
following treatment. Another study measured the short‐
term effects of octreotide in five feline acromegalics and
found a decrease in growth hormone concentrations for
up to 90 minutes. A small study evaluating an octreotide
analog (Sandostatin® LAR) showed no benefit in cats
treated for 3–6 months.
However, a recent study examined the long‐term
­medical management of acromegaly in cats using pasire­
otide, a novel somatostatin analog, which had been
shown to decrease serum IGF‐1 and improve insulin
sensitivity in cats with acromegaly when administered as
a short‐acting preparation. The study used once‐monthly
administration of long‐acting pasireotide (pasireotide
LAR) for treatment of cats with acromegaly. Fourteen
cats with acromegaly, diagnosed based on the presence
of diabetes mellitus, pituitary enlargement, and serum
IGF‐1 >1000 ng/mL, were enrolled. Cats received pasire­
otide LAR (6–8 mg/kg SC) once monthly for six months.
Fructosamine and IGF‐1 concentrations, and 12‐hour
blood glucose curves (BGCs) were assessed at baseline
and then monthly. Product of fructosamine concentra­
tion and insulin dose was calculated as an indicator of
insulin resistance (Insulin Resistance Index). Eight cats
completed the trial. Three cats entered diabetic remission.
Median IGF‐1 (baseline 1962 ng/mL [range 1051–
2000 ng/mL]; month 6 1253 ng/mL [524–1987 ng/mL];
P < 0.001) and median Insulin Resistance Index (baseline
812 μmolU/L kg [173–3565 μmolU/L kg]; month 6
135 μmolU/L kg [0–443 μmolU/L kg]; P = 0.001)
decreased significantly. No significant change was found
in mean fructosamine (baseline 494 ± 127 μmol/L; month
6 319 ± 113.3 μmol/L; P = 0.07) or mean blood glucose
(baseline 347.7 ± 111.0 mg/dL; month 6 319.5 ± 113.3 mg/
dL; P = 0.11), despite a significant decrease in median
insulin dose (baseline 1.5 [0.4–5.2] U/kg; month 6 0.3
[0.0–1.4] U/kg; P < 0.001). Adverse events included diar­
rhea (n = 11), hypoglycemia (n = 5), and worsening poly­
phagia (n = 2). This initial study indicates that pasireotide
LAR has potential as a long‐term management option
for cats with acromegaly.
Conflicting results with various somatostatin analogs
may be related to difference in somatostatin receptor
subtypes. Future studies are required to identify the
somatostatin receptor subtypes in GH‐secreting feline
pituitary tumors to determine if they are similar to the
ones found in humans.
Dopamine agonists and more recently GH receptor
antagonists are also used in human medicine for the treat­
ment of acromegaly. The use of GH receptor antagonists

45

VetBooks.ir

46

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

has not been reported in cats but in humans, response
rates have been reported to be as high as 90%. However, it
has been noted that the medication has no effect on
tumor size and thus would be of no benefit in patients
with neurologic signs. A single case study using a dopa­
mine agonist (L‐deprenyl) for the treatment of feline acro­
megaly showed no effect on reducing insulin requirements
or clinical signs of disease. In humans, dopamine agonists
are typically only 10–20% effective, but are often used in
combination with other medications.
Increasing the dosage of insulin to improve glycemic
control and clinical signs of diabetes is the most con­
servative choice for treating insulin‐resistant diabetic
acromegalics. However, there have been reports that
some patients suddenly and inexplicably become sensi­
tized to insulin, resulting in hypoglycemic crises. In one
study, several acromegalic cats were euthanized after
experiencing hypoglycemic coma.
Surgical Treatment
Surgical removal of the pituitary tumor (adenectomy) is the
treatment of choice for acromegaly in human medicine.
The procedure can be performed in cats and dogs, usually
employing complete removal of the entire pituitary
(hypophysectomy).
In veterinary medicine, a transsphenoidal approach is
used involving only a small incision through the soft p
­ alate
and then approaching the pituitary gland through the
basisphenoid bone. Complications associated with the
surgery include hemorrhage and incision dehiscence. Post
surgery, patients are treated with cortisone, L‐thyroxine,
and desmopressin. The same surgical procedure is also
used to treat pituitary‐dependent hyperadrenocorticism
in both dogs and cats. A study in which seven cats with
pituitary‐dependent hyperadrenocorticism were treated
with transsphenoidal hypophysectomy resulted in five
cats showing complete resolution of the disease. Four of
these cats had concurrent diabetes mellitus, two of which
showed increased insulin responsiveness after surgery.
A few case reports exist for the treatment of feline acro­
megaly with transsphenoidal hypophysectomy. Prior to
surgery, one patient was an insulin‐resistant diabetic that
was still exhibiting clinical signs despite receiving 25 U of
insulin (Levemir® Novo Nordisk) four times per day.
Three weeks after surgery, the patient no longer required
insulin therapy and up to one year later the patient’s IGF‐1
and GH concentrations were within normal limits.
In another single case report, a 13‐year‐old male cas­
trated domestic shorthair was treated for acromegaly with
transsphenoidal hypophysectomy. The patient had a his­
tory of insulin‐resistant diabetes mellitus (15 units of glar­
gine BID) and was diagnosed with acromegaly via elevated
IGF‐1 (447 nmol/L) and visualization of a pituitary mass

on MRI. The diabetes resolved two weeks postoperatively
and remained in remission for eight months at which time
the patient was euthanized as a result of feline infectious
peritonitis.
In more recent studies, hypophysectomy has been
offered to owners who presented diabetic cats with con­
firmed acromegaly (IGF‐1 >1000 ng/mL, pituitary mass)
to the Royal Veterinary College since 2012. All cats were
operated on by one neurosurgeon. Hypophysectomy was
performed by manual extirpation using fine surgical tools
via a transoral transsphenoidal approach. Cats received
intensive peri‐ and postoperative monitoring of electro­
lytes, glucose and blood pressure, and were initially
administered conjunctival desmopressin (DDAVP), intra­
venous infusions of insulin and hydrocortisone, before
being transitioned to conjunctival DDAVP, oral hydrocor­
tisone and levothyroxine and subcutaneous glargine insu­
lin. In total, 21 diabetic cats underwent hypophysectomy
from April 2012 to October 2014 (median, range; age: 10.3
years, 5.4–14.8; pituitary height: 6.0 mm, 4.0–10.6; IGF‐1:
1833 ng/mL, 1138 to >2000; fructosamine: 574 μmol/L,
339–1076). Other than mild pelvic limb weakness, no cat
displayed overt neurologic deficits prior to surgery. Three
(14%) cats died postoperatively. Two cats did not recover
from anesthesia and were euthanized within 24 hours;
one cat developed septic meningitis and was euthanized
17 days postoperatively. All surviving cats (n = 18) had a
reduction of serum IGF‐1 and 16 cats (89%) showed IGF‐1
normalization (median postoperative serum IGF‐1: 38 ng/
mL (15–1955), P < 0.001). Fourteen of the 18 s­urviving
cats (78%) achieved diabetic remission; the remaining
four achieved superior glycemic control with lower insu­
lin dosages (median fructosamine pre‐ and postopera­
tively: 692 and 547μmol/L respectively; median insulin
dose pre‐ and postoperatively: 20.5 and 3.5 units/kg/day
respectively). Congestive heart failure was encountered as
a transient problem in 4/19 cats that recovered from the
surgery; all four cases occurred prior to implementing a
reduction in volume of intravenous fluid delivered as part
of the postoperative protocol. Two cats developed paresis
of the left orbicularis oculi muscle, which resolved in the
surviving cat. Cardiac arrest occurred in one cat postop­
eratively at time of ­jugular catheter placement, which was
successfully revived and made an uneventful recovery.
One cat developed a left pelvic limb monoparesis, which
improved but did not resolve. Palatal wound breakdown
was not encountered. This large case series suggests that
hypophysectomy as a treatment for feline acromegaly
results in a high i­ncidence of diabetic remission and reso­
lution of acromegaly.
An alternative procedure, cryohypophysectomy, has
been reported in a small number of cats but the proce­
dure has been less effective and results in a higher
­complication rate.

VetBooks.ir

6 Feline Acromegaly

Radiation
Radiation therapy is another option for the treatment of
feline acromegaly, especially if the tumor is inoperable,
the patient is not a suitable candidate for anesthesia, or
surgical treatment is not available in the area. In human
medicine, radiation therapy is regarded as a second‐line
treatment as beneficial effects may take years to develop
and the patient typically experiences undesired late‐term
CNS radiation effects.
The majority of studies that have been performed in vet­
erinary medicine focus on radiation treatment of pituitary
masses regardless of functional status. There is no standard
treatment protocol for pituitary masses in veterinary medi­
cine and varying methods have been used, including both
single and multiple dose fractions administering total dos­
ages ranging from 1500 to 4000 cGY. The majority of the
cats included in these studies had insulin‐resistant diabetes
(suspected acromegaly or Cushing disease) and/or neuro­
logic signs. Radiation therapy was shown to be successful
in improving insulin resistance and neurologic signs.
Neurologic improvement was generally seen within weeks
to months and an improved insulin response was seen
within the first month, but most patients still required insu­
lin therapy. In cases where repeat imaging was available, a
decrease in tumor size was also noted.
Disadvantages of radiation therapy are the early and
delayed effects of radiation, repeated anesthesia, and
expense. Early effects from radiation therapy include
hair loss, skin pigmentation, and otitis externa. Reported
late‐term side‐effects include brain necrosis, tumor
regrowth, and visual and hearing impairment.
In one study, 12 cats with pituitary tumors were treated
with a coarse fractionated radiation protocol delivering a
total dose of 37 Gy in five once‐weekly doses. Eight of these
cats had insulin‐resistant diabetes mellitus secondary to
acromegaly. Of these eight cats, five no longer required
insulin therapy, two became stable diabetics, and one
required less insulin. In addition, 3/4 cats had improved
neurologic signs. The mean survival time of cats in this
study was approximately 18 months. In another study, 14
cats with confirmed acromegaly and insulin‐resistant dia­
betes were treated with a total dose of 3700 cGy divided
into 10 fractions (three per week). Thirteen of the 14 cats

had improved insulin responses. The average insulin dos­
age reduction was approximately 75%. Six of the cats went
into complete diabetic remission and at the time the article
was written, 3/6 remained in remission. The median sur­
vival time of cats in this study was 28 months.
The most promising results with radiation may involve
the use of stereotactic radiation therapy (SRT). Fifty‐
three client‐owned cats were referred to Colorado State
University for
SRT to treat pituitary tumors causing poorly controlled
diabetes mellitus (DM) secondary to acromegaly.
Diagnosis of acromegaly was based on history, physical
examination, laboratory results, and cross‐sectional
imaging of the pituitary. Signalment, radiation protocol,
insulin requirements over time, adverse effects, and sur­
vival were recorded. Median survival time was 1072 days.
Of the 41 cats for which insulin dosage information was
available, 95% (39/41) experienced a decrease in required
insulin dose, with 32% (13/41) achieving diabetic remis­
sion. Remission was permanent in 62% (8/13) and tem­
porary in 38% (5/13) cats. Median duration to lowest
insulin dose was 9.5 months. Of the treated cats, 14%
developed hypothyroidism and required supplementa­
tion after SRT. Cats treated with SRT have improved sur­
vival time and control of their DM when compared to
previously reported patients treated with non‐SRT.

­Conclusion
Feline acromegaly is likely an underdiagnosed disease in
older male cats, especially in patients with insulin‐resistant
diabetes. There is no single diagnostic test for acromegaly.
The diagnostician should use history, clinical signs, labora­
tory tests (GH and IGF‐1), and advanced imaging to arrive
at a diagnosis. There are several treatments options, but
clinical studies on long‐term safety and efficacy are limited
and often lack controls. Until more work is done evaluat­
ing medical treatments such as somatostatin analogs and
growth hormone antagonists, most patients are best
treated with either surgery or radiation therapy to control
GH levels, improve glycemic control, and improve or pre­
vent the development of neurologic signs.

­Further Reading
Abraham LA, Helmond SE, Mitten RW, et al. Treatment of
an acromegalic cat with the dopamine agonist L‐deprenyl.
Aust Vet J 2002; 80: 479–83.
Abrams‐Ogg ACG, Holmberg DL, Stewart WA, et al.
Acromegaly in a cat: diagnosis by magnetic resonance
imaging and treatment by cryohypophysectomy. Can
Vet J 1993; 34: 682–5.

Berg IM, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, et al.Serum insulin‐like
growth factor‐I concentration in cats with diabetes
mellitus and acromegaly. J Vet Intern Med 2007; 21:
892–8.
Blois SL, Holmberg DL. Cryohypophysectomy used in the
treatment of a case of feline acromegaly. J Small Anim
Pract 2008; 49: 596–600.

47

VetBooks.ir

48

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

Brearly MJ, Polton GA, Littler RM, et al. Coarse
fractionated radiation therapy for pituitary tumors in
cats: a restrospective study of 12 cases. Vet Comp Oncol
2006; 4: 209–17.
Dunning MD, Lowrie CS, Bexfield NH, et al. Exogenous
insulin treatment after hypofractionated radiotherapy in
cats with diabetes mellitus and acromegaly. J Vet Intern
Med 2009; 23: 243–9.
Elliott DA, Feldman EC, Koblik PD, et al. Prevalence of
pituitary tumors among diabetic cats with insulin
resistance. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 216: 1765–8.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Disorders of growth hormone.
In: Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction,
3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 2004,
pp. 69–84.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Acromegaly and
hyperadrenocorticism in cats: a clinical perspective.
J Feline Med Surg 2000; 2: 153–8.
Goldman L, Schafer AI. Growth hormone excess:
acromegaly and gigantism. In: Goldman‐Cecil Medicine,
24th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier, 2012,
pp. 1437–8.
Gostelow R, Scudder C, Keyte S, et al. Pasireotide long‐
acting release treatment for diabetic cats with
underlying hypersomatotropism. J Vet Intern Med 2017;
31(2): 355–64.
Kenny P, Scudder C, Keyte S, et al. Treatment of feline
hypersomatotropism. Efficacy, morbidity and
mortality of hypophysectomy. J Vet Intern Med 2015;
29: 1271.
Kittleson MD, Pion PD, DeLellis DA, et al. Increased
serum growth hormone concentration in feline
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Vet Intern Med 1992;
6: 320–4.

Meij BP, Auriemma E, Grinwis G, et al. Successful
treatment of acromegaly in a diabetic cat with
transsphenoidal hypophysectomy. J Feline Med Surg
2010; 12: 406–10.
Meij BP, Voorhout G, van den Ingh TS, et al.
Transsphenoidal hypophysectomy for treatment of
pituitary‐dependant hyperadrenocorticism in seven
cats. Vet Surg 2001; 30: 72–86.
Niessen SJM, Khalid M, Petrie G, Church DB. Validation
and application of an ovine radioimmunoassay for the
diagnosis of feline acromegaly. Vet Rec 2007; 160: 902–7.
Peterson ME, Taylor RS, Greco DS, et al. Acromegaly in 14
cats. J Vet Intern Med 1990; 4: 192–201.
Posch B, Dobson J, Herrtage M. Magnetic resonance
imaging finding in 15 acromegalic cats. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 2011; 4: 422–7.
Scudder CJ, Niessen SJ, Catchpole B, et al. Feline
hypersomatotropism and acromegaly tumorigenesis: a
potential role for the AIP gene. Domest Anim Endocrinol
2017; 59: 134–9.
Singerland LI, Voorhout G, Rijnberk A, et al. Growth
hormone excess and the effect of octreotide in cats with
diabetes mellitus. Domest Anim Endocrinol 2008; 35:
352–61.
Starkey SR, Tan K, Church DB. Investigation of serum
IGF‐I levels amongst diabetic and non‐diabetic cats.
J Feline Med Surg 2004; 6: 149–55.
Timian J, Lunn KF. Evaluation of a long‐acting
somatostatin receptor ligand for the treatment of feline
acromegaly. J Vet Intern Med 2012; 26: 757.
Wormhoudt TL, Boss MK, Lunn K, et al. Stereotactic
radiation therapy for the treatment of functional
pituitary adenomas associated with feline acromegaly.
J Vet Intern Med 2018; 32: 1383–91.

VetBooks.ir

49

7
Pituitary‐Dependent Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs and Cats
David S. Bruyette, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)
Anivive Lifesciences, Long Beach, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
and Epidemiology
Pituitary‐dependent hyperadrenocorticism (PDH), also
known as Cushing disease, is a common endocrine dis­
order in older dogs though relatively uncommon in cats.
This disorder is caused by a pituitary adenoma (PA) that
secretes inappropriate amounts of adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH), which results in bilateral adrenal
hyperplasia and disorderly and excessive production of
cortisol by the adrenal gland.
Classification
Basics of Classification

As with all central nervous system tumors, the Tumor–
Node–Metastasis (TNM) system used by the World
Health Organization does not apply. Current classifica­
tion systems for PAs in veterinary patients are based pri­
marily on secretory characteristics of the tumor. However,
in humans, PAs are currently classified based upon:
●●
●●

tumor size and degree of invasiveness (Box 7.1)
tumor endocrine activity (hormone secretion)

or functional classification based on immunohisto­
logic findings such as ACTH, thyroid‐stimulating hor­
mone (TSH), follicle‐stimulating hormone (FSH), etc.
immunostaining.
In both humans and animals, pituitary corticotroph
adenomas that are responsible for Cushing disease (i.e.,
PDH) are classified as functional ACTH‐secreting PAs
(ACTH‐PAs).
Further Classification

The World Health Organization classification system for
PAs in humans has been refined to include designations
for benign adenoma, atypical adenoma, and pituitary

carcinoma on the basis of proliferation indices (p53
immunoreactivity, MIB‐I Index, mitotic activity) and the
absence/presence of metastases.
More comprehensive molecular classification systems
based on relevant gene expression have not been system­
atically used to further characterize pituitary tumors.
Similar work to classify canine pituitary tumors both
morphologically and functionally is currently under way.
Prevalence
Humans

In humans, PAs are common tumors, with an overall prev­
alence in the general US population estimated at 16.7%.
Corticotroph adenomas, comprising functional
(ACTH‐PAs) and silent corticotroph adenomas, rep­
resent approximately 10–15% of all PAs.
●● Functional ACTH‐PAs are the most common cause of
Cushing syndrome (hypercortisolemia from any
source), accounting for an estimated 70% of all cases.
●● Prevalence of Cushing disease is estimated to be 1.2–
2.4 per 1 million people, and affects approximately
12 000 people in the US. This number, however, may
be much higher, given that Cushing disease is fre­
quently misdiagnosed and diagnosis is often delayed.
●●

Dogs

Functional ACTH‐PAs have a reported incidence of 0.2%
in all dogs (1–2 cases/1000 dogs/year), with approxi­
mately 100 000 dogs affected yearly in the US. PDH
accounts for approximately 85–90% of cases of hyper­
adrenocorticism, with the remainder of cases resulting
from functional adrenal tumors, meal/food‐induced
cases, occult or atypical disease.
Meal‐ or food‐induced Cushing syndrome is thought to
occur as the result of a congenital defect resulting in the
aberrant expression of the gastric inhibitory polypeptide

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

Box 7.1 Classification of pituitary tumors in humans
by size and anatomic location

VetBooks.ir

50

Classification by size based on radiologic findings
Microadenomas
Macroadenomas

Less than 10 mm diameter
Equal to or greater than 10 mm
diameter

Classification based on radioanatomic findings
Stage I
Stage II
Stage III
Stage IV

Microadenomas (<1 cm) without sella
expansion
Macroadenomas (≥1 cm); may extend above
the sella
Macroadenomas with enlargement and
invasion of the floor or suprasellar extension
Destruction of the sella

(GIP) receptor in the adrenal cortex. Stimulation of this
receptor by GIP, normally released by the stomach in
response to a meal, leads to clinical signs of hyperadreno­
corticism in younger dogs. Occult hyperadrenocorticism
refers to the presence of elevated adrenal steroid concen­
trations in the absence of clinical signs and has been
best described in Scottish terriers with elevated serum
alkaline phosphatase (SAP) and vacuolar hepatopathy.
Atypical hyperadrenocorticism refers to animals with
clinical signs of classic hyperadrenocorticism secondary
to excess sex steroid production rather than excessive
cortisol secretion.
Pathogenesis
The pathogenesis of pituitary tumors that produce
ACTH is becoming more evident based on ongoing
studies evaluating gene and protein expression in both
humans and dogs. This information will aid our under­
standing of tumorigenesis and point us toward targeted
specific therapies.
Two theories have been put forward to explain the
development of an ACTH‐producing pituitary tumor
(ACTH‐PA, corticotrophinoma):
●●
●●

hypothalamic theory
monoclonal theory.

Hypothalamic Theory

In this theory, the hypothalamus stimulates corticotrophs
through enhanced secretion of corticotropin‐releasing
hormone (CRH) and vasopressin. In addition, concur­
rent defects in the pituitary glucocorticoid receptors
(GR) on the corticotroph cells lead to decreased negative
feedback by cortisol on CRH and ACTH synthesis.

Gene Mutation

Karl and colleagues and Lamberts described a mutation
in the gene in humans that encodes the GR, with a
reduction in the sites of DNA binding, while maintain­
ing affinity for cortisol. This de novo mutation pro­
motes GR resistance that precedes the formation of the
corticotrophinoma.
Recent studies by Teshima and colleagues, using trilos­
tane to decrease cortisol, demonstrated pituitary tumor
growth as a consequence of a reduction in negative feed­
back. Their studies on canine ACTH tumor cells suggest
that reduced negative feedback might first lead to corti­
cotroph hyperplasia followed by a subsequent somatic
mutation that could lead to tumor development.
Dopaminergic Actions

Other possibilities for a hypothalamic theory of PDH
include:
●●
●●

dopaminergic neurodegeneration in aged individuals
decreased expression of the D2 dopaminergic receptor
in the corticotroph cells, resulting in decreased dopa­
minergic inhibition and subsequent hyperplasia. With
this possibility, adenomas would evolve secondary to
somatic mutations in hyperplastic cells.

The hypothalamic theory is reinforced by the recurrence
of ACTH‐producing tumors following surgery or in
patients in which no tumor was found on MRI or when
exploring the sella. Both of these scenarios suggested
stimulation or lack of inhibition of ACTH‐producing
cells from higher centers (hypothalamus or hippocam­
pus). This hypothesis is also supported by the fact that
individuals with chronic stress and greater activation of
the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis show cortico­
troph hyperplasia.
Monoclonal Theory

The main evidence against the hypothalamic theory is the
presence of tumor clonality in the majority of the adeno­
mas studied in humans. The monoclonal theory argues
that the adenoma occurs in the pituitary outside of other
influences and arises through the somatic mutation of a
corticotroph cell, resulting in a tumor clone. This muta­
tion precedes the clonal expansion of the tumor.
It is unknown which mutation(s) result in the develop­
ment of a tumor. Taking into account microadenomas
and macroadenomas, the existence of a variety of corti­
cotrophinomas is suggested. The majority of microade­
nomas in dogs do not progress to macroadenomas based
on the low percentage of dogs that develop such tumors
during treatment with adrenolytics or adrenal enzyme
blockers. Macroadenomas can display a variety of behav­
iors, from limited growth and indolent course to more
aggressive behavior as seen in human patients with

7 Pituitary-Dependent Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs and Cats

VetBooks.ir

Box 7.2 Genes and proteins expressed in pituitary
tissue in humans with functional ACTH‐PAs
Genes
NEUROD1 + hPTTG1
HIGD1B + HSD11B2
CDKN1B
CDKN2A
let‐7

Overexpressed in 3 studies
Overexpressed in 2 studies
Underexpressed in 4 studies
Underexpressed in 2 studies
Underexpressed in 2 studies

Proteins
c‐myc
p27Kip1
p16

Overexpressed in 2 studies
Underexpressed in 4 studies
Underexpressed in 2 studies

Gene Origin

In humans with functional ACTH‐PAs, studies have
identified 43 genes and 22 proteins as overexpressed and
58 genes and 15 proteins as underexpressed compared
with normal pituitary tissue (Box 7.2).
In dogs, we are just beginning to learn more about
genes and protein expression in patients with PDH. The
recent demonstration of expression of somatostatin
receptor subtypes and dopamine receptor subtype 2
(D2) in canine corticotroph adenomas offers the possi­
bility for novel medical treatment of PDH with somato­
statin analogs and dopamine agonists.
Pituitary Size and Proliferation Markers

The ratio between pituitary height and area of the brain
(P/B) has been used to evaluate pituitary size.
●●

In the pituitary glands of humans and mice, cortico­
trophs and melanotrophs have a specific marker in com­
mon, the T‐box transcription factor (Tpit or Tbx19),
which regulates the late differentiation of corticotrophs
and melanotrophs and therefore may contribute to the
pathogenesis of corticotroph adenomas.
A recent study in 14 dogs with PDH examined the
expression and mutation analysis of Tpit in normal
canine pituitary and corticotroph adenomas.
Tpit was expressed in corticotroph and melanotroph
cells of normal and adenomatous canine pituitary, and
remained present in nonadenomatous corticotrophs
of pituitaries from PDH dogs.
●● No tumor‐specific mutation in Tpit cDNA from corti­
cotroph adenomas was found; however, a missense
polymorphism (see Polymorphism versus Mutation)
in the highly conserved DNA‐binding domain, the T‐
box, was discovered in one dog.
●●

Nelson syndrome in which the pituitary tumor grows
rapidly following bilateral adrenalectomy or suppressive
medical therapy.

●●

Corticotroph and Melanotroph Cell Marker: Tpit

P/B ratio >0.31 indicates an enlarged pituitary
P/B ratio ≤0.31 indicates a nonenlarged pituitary.

A recent study investigated the expression of prolifera­
tion markers Ki‐67 and minichromosome maintenance‐7
(MCM7) in canine corticotroph adenomas in enlarged
and nonenlarged pituitaries, and evaluated their relation
to the size of canine pituitary corticotroph adenomas.
Canine corticotroph adenomas in enlarged pituitaries
showed greater proliferation potential compared with
adenomas in nonenlarged pituitaries.
●● MCM7 expression was significantly greater than Ki‐67
expression in canine pituitary corticotroph adenomas.
●●

Thus, MCM7 may be superior to Ki‐67 as a proliferation
marker in canine pituitary tumors.

The study concluded that Tpit can be used as a reliable
marker for corticotroph and melanotroph cells in canine
pituitary tissue, but that mutations in the Tpit gene are
unlikely to play a major role in pathogenesis of canine
corticotroph adenomas.
Corticotroph Differentiation Markers: LIF and LIFR

Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) is a cytokine of the
interleukin (IL)‐6 family that activates the hypotha­
lamic–pituitary–adrenal axis and promotes corticotroph
differentiation during development. LIF and leukemia
inhibitory factor receptor (LIFR) expression were stud­
ied in pituitary glands of control dogs and specimens of
corticotroph adenoma tissue were collected from dogs
with PDH. The results demonstrated that:
LIFR is highly co‐expressed with ACTH and alpha‐
melanocyte‐stimulating hormone in the control canine
pituitary gland and corticotroph adenomas
●● there was a strong co‐expression of LIFR and ACTH1‐24
in the cytoplasm of cells in the pars distalis and pars
intermedia of control pituitary tissue. In pituitary glands
harboring an adenoma, the cytoplasmic expression of
LIFR followed that of ACTH1‐24. Nontumorous cells of
the pars distalis showed no cytoplasmic staining but did
demonstrate nuclear to perinuclear immunoreactivity
for LIFR in 10 of 12 tissue specimens from PDH dogs.
This nuclear immunoreactivity was not observed in the
control pituitary tissues or in the pituitary gland with
corticotroph hyperplasia.
●●

Role of ACTH Production and Glucocorticoids

As mentioned earlier, a characteristic biochemical feature
of corticotroph adenomas is their relative resistance to
negative feedback by glucocorticoids. In a recent study,

51

VetBooks.ir

52

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

gene expression related to ACTH production and secre­
tion and the negative feedback by glucocorticoids in
canine corticotroph adenoma was evaluated in pituitary
tumors in 10 dogs with Cushing disease. The results dem­
onstrated increased ACTH production and resistance to
negative feedback by glucocorticoids in canine cortico­
troph adenomas.
Therapeutic Role of EGFR

Since tumors in dogs and humans express epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR), in another study we
examined whether EGFR might provide a therapeutic
target for Cushing disease.
In cell cultures from surgically resected human and
canine corticotroph tumors, blocking EGFR also sup­
pressed expression of proopiomelanocortin (POMC),
the ACTH precursor.
●● In mouse corticotroph EGFR transfectants, ACTH
secretion was enhanced and POMC promoter activity
was increased.

Box 7.3 Common clinical signs of PDH in dogs and cats
Polyuria and polydipsia
Polyphagia
Abdominal distension
Bilaterally symmetric endocrine alopecia
Panting
Hypertension
Urinary tract infections
Additional dermatologic signs:
– Thin skin
– Pyoderma
– Calcinosis cutis

●●

In mice, blocking EGFR activity with gefitinib, an EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor:
attenuated POMC expression
inhibited corticotroph tumor cell proliferation and
induced apoptosis
●● decreased both tumor size and corticosterone levels
●● reversed signs of hypercortisolemia, including ele­
vated glucose levels and excess omental fat.
●●

Box 7.4 Common laboratory findings of PDH
Hematologic abnormalities
“Stress” leukogram (uncommon in cats):
– Neutrophilic leukocytosis
– Lymphopenia
– Eosinopenia
Mild thrombocytosis
Mild erythrocytosis

●●

These study results indicate that inhibiting EGFR signal­
ing may be a novel strategy for treating Cushing disease.

Serum biochemical abnormalities
Increased serum alkaline phosphatase
Milder increased in alanine aminotransferase
Hypercholesterolemia
Hypertriglyceridemia
Hyperglycemia
Urinalysis

­History and Clinical Signs
Clinical signs, as well as laboratory abnormalities, seen
in patients with PDH are secondary to the effects of ster­
oid excess, well recognized, and similar in scope to those
seen with exogenous glucocorticoid supplementation
(Boxes 7.3 and 7.4).
The clinical signs of polyuria and polydipsia occur as
the result of excessive cortisol interfering with pituitary
release of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) or the binding
of ADH to receptors in the renal tubules. Abdominal
distension and thinning of skin occur due to the cata­
bolic effects of cortisol on tissues such as muscle and
connective tissue. Hepatomegaly steroid‐induced vacu­
olar hepatopathy also contributes to the “pot‐bellied”
appearance. The endocrine alopecia mirrors the known
distribution of sex hormone receptors in the skin
with endocrine alopecias often sparing the head and
extremities. Panting occurs in both dogs and humans

Decreased urine specific gravity <1.018
Proteinuria
Urinary tract infection (even in absence of pyuria and
bacteriuria)

and is felt to be due to steroid‐induced stimulation of
ventilator centers in the brainstem. Pyoderma and uri­
nary tract infections reflect the immunosuppressive
effects of g­ lucocorticoids. The mechanism(s) behind
the steroid induction of calcinosis cutis is poorly under­
stood although the condition does occur with both iat­
rogenic and spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism and
the ­condition can take months to resolve following res­
olution of hyperadrenocorticism or withdrawal of the
exogenous steroid.
Awareness of PDH has increased over time, resulting
in the presentation of patients with only mild clinical
signs, clinical signs affecting only one organ system (e.g.,

VetBooks.ir

7 Pituitary-Dependent Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs and Cats

polyuria and polydipsia or alopecia), absent clinical signs,
or unusual isolated manifestations of the disease.

­Diagnosis
Diagnosis of PDH requires incorporating information
from the history, physical examination, and routine labo­
ratory tests. Specific endocrine tests and imaging modal­
ities are available to diagnose hyperadrenocorticism
(HAC) and distinguish between the various causes of
hypercortisolism. No single test is perfect and if the ini­
tial screening test is negative and high clinical suspicion
of HAC exists, additional tests should be performed.
Endocrine evaluation of patients with HAC and nonad­
renal illness can be difficult, and it is important to elimi­
nate or manage the concurrent illness before undertaking
adrenal function tests.
ACVIM Consensus Statement
In 2012, the American College of Veterinary Internal
Medicine (acvim.org) issued a consensus statement
addressing the diagnosis of spontaneous canine hyper­
adrenocorticism, which provides a thorough review of the
diagnostic approach to patients with PDH and addresses
many common clinical concerns. Access this statement
at onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jvim.12192/epdf.

Baseline Diagnostics
In all patients being screened for PDH, the following ini­
tial diagnostics should be performed prior to endocrine
diagnostics.
Thorough history including prior treatment with sys­
temic or topical glucocorticoids.
●● Physical examination.
●● Complete routine database, including complete blood
count, serum biochemical profile, urinalysis, urine
culture, and blood pressure.
●●

These diagnostics are important as the clinical signs of
PDH are rarely pathognomonic, and patients are gener­
ally older and may have co‐morbidities, which affect
endocrine function tests and impact therapeutic options
and prognosis.
If a patient has a concurrent serious illness, postpone
testing until the illness or injury has resolved or been
controlled to minimize false‐positive test results.
Endocrine Diagnostics
Specific endocrine tests and imaging modalities are
available to both diagnose PDH and distinguish between
the various causes of HAC (Tables 7.1 and 7.2). No single
test is perfect and if the initial screening test is negative
and high clinical suspicion of PDH exists, additional

Table 7.1 Diagnostic tests to evaluate patients with suspected PDH
Test

Components

Procedures

Results

Low‐dose
dexamethasone
suppression
(LDDS)

Dexamethasone sodium
phosphate or
polyethylene glycol:
0.01–0.015 mg/kg IVa
(dog), 0.10 mg/kg IV (cat)

Obtain blood samples:
1) Before administration
2) 4 h after administration
3) 8 h after administration

Consult with your reference
laboratory for specific
reference ranges

ACTH
stimulation

Cosyntropin or
tetracosactrin:
5 μg/kg IV or IM (dog),
0.125 mg IV (cat)

Obtain blood samples:
1) Before administration
2) 60 min after administration

Consult with your reference
laboratory for specific
reference ranges

Urine cortisol to
creatinine ratio
(UCCR)b

Urine collected from dog
in the morningc

Have owner collect urine at home for at
least 2–3 consecutive mornings; submit
an aliquot of the pooled samples to
diagnostic laboratory

Consult with your reference
laboratory for specific
reference ranges

a

Calculate dose using parent compound.
High UCCRs in dogs without a high degree of clinical suspicion of hyperadrenocorticism should be interpreted cautiously.
c
Urine collected by the owner is less likely to be influenced by stress; in addition, morning urine is preferred because it usually represents several
hours of urine production.
Notes:
b

The effect of feeding on LDDS or ACTH stimulation test results is unknown; however, feeding during these tests is not recommended. Fasting
before testing is not necessary unless lipemia affects the cortisol assay results (check with your laboratory for specific details).
●● In veterinary medicine, the ability of glucocorticoids, progestagens, and ketoconazole to suppress cortisol secretion is known. However, no effect
on LDDS, ACTH stimulation, or UCCR has been documented in dogs treated with phenobarbital.
●●

ACTH, adrenocorticotrophic hormone; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous.

53

VetBooks.ir

54

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

Table 7.2 Diagnostic tests that differentiate between PDH and ADH
Test

Components

Procedures

Results

Low‐dose
dexamethasone
suppression
(LDDS)a

Dexamethasone sodium
phosphate or
polyethylene glycol:
0.01–0.015 mg/kg IVb
(dog), 0.10 mg/kg IV (cat)

Obtain blood samples:
1) Before administration
2) 4 h after administration
3) 8 h after administration

High‐dose
dexamethasone
suppression
(HDDS)a

Dexamethasone sodium
phosphate:
0.1 mg/kg IVc
(dog), 1.0 mg/kg IV (cat)

Endogenous
ACTH

cACTH

Collect blood into chilled, silicon‐
coated glass or plastic EDTA tubes.
Centrifuge within 15 min (ideally
cooled centrifuge).
Transfer plasma to plastic tubes and
freeze immediately; samples must
stay frozen until analysisd

With LDDS, suppression to <50%
baseline in a dog with HAC confirms
PDH.
●● If no suppression with LDDS, cACTH
measurement or abdominal ultrasound is
recommended.
●● With LDDS or HDDS, lack of suppression
does not confirm AT (approximately 25%
of dogs with PDH fail to suppress)
●●

Normal or elevated concentrations are
consistent with PDH, suppressed values are
consistent with AT

a

LDDS and HDDS results cannot be considered 100% absolute; when imaging and endocrine test results conflict, the latter should be given
preference.
b
Calculate dose using parent compound.
c
For HDDS, avoid the free alcohol form.
d
Addition of the protease inhibitor aprotinin prevents ACTH degradation by plasma proteases and greatly facilitates sample handling. Check
with your laboratory regarding suitability because, with some assays (i.e., Immulite), aprotinin introduces an artifactual decrease in results.
AT, adrenal tumor; ATCH, adrenocorticotrophic hormone; cATCH, canine adrenocorticotrophic hormone; HAC, hyperadrenocorticism;
IV, intravenous.

tests should be performed to determine a definitive
diagnosis.
Several endocrine screening tests are available to arrive
at a diagnosis of HAC, including:
low‐dose dexamethasone suppression (LDDS)
●● ACTH stimulation
●● urine cortisol to creatinine ratio (UCCR).
●●

Additional tests may be required to differentiate PDH
from other causes of hypercortisolemia, such as endog­
enous ACTH measurement and advanced imaging.
Initial Endocrine Screening
Low‐Dose Dexamethasone Suppression

Low‐dose dexamethasone suppression demonstrates
decreased pituitary sensitivity to negative feedback from
glucocorticoids.
Most consider LDDS the screening test of
choice for HAC unless the patient history suggests iatro­
genic HAC, in which case ACTH stimulation is preferred.

Indications

In veterinary medicine, the
reported sensitivity and specificity of the LDDS test
range from 85% to 100% and from 44% to 73%, respectively.

Sensitivity/Specificity

Blood samples are obtained (1) before, (2)
four hours after, and (3) eight hours after dexamethasone

Test Results

administration (0.01 mg/kg IV). Diagnosis of HAC is
based on lack of suppression of cortisol concentration
eight hours after dexamethasone administration.
ACTH Stimulation

Adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation assesses
adrenocortical reserve. Sensitivity of ACTH stimulation
for all forms of spontaneous canine HAC ranges from
57% to 95%. In dogs with PDH, sensitivity is 80–83%.
Specificity ranges from 59% to 93%.
Due to greater purity and quality control, use of syn­
thetic ACTH is recommended. Use of compounded
ACTH is discouraged, especially when monitoring
patients on adrenolytic agents or adrenal enzyme block­
ers (see Synthetic versus Compounded ACTH).
Indications Adrenocorticotrophic hormone stimula­
tion is the gold standard for diagnosis of iatrogenic HAC
and spontaneous Addison disease (hypoadrenocorti­
cism). A diagnosis of HAC is based on finding an ele­
vated post‐ACTH cortisol concentration based on the
reference range established by the laboratory.
Sensitivity/Specificity Due to its low sensitivity, it is
inferior to LDDS as a screening test for spontaneous
HAC. However, many clinicians still use ACTH stimula­
tion because of its convenient study duration of 60 min­
utes and relative effectiveness in the clinical setting,

VetBooks.ir

7 Pituitary-Dependent Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs and Cats

especially when combined with abdominal ultrasound
evaluation and interpreted in light of the history and
physical examination.

Evaluation of Pituitary–Adrenal Axis

Evaluation of the pituitary–adrenal axis is indicated in
the following circumstances.
Patients with clinical signs and laboratory findings
consistent with PDH and in whom nonadrenal illness
has been ruled out or is well controlled.
●● Patients in whom an adrenal/pituitary mass or bilat­
eral adrenal hyperplasia has been discovered in con­
junction with compatible clinical signs.
●● Patients with an incidentally discovered adrenal mass,
with adrenalectomy being considered.
●● Diabetic dogs with insulin resistance.
●●

Synthetic polypeptides,
such as Cortrosyn® (cosyntropin) or Synacthen® (tetra­
cosactrin), contain the biologically active first 24 amino
acids of ACTH; however, their potencies have not been
compared.
In several studies, after administration of cosyntropin
(5 μg/kg or 250 μg/dog IV or IM), peak cortisol concen­
trations occurred at 60–90 minutes. After administra­
tion of 5 μg/kg IV, no difference was detected between
60‐ and 90‐minute cortisol concentrations. Cosyntropin
can be reconstituted, divided into aliquots in plastic
syringes, and frozen at –20 °C for six months. Whether
tetracosactrin can be frozen has not been investigated;
according to the manufacturer, store it at temperatures
from 2 to 8 °C.
Compounded ACTH products have been evaluated
in healthy dogs. Sixty minutes after administration,
cortisol concentrations were similar among four
­compounded products (2.2 U/kg IM) and cosyntropin
(5 μg/kg IV). However, at later times, cortisol concen­
trations varied considerably with the compounded
products.
Synthetic vs Compounded ACTH

Urine Cortisol to Creatinine Ratio

The UCCR provides an integrated reflection of cortisol
production, adjusting for fluctuations in blood concen­
trations. Determination of basal UCCRs can be per­
formed alone or in tandem with other endocrine testing.
Indications The UCCR can be used as a screening test
for hypercortisolemia, although a single positive result
should not be overinterpreted. Adding oral dexametha­
sone suppression to UCCR testing (see later) has the
advantage of potentially demonstrating both increased
cortisol production and decreased sensitivity to gluco­
corticoid feedback.

When a single, random urine
sample is collected in veterinary hospitals, reported sen­
sitivity and specificity of UCCR for diagnosis of HAC
range from 75% to 100% and 20% to 25%, respectively. In
some dogs, there is considerable day‐to‐day variation in
UCCR results.
However, in dogs with physical and biochemical
changes consistent with HAC, when two basal UCCRs
were above the cut‐off level:

Sensitivity/Specificity

●●
●●

sensitivity was 99%; 95% confidence interval 94–100%
specificity was 77%; 95% confidence interval 64–87%.

Differentiating PDH from ADH: Laboratory Analysis

Given that PDH and adrenal‐dependent hyperadreno­
corticism (ADH) are the most common forms of HAC,
and that their treatment options and prognoses differ, it
is important to recommend additional testing to deter­
mine the exact etiology of HAC. Several diagnostic
modalities are commonly used to differentiate between
PDH and ADH.
Endogenous ACTH
Dexamethasone suppression
●● Dexamethasone suppression with UCCR
●●
●●

Endogenous ACTH

Canine ACTH is secreted from the pituitary gland
in an episodic, pulsatile fashion in both healthy
dogs and those with PDH. A circadian rhythm has
not been convincingly demonstrated, although one
study reported higher plasma concentrations of canine
ACTH (cACTH) in the late afternoon than in the
morning.
Indications Concentrations of cACTH do not differ
between healthy dogs and those with PDH, and its
measurement is not useful to screen for HAC. However,
measurement of cACTH is the most accurate stand‐
alone biochemical test for differentiating PDH from
adrenocortical tumor (AT), but the sensitivity of the
assay differs with methodology. Normal or elevated
concentrations of cACTH are consistent with PDH
while suppressed values are consistent with AT.
Sensitivity/Specificity The most common problem with
the cACTH assay is poor sensitivity. The largest study of
cACTH in dogs with HAC used a two‐site solid‐phase
chemiluminescent immunometric assay (Immulite 2000
Immunoassay System for ACTH; healthcare.siemens.
com) and showed excellent discrimination between
PDH and AT.

55

VetBooks.ir

56

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

The likelihood of falsely low ACTH values in dogs with
PDH is increased by:
intraassay and interassay variability (increased at lower
cACTH concentrations)
●● pulsatile ACTH secretion
●● inappropriate
sample handling allowing ACTH
degradation.
●●

Dexamethasone Suppression

Dexamethasone administration in:
normal dogs: causes rapid and prolonged suppression
of cortisol secretion
●● patients with an AT: at any dosage does not suppress
cortisol secretion
dogs with PDH:
–– does not appropriately suppress ACTH secretion
(therefore does not suppress cortisol) when a low
dose (0.01 mg/kg) is administered
–– in 75% of dogs with PDH, ACTH and cortisol con­
centrations decrease when a high dose (0.1 mg/kg) is
administered
–– in 25% of dogs with PDH, suppression of ACTH and
cortisol does not occur even after administration of
higher dosages; in these patients, a large pituitary
tumor or tumor developing from the pars interme­
dia is more likely.
●●

Test Results The largest study evaluating both suppres­
sion tests (LDDS and high‐dose dexamethasone sup­
pression [HDDS]) included dogs with PDH (n = 181) and
ATs (n = 35). With LDDS, criteria for identifying dogs
with PDH included:

four‐hour post‐LDDS cortisol concentrations below
laboratory cut‐off or <50% of basal cortisol
concentration
●● eight‐hour post‐LDDS cortisol concentrations <50%
of the basal cortisol concentration and greater than the
laboratory cut‐off.
●●

With HDDS, criteria for cortisol suppression were a four‐
and/or eight‐hour cortisol concentration below the labo­
ratory cut‐off or <50% of the basal cortisol concentration.
Approximately 75% of dogs with PDH met at least one
criterion for suppression on either LDDS or HDDS. Of
those with PDH, 88% suppressed with the LDDS and
12% demonstrated suppression with HDDS.
Dexamethasone resistance (i.e., no criteria were met)
occurred in all dogs with AT and the remainder (25%) of
the dogs with PDH. In another study of 41 dogs with AT,
28 LDDS and 30 HDDS tests were performed, with no
suppression seen on any test.
In dogs demonstrating lack of suppression with
LDDS, use of endogenous ACTH rather than HDDS is

recommended to differentiate PDH from ADH. Since
suppression in response to dexamethasone supports a
diagnosis of PDH, a dog with dexamethasone resistance
can have either AT or PDH.
Dexamethasone Suppression with UCCR

Decreased blood cortisol concentration after dexameth­
asone administration is reflected in decreased UCCR.
After the patient’s owner/handler collects a
morning urine sample on two consecutive days, three
doses of dexamethasone (0.1 mg/kg PO) are adminis­
tered at 6–8‐hour intervals, with a third urine sample
collected the next morning.
Decrease in the third UCCR to <50% of the mean cor­
tisol basal values is consistent with PDH. Lack of sup­
pression does not confirm AT. In 160 dogs with HAC (49
with ATs, 111 with PDH), the UCCR in 72% of dogs with
PDH suppressed to <50% of the basal UCCR, while the
other 28% of those with PDH were dexamethasone
resistant. In dogs with ATs, maximum suppression was
44% of the baseline sample.

Test Results

Differentiating PDH from ADH: Imaging

While imaging can be very helpful in differentiating PDH
from ADH, it cannot be used to establish a diagnosis of
HAC. Moreover, finding normal adrenal glands on imag­
ing studies does not rule out HAC.
Radiography

Imaging results may include:
abdominal distension
good contrast due to abdominal fat deposition
●● hepatomegaly
●● bladder distension
●● mineralization of bronchi and pulmonary interstitium,
and of dermal and subcutaneous tissues in areas pre­
disposed to calcinosis cutis.
●●
●●

A small liver makes HAC unlikely. An AT may be visual­
ized due to either mass effect or tumor calcification.
Adrenal Gland Imaging

Adrenal gland width is the most informative parameter
identified on ultrasonography. However, the following
may affect correct measurement.
The long axis of adrenal gland often is misaligned with
either the medial or dorsal plane of the body.
●● Cross‐sectional images may lead to oblique views and
miscalculation of glandular dimensions.
●● Breed and body size differences.
●● Macronodular hyperplasia (a rare form of PDH) and
some ATs can be difficult to differentiate.
●●

VetBooks.ir

7 Pituitary-Dependent Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs and Cats

Test Results In dogs with PDH, ultrasonography reveals
normal‐sized or enlarged adrenal glands that are typi­
cally symmetric; however, mild asymmetry may occur. In
dogs with ATs, ultrasonography reveals moderate asym­
metry, contralateral adrenocortical atrophy (adrenal
width <4–5 mm), destruction of normal tissue architec­
ture, or some combination of these findings.
Ultrasonography can also estimate AT size and possibly
vascular or local soft tissue invasion. Although most ATs
are unilateral, bilateral tumors may occur and in these
patients, endogenous ACTH concentrations should be
determined.
Metastasis When an AT has been confirmed, certain tho­
racic and ultrasonographic findings suggest malignancy.
●●
●●

Adrenal gland width >4 cm.
Invasion into the vena cava or adjacent tissues.

However, computed tomography (CT) and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) are more sensitive techniques
to identify vascular invasion and detect metastases.
Adrenalectomy should not be performed without con­
firming the presence of an AT (and atrophy of contralat­
eral adrenal gland) by abdominal ultrasonography, CT,
MRI, or some combination of these. Metastasis can be
confirmed by ultrasound‐guided biopsy, but differentiat­
ing benign from malignant AT often is difficult, even
with histopathologic examination.
Pituitary Imaging

Pituitary imaging provides valuable information regard­
ing treatment options and prognosis. Pituitary lesions
range from microscopic nests of hyperplastic cells to
large tumors. Absence of neurologic abnormalities does
not exclude pituitary macrotumors (i.e., tumors that are
>1 cm in diameter, extend above the sella turcica, or have
a pituitary:brain ratio of >0.31).

The posterior pituitary gland’s blood supply is direct
(arterial).
●● The anterior pituitary gland’s blood supply is mainly
indirect via the pituitary portal system.
●●

In dogs with normal pituitary glands, after IV adminis­
tration of contrast medium, the posterior pituitary gland
can be identified first – this phase is called the “pituitary
flush.” Its absence indicates atrophy due to compression
by a pituitary tumor. Displacement or distortion of the
flush can be used to identify and localize anterior pitui­
tary microtumors.
Dorsal displacement and decreased signal intensity of
the posterior lobe on T1‐weighted MRI indicate the
presence of a microtumor.

­Treatment
In humans, while pituitary surgery is considered the first
line of treatment for patients with Cushing disease, med­
ical therapy now plays a more important role in the
armamentarium available to patients after failed surgery.
Repeat surgery, bilateral adrenalectomy, and pituitary
radiation are also frequently employed.
In dogs, medical management is far more common
than surgical approaches and generally involves the use
of medications directed toward reducing adrenal gluco­
corticoid production. However, recent work on newer
medical and surgical therapies as well as work on emerg­
ing treatments provides the clinician with multiple ther­
apeutic options.
Medical treatments can be classified based on their
mechanism of action and categorized as (1) adrenal‐
directed steroidogenesis inhibitors or adrenolytics, (2)
centrally acting agents, and (3) glucocorticoid receptor
blockers (Box 7.5).
Adrenal‐Directed Therapies

Pituitary imaging should be considered for
all dogs at the time of PDH diagnosis, especially if hypo­
physectomy or radiation therapy is being considered. If
clinical features suggest a pituitary macrotumor, confir­
mation requires imaging. Clinical signs of a macroade­
noma include disorientation, aimless wandering, severe
polyuria/polydipsia, lethargy, hyporexia to anorexia, vis­
ual impairment and possibly seizures.
Indications

Because pituitary lesions may be quite
small, contrast‐enhanced CT and MRI may identify nor­
mal‐sized pituitary glands in dogs with PDH. However,
dynamic contrast‐enhanced CT takes advantage of the
pituitary gland’s blood supply.
Test Results

In dogs, op‐DDD (mitotane, Lysodren®; Bristol Pharma­
ceuticals), trilostane (Vetoryl®; Dechra Pharmaceuticals)
and ketoconazole are the most commonly used agents
although several other agents have been used or are
under investigation. In cats, mitotane and trilostane are
most commonly used.
Mitotane

Mitotane is derived from the insecticide DDT and is a
potent adrenocorticolytic agent. The drug causes pro­
gressive necrosis of the zona fasciculata and zona retic­
ularis of the adrenal gland and at higher doses may also
cause necrosis of the zona glomerulosa. Other effects
of mitotane include fatty degeneration, centrilobular

57

VetBooks.ir

58

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

Box 7.5 Treatment of canine hyperadrenocorticism
Adrenal‐directed therapy
Mitotane
Trilostane
Ketoconazole
Aminogluthemide
Metyrapone
Etomidate
LCI699*
Normocort*
Pituitary‐directed therapy
Somatostain receptor agonists (octreotide, pasireotide)
D2 receptor agonists (cabergoline, bromocriptine)
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (gefitinib)
Cyclin‐dependent kinase inhibitors (roscovitine)*
PPAR‐gamma agonists (rosiglitazone)*
Retinoic acid
Temozolamide*
mTor inhibitors (everolimus)*
Glucocorticoid receptor blockade
Mifepristone*
* = Currently no data in dogs with PDH.

atrophy, and congestion of the liver. Normal dogs and
cats are clinically quite resistant to the effects of the drug.
Therapy with mitotane in both dogs and cats is begun
at a dose of 50 mg/kg divided q12h. Glucocorticoids are
not usually administered concurrently, but a small sup­
ply of prednisone should be made available to the owner
for emergencies. Mitotane at induction doses is typically
administered for 5–10 days, until water consumption
decreases to <100 mL/kg/day. It should be discontinued
immediately if decreased appetite, depression, diarrhea,
or vomiting are observed. At this point, the pet should be
reevaluated and an ACTH stimulation test performed.
Prednisone treatment (0.2–0.5 mg/kg/day) should be ini­
tiated in patients showing clinical signs of hypocorti­
solemia, until the results of the ACTH stimulation test
are known. In patients that are not polydipsic, patients in
which water consumption cannot be monitored, and
patients in which polydipsia is due to another underlying
disease (e.g., diabetes mellitus), mitotane should be
administered for a maximum of 5–7 days prior to ACTH
stimulation testing.
The goal of treatment is to have both the pre‐ and
postcortisol measurement in the normal resting range
(2–6 μg/dL). Maintenance therapy (50 mg/kg q7–10
days) is started once the ACTH stimulation test shows

adequate suppression (pre and post less than 5 μg/dL)
and prednisone therapy (if necessary) has been discon­
tinued. Failure to use maintenance therapy will result
in regrowth of the adrenal cortex and recurrence of
clinical signs. Efficacy of maintenance therapy is moni­
tored by an ACTH stimulation test in one month and
every 3–4 months thereafter. The dose of mitotane
required for long‐term maintenance is quite variable
(26–330 mg/kg/week).
Reasons for treatment failure include incorrect diag­
nosis, the presence of an adrenal tumor (although some
adrenal tumors will respond well), loss of drug potency
due to poor storage or compounding of mitotane, or a
need for a higher dose or duration of treatment in some
dogs. Side‐effects of mitotane include gastric irritation,
hypoadrenocorticism, and very occasionally neurologic
signs. Mean survival time of 200 dogs treated with mito­
tane was 2.2 years (range 10 days to 8.2 years).
Trilostane

Trilostane is a synthetic hormonally inactive steroid
analog, which is a competitive inhibitor of the 3‐beta‐
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase system. The drug blocks
synthesis of adrenal steroids, including cortisol and
aldosterone. Trilostane is rapidly absorbed orally (peak
concentrations within 1.5 hours), although suppression
of plasma cortisol concentrations is short‐lived (<20
hours). The medication should be administered with
food (including the days when ACTH stimulation tests
are scheduled to be performed) to aid in absorption.
Current recommendations for use of trilostane in dogs
are to start at a dose of 1–2 mg/kg q12–24h and then
increase or decrease the dose based on evaluation of
ACTH stimulation tests performed 4–6 hours after drug
administration. While there is no difference in whether
the samples are drawn four or six hours post pill, it is
important that the same sampling times are used in a
given patient. The hormonal endpoints are postcortisol
concentration of less than 6–9 μg/dL in conjunction with
remission of clinical signs. Twice‐a‐day therapy at a
starting dose of 1–3 mg/kg may result in good control of
clinical signs at a lower total daily dose with less risk of
adverse effects than higher doses q24h. In addition, BID
dosing may be more effective in controlling hypercorti­
solemia more consistently throughout the day and may
be appropriate as a starting dose in dogs with diabetes
and other Cushing‐related complications.
We have recently evaluated the safety and efficacy of
trilostane therapy in 15 cats with PDH at starting doses
of 1–2 mg/kg q12–24h. Clinical signs (13 of 15 cats) and
ACTH stimulation testing results (13 of 15) improved
with trilostane therapy. Diabetes mellitus was reported
in 9/15 cases. Insulin requirements decreased by 36%
within two months in 6/9 diabetic cats. Median survival

VetBooks.ir

7 Pituitary-Dependent Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs and Cats

time was 617 days for all cats (range 80–1278 days).
Complications included weight loss, urinary tract infec­
tions, chronic kidney disease, seizures, and recurrent
pancreatitis. Hypocortisolemia was documented in one
case. Cause of death occurred as a result of nonadre­
nal or nondiabetic illnesses (renal failure, seizures
[caused by hypoglycemia or unknown]), or lymphoma.
Trilostane ameliorates clinical signs of HAC in cats, is
tolerated well in the long term, and can lead to improved
regulation of diabetes. It should be considered as first‐
line therapy for cats undergoing medical management
of PDH.
Adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation testing
should be performed 10, 30, and 90 days after start of
treatment and 30 days after each dose adjustment.
Trilostane is well tolerated in most dogs. Adverse effects
that are usually mild and self‐limiting include diarrhea,
vomiting, and lethargy in up to 63% of treated dogs.
The ACTH stimulation test is the monitoring method
for patients on trilostane therapy for which we have the
most clinical experience and have reliably used for clini­
cal decision making for a decade. However, the correla­
tion of test results with the patient’s clinical well‐being
has been questioned by multiple researchers. As with
many endocrine tests, there is not one definitive meth­
odology that can be applied to all patients.
The ACTH stimulation test remains the test of choice
in any canine patient found to be clinically unwell by
either the owner or the veterinarian. Oversuppression
of cortisol production can occur with any medical ther­
apy for hyperadrenocorticism and can develop insidi­
ously or acutely.
Recently in Europe, the cost of cosyntropin has incre­
ased significantly. This, along with the multiple publica­
tions showing a lack of correlation between the ACTH
stimulation test results and patients’ clinical well‐being,
led a group of researchers to investigate the value of
examining a single, unstimulated, cortisol result prior to
the administration of trilostane.
Procedure/Protocol

1) Owners are instructed to bring their dog to the veteri­
nary hospital prior to receiving the morning dose of
trilostane.
2) The owners are then asked questions regarding con­
trol of clinical signs, with or without the use of a ques­
tionnaire. If any signs of cortisol oversuppression are
noted, such as vomiting, anorexia, hyporexia, or leth­
argy, trilostane is not given, and a baseline cortisol
and/or an ACTH stimulation test is performed to rule
out hypoadrenocorticism.
3) A serum sample is collected for the measurement of
cortisol.

Based on the above literature review, we offer the fol­
lowing recommendations for monitoring canine patients
receiving trilostane therapy.
Unwell Dogs, Stressed Dogs, and Dogs With Concurrent Illness
●●
●●

Perform an ACTH stimulation test.
Perform an electrolyte panel and evaluate for signs of
mineralocorticoid suppression.

Clinically Well and Controlled Dogs (Per Client Questionnaire
and/or History)

Pre‐trilostane cortisol <1.4 μg/dL: decrease dose by
10% or perform an ACTH stimulation test.
●● Pre‐trilostane cortisol 1.4–5 μg/dL: continue current
dose.
●● Pre‐trilostane cortisol >5 μg/dL: reevaluate history and
consider splitting dose to twice daily (if currently once
daily), or a small dose increase, based on clinical signs.
●●

Clinically Undercontrolled Dogs

Pre‐trilostane cortisol <1.4 μg/dL: reevaluate history
and diagnosis; perform an ACTH stimulation test;
consult with a specialist.
●● Pre‐trilostane cortisol 1.4–5 μg/dL: this is currently a
gray zone. Depending on the patient, consider splitting
the dose to twice daily, if currently on once‐daily dos­
ing, or consider a dose increase if >3 μg/dL.
●● Pre‐trilostane cortisol >5 μg/dL: increase dose fre­
quency (from once daily to twice daily) or dose.
●●

Occasionally, dogs have developed hypoadrenocorticism,
which is generally glucocorticoid deficient only, although
dogs with evidence of mineralocorticoid deficiency have
been reported. Hypoadrenocorticism induced by trilos­
tane is generally reversible, although in rare cases this
may take several months, likely because of adrenocorti­
cal necrosis. There have been anecdotal reports of acute
death shortly after starting trilostane treatment.
Mitotane vs Trilostane

Studies have been performed comparing trilostane with
mitotane in dogs with PDH or adrenal tumors. In a ret­
rospective study of dogs treated with either mitotane
(n = 25) or trilostane (n = 123), long‐term survival was not
statistically different between the groups. Median sur­
vival in the mitotane group was 708 days (range 33–1399),
and in the trilostane group was 662 days (range 8–1971).
Of the dogs that died in this study, 11% died due to causes
that were attributed to the underlying PDH, and a fur­
ther 17% died of causes that could have been related to
their underlying PDH. In 38% of cases, the cause of death
could not be directly attributed to PDH, and in 34% the
cause of death was unknown.

59

VetBooks.ir

60

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

Ketoconazole

While ketoconazole was used more frequently in the
past, its use now is generally in countries where mitotane
and trilostane are not available or when these agents
have failed to correct hypercortisolism or resulted in
adverse reactions. Its systemic use has recently been
restricted or banned in several countries due to the
potential of significant hepatoxocity in humans.
Specifically, ketoconazole has been shown to inhibit
cholesterol side‐chain cleavage enzyme, which converts
cholesterol to pregnenolone, 17‐alpha‐hydroxylase and
17,20‐lyase, which convert pregnenolone into andro­
gens, and 11‐beta‐hydoxylase, which converts 11‐deoxy­
cortisol to cortisol.
A paper in 2008 examined the safety and efficacy of
ketoconazole in 48 dogs with PDH. Data collected from
each record included signalment, clinical signs, results of
ACTH stimulation tests before and after treatment with
ketoconazole (10 mg/kg PO BID), serum alkaline phos­
phatase (ALP) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
activities, dosage of ketoconazole, clinical response, and
survival time. Forty‐three of 48 (90%) dogs had evidence
of clinical improvement during the treatment period. In
all dogs, treatment with ketoconazole resulted in signifi­
cantly lower serum cortisol concentrations as measured
before and after ACTH stimulation testing; 69% (33/48)
of serum cortisol concentrations measured after ACTH
stimulation were within the basal resting range. Serum
ALP and ALT activities significantly decreased after
treatment with ketoconazole.
Survival time after diagnosis of PDH ranged from 2 to
61 months (mean 26.9 months; median 25 months).
Another study evaluating ketoconazole found that after
diagnosis, 50% of the dogs died approximately 1.8–2
years (range 0.6–3) after starting therapy.
Several other adrenal steroidogenesis inhibitors have
been used in man and at times in dogs.
Aminoglutethemide (Cytadren®; Novartis)

Aminoglutethemide blocks the conversion of cholesterol
to pregnenolone by inhibiting the enzyme P450scc and
consequently decreases synthesis of all hormonally active
steroids. Its use in dogs has been limited. In one study, 10
dogs were diagnosed with PDH based on clinical and lab­
oratory data, adrenal function tests, ACTH stimulation
test and UCCR combined with a high‐dose oral dexa­
methasone suppression test, and ultrasonographic evalu­
ation of the adrenal glands. Aminoglutethimide was
administered daily at a dose of 15 mg/kg body weight for
one month. Median basal cortisol concentration and
post‐ACTH cortisol concentration one month after treat­
ment were significantly lower than pretreatment values.
Complete response was achieved in one dog, and partial
response was obtained in three dogs. Severe side‐effects

of anorexia, vomiting, and weakness occurred in one dog
and medication was withdrawn. Two further dogs devel­
oped progression of concurrent diseases and medication
was stopped in these animals as well. Mild toxicity
occurred in four dogs. Moderate to severe elevations in
liver enzymes occurred in all dogs. The efficacy of this
drug is lower than that observed using mitotane, trilos­
tane and ketoconazole, and adverse effects limit its use.
Metyrapone (Metopirone®; Novartis)

Metyrapone is a pharmacologic agent used in the diag­
nosis of adrenal insufficiency and occasionally in the
treatment of Cushing disease in humans. The primary
inhibitory target is 11‐beta‐hydroxylase and to a lesser
extent 17‐alpha‐, 18‐, and 19‐hydroxylase. The availabil­
ity of metyrapone varies by country.
In dogs, it has been used in patients with Cushing syn­
drome in an attempt to distinguish PDH from a func­
tional adrenal tumor. No reports exist on its use in
treating Cushing syndrome in dogs.
Etomidate (Amidate®; Hospira)

Etomidate is a short‐acting intravenous hypnotic non­
barbiturate anesthetic agent used for general anesthesia
which suppresses steroidogenesis by dose‐dependent
inhibition of 11‐beta‐hydroxylase and desmolase. It plays
a particular role in human cases with significant bio­
chemical disturbance, sepsis and other serious complica­
tions such as severe psychosis, as well as in patients who
have acute contraindications to surgery and cannot tol­
erate oral medications.
Its use in canine surgical patients has been reported
revealing adrenal suppression for 2–6 hours following a
single bolus injection of 1.5–3.0 mg/kg. Its use as a con­
tinuous‐rate infusion (CRI) in the management of
Cushing syndrome has not been reported.
LCI699 (Novartis)

LCI699 is a potent inhibitor of aldosterone synthase and
11‐beta‐hydroxylase. The mechanism of action of LCI699
is similar to that of metyrapone, but LCI699 is more
potent and has a longer plasma half‐life (approximately 4
vs 2 h), which allows for twice‐daily dosing. LCI699 is
currently under investigation in a Phase III prospective
safety and efficacy study in human patients with Cushing
disease. No information on its use in canine patients has
been reported.
NormoCort (COR‐003; Cortendo)

COR‐003 is a single 2S, 4R enantiomer of ketoconazole
in development as a possible new drug for the treat­
ment of endogenous Cushing syndrome. This 2S, 4R
enantiomer of ketoconazole is expected to be a more
potent inhibitor of key enzymes in the cortisol synthesis

VetBooks.ir

7 Pituitary-Dependent Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs and Cats

pathway, and also a less potent inhibitor of a metabolic
enzyme, cholesterol 7‐alpha‐hydroxylase (Cyp7a), than
its counterpart. COR‐003 is presently in Phase III studies
in humans though no information is available regarding
its use in dogs.
Pituitary‐Directed Therapy
Recent work on somatostatin and dopaminergic recep­
tor changes in humans and dogs with Cushing disease
has opened the door to targeted therapy of pituitary
tumors. Such therapies result not only in decreased
ACTH production but also a reduction in tumor size.
Several agents have been studied or are in clinical trials.
Pasireotide (SOM230; Signifor®; Novartis)

Pasireotide is a somatostatin receptor (SSR) ligand with
high binding affinity for multiple receptor isoforms
(SST1‐3 and SST5). SST5 and SST2 are highly expressed
in ACTH pituitary adenomas, and animal studies docu­
mented that SSR mediates inhibition of cAMP and regu­
lation of ACTH secretion. While SST5 is most commonly
overexpressed in humans, SST2 appears to be most com­
mon in dogs. Pasireotide has recently been approved for
use in humans for the treatment of adult patients with
Cushing disease for whom pituitary surgery is not an
option or has not been curative.
SOM230 was tested in dogs suffering from Cushing
disease (10 animals were treated continuously during six
months, and another 10 were treated with three cycles
consisting of two months of treatment followed by a two‐
month rest period). The dose was 0.03 mg/kg SOM230,
SC q12h. Clinical and biochemical variables were evalu­
ated at different times: before treatment and at three
and six months of treatment. MRI studies at three and
six months were performed. A significant decrease in
ACTH, urinary cortisol creatinine ratio, adenoma size
(magnetic nuclear resonance), and improvement of
clinical signs were obtained, without side‐effects. In this
study, tumor size did not decrease in patients whose
tumors were >7 mm, but there was no increase either,
and there were variations in the paramagnetic signal
intensities, becoming isointense. AtT20 cells treated
with SOM230 suppressed proopiomelanocortin (POMC)
promoter activity through SSTR2, via the Gi alpha‐subu­
nit, and reduced Nur77/Nurr1 transcriptional activity. It
was concluded that SOM230, in addition to its well‐
described antisecretory effects, inhibits, as shown in
AtT20 cells, ACTH synthesis at the POMC transcrip­
tional level, an effect mediated mainly through SSTR2,
and limits tumor growth. The controlled Cushing dis­
ease in the dogs that received the treatment indicates
that SOM230 has a potential therapeutic use in dogs suf­
fering from Cushing disease.

We recently evaluated nine client‐owned dogs with
PDH and macroadenoma in which PDH had been suc­
cessfully managed with adrenal‐directed treatment (trilos­
tane or mitotane). Dogs were given pasireotide (0.03 mg/
kg [0.014 mg/lb], SC, q12h) for six months, while adrenal‐
directed treatment was continued. Physical examination,
basic clinicopathologic testing, ACTH stimulation testing,
and plasma ACTH concentration measurement were per­
formed before (baseline) and three and six months after
treatment began. Measurements of pituitary gland vol­
ume and pituitary gland‐to‐brain ratio were performed
via MRI at baseline and six months after treatment
began. No dog developed neurologic abnormalities or
signs of adverse effects during the study period. No dif­
ferences from baseline were identified in clinicopatho­
logic values, ACTH stimulation test results, or plasma
ACTH concentration at the three‐ or six‐month assess­
ment points. After six months of pasireotide treatment,
six dogs had decreases in MRI‐measured values, and three
had increases. Pasireotide as administered in this study
had no noted adverse effects on dogs with PDH and mac­
roadenoma successfully managed with standard treat­
ment. Placebo‐controlled, randomized studies are needed
to determine whether pasireotide protects from the devel­
opment of neurologic signs or improves outcome in dogs
with pituitary macroadenomas.
As mentioned, while dogs seem to overexpress the
SST2 receptor, a recent paper showed no decrease in
cortisol concentrations in dogs treated with octreotide, a
selective SST2 receptor antagonist.
Cabergoline (Dostinex®; Pfizer)

Cabergoline is a dopamine D2 receptor agonist with a
higher affinity and a longer half‐life than bromocriptine.
In humans, its effectiveness and tolerance in the treat­
ment of prolactinomas and growth‐hormone secreting
adenomas have been demonstrated. Pivonello described
reduction in size of the aggressive corticotroph adenoma,
which causes Nelson syndrome, while the antineoplastic
effects of cabergoline have been reported in the treat­
ment of nonfunctional tumors of corticotroph cells.
A study with follow‐up for over four years was con­
ducted in 40 dogs with PDH that were treated with
cabergoline (0.07 mg/kg/week). Out of the 40 dogs, 17
responded to cabergoline (42.5%). A year after the
­treatment, there was a significant decrease in ACTH (P
<0.0001), alpha‐MSH (P <0.01), UCCR (P <0.001), and
tumor size (P <0.0001) evaluated by nuclear magnetic
resonance. Dogs responding to cabergoline lived signifi­
cantly longer (P <0.001) than those in the control group
(ketoconazole). Cabergoline may be useful in 42.5% of
dogs with PDH, justifying its use as a treatment especially
if a pars intermedia tumor is documented or suspected
based on hormonal (elevated MSH) and imaging data.

61

VetBooks.ir

62

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

Selegilene (L‐deprenyl)

The monoamine oxidase B inhibitor L‐deprenyl, which
serves to raise concentrations of dopamine in the brain,
has been used to treat hyperadrenocorticism in dogs.
The medication appears effective in some patients (20–
30%) with pars intermedia disease with few side‐effects.
Today, the medication is generally used in PDH patients
where the cost of monitoring ACTH stimulation tests
and electrolytes would prohibit treatment with adrenal
enzyme blockers or adrenolytics.
Retinoic Acid

Retinoic acid is an agent that has been shown to inhibit
proliferation, invasion, and tumor growth in vivo and
induces differentiation and apoptosis in different cell
types. Some of these effects are mediated by a reduction
in binding of the transcription factors AP‐1 and Nur77
to their cognate DNA sites; these factors are also essen­
tial in the control of the POMC gene, which gives rise to
the precursor to ACTH and alpha‐MSH. Recently, it was
shown that retinoic acid inhibits ACTH secretion both
in vitro and in vivo through an action on POMC gene
transcription and also inhibits corticotrophinoma devel­
opment and proliferation.
A randomized study comparing treatment with 2 mg/
kg/day of 9‐cis retinoic acid (n = 22) vs 20 mg/kg/day of
ketoconazole (n = 20) in dogs with Cushing disease was
recently performed. Clinical signs, plasma ACTH and
alpha‐MSH, UCCR, and pituitary MRI were assessed
and compared at different time points for six months. A
significant reduction in plasma ACTH, alpha‐MSH, and
UCCR was seen in the dogs treated with retinoic acid.
Pituitary adenoma size was also significantly reduced at
the end of treatment. Survival time and all the clinical
signs evaluated showed an improvement in the retinoic
acid‐treated dogs. No adverse events or signs of hepato­
toxicity were observed, suggesting that the drug is not
only effective but also safe. Retinoic acid treatment con­
trols ACTH and cortisol oversecretion as well as tumor
size in dogs with ACTH‐secreting tumors, leading to
resolution of the clinical signs. This study highlights the
possibility of using retinoic acid as a novel therapy in the
treatment of ACTH‐secreting tumors in humans with
Cushing disease.
EGFR Receptor Antagonists

We recently demonstrated that in surgically resected
human and canine corticotroph cultured tumors, block­
ing EGFR suppressed expression of POMC, the ACTH
precursor. In mouse corticotroph EGFR transfectants,
ACTH secretion was enhanced and EGF increased
POMC promoter activity, an effect that was dependent
on mitogen‐activated protein kinase (MAPK). Blocking
EGFR activity with gefitinib, an EGFR tyrosine kinase

inhibitor, attenuated POMC expression, inhibited corti­
cotroph tumor cell proliferation, and induced apoptosis.
As predominantly nuclear EGFR expression was observed
in canine and human corticotroph tumors, we preferen­
tially targeted EGFR to mouse corticotroph cell nuclei,
which resulted in higher POMC expression and ACTH
secretion, both of which were inhibited by gefitinib.In
athymic nude mice, EGFR overexpression enhanced the
growth of explanted ACTH‐secreting tumors and further
elevated serum corticosterone levels. Gefitinib treatment
decreased both tumor size and corticosterone levels; it
also reversed signs of hypercortisolemia, including ele­
vated glucose levels and excess omental fat. These results
indicate that inhibiting EGFR signaling may be a novel
strategy for treating Cushing disease and studies in dogs
and humans are under way.
Pituitary Surgery

Several groups have described successful use of transs­
phenoidal hypophysectomy (TSH) as a method of treat­
ing PDH in dogs. Recently, we described a technique
for transsphenoidal removal of pituitary adenomas in
26 dogs with PDH using a high‐definition video tele­
scope. Pituitary tumors were removed using a modifi­
cation of a transoral transsphenoidal approach. Surgery
was observed using a high‐definition video telescope
(VITOMTM) and localization of the sella was per­
formed by drilling pilot holes in the basisphenoid bone
followed by CT. There were no postoperative cerebro­
spinal fluid leaks, wound dehiscence, or surgical site
infections. Overall postoperative mortality was 19%,
with no mortality observed in the last 16 dogs, indicat­
ing an initial learning curve. Follow‐up times ranged
from three to 36 months. Sustained tumor control and
hormonal remission based on normalized ACTH and
UCCR measurements were observed in 20/21 (95%) of
dogs at one‐year follow‐up.
Surgical experience and tumor size are likely impor­
tant variables in dogs undergoing TSH. The survival
rates at one, two, three, and four years in the study by
Hanson et al. evaluating 181 patients were 86%, 83%,
80%, and 79%, respectively. Disease‐free intervals (DFI)
were 90%, 77%, 72%, and 68%, respectively.
In our study, one‐year survival was 81% (all five deaths
occurring within the first five days) with 100% of the sur­
viving dogs in remission at three months and 95% (20/21)
in remission at one year. To date, seven dogs have sur­
vived >2 years and one dog >3 years.
Another important variable is tumor size. All the dogs
in our study had tumors with P/B ratios >0.32 and a
median P/B ratio of 0.73. Both the tumor size and extent
of removal were typical for this series. Median tumor
volume was 820 mm3, which is nine times larger than the
median volume of 89 mm3 reported by Hanson et al. In

VetBooks.ir

7 Pituitary-Dependent Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs and Cats

that series of 181 dogs with PDH, mean tumor height
was 6 mm, mean width 6.2 mm, and mean height 5.4 mm
with a median P/B ratio of 0.3.
Forty‐three percent of the dogs had a normal P/B ratio.
Interestingly, Hanson et al. concluded that pituitary size
(height) was the most significant predictor of postopera­
tive survival and mortality. In those studies, initial remis­
sion of PDH occurred in 85% of dogs with relapse in 28%
by three years.
Similarly, Hara et al. evaluated outcomes in 25 dogs
that had TSH using the protocol of Meij et al. Median
P/B ratio was 0.38 (range 0.24–0.71) with 24% of dogs
having a normal P/B ratio. Initial remission was attained
in 84% with 12% of dogs having relapse within four years.
Survival at one, two, three, and four years was 92%, 81%,
81%, and 81%. No data on DFI were reported.
Continued experience with surgery for pituitary
tumors in both dogs and cats will be important not only
in improving survival and DFI, but it will also allow for

the continued collections of tumor tissue allowing for
additional studies regarding pathogenesis and novel
therapies for both man and pets.

­Prognosis
With medical treatment, survival time after diagnosis
of PDH ranges from two to 61 months (mean 26.9
months; median,25 months). Another study evaluating
ketoconazole found that after diagnosis, 50% of the
dogs died approximately 1.8–2 years (range 0.6–3)
after starting therapy. A recent study evaluated sur­
vival times in dogs left untreated for PDH. Median sur­
vival time for the trilostane group was not reached
(95% confidence interval 443 days–not applicable)
and was significantly longer than the 506 days (95%
confidence interval 292–564 days; P = 0.016) for the
untreated group.

­Further Reading
Arenas C, Melián C, Pérez‐Alenza MD. Long‐term survival
of dogs with adrenal‐dependent hyperadrenocorticism: a
comparison between mitotane and twice daily trilostane
treatment. J Vet Intern Med 2014; 28(2): 473–80.
Burkhardt WA, Boretti FS, Reusch CE, et al. Evaluation of
baseline cortisol, endogenous ACTH and cortisol/
ACTH ratio to monitor trilostane treatment in dogs
with pituitary‐dependent hypercortisolism. J Vet Intern
Med 2013; 27: 919–23.
Fracassi F, Corradini S, Floriano D, et al. Prognostic factors
for survival in dogs with pituitary‐dependent

hypercortisolism treated with trilostane. Vet Rec 2015;
176(2): 49–54.
Lottati M, Bruyette DS. Outcomes of the addition of
pasireotide) to traditional adrenal‐directed treatment
for dogs with pituitary‐dependent hyper­
adrenocorticism secondary to macroadenoma:
9 cases (2013–2015). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018;
252: 1403–8.
Macfarlane L, Parkin, T, Ramsey I. Pre‐trilostane and
three‐hour post‐trilostane cortisol to monitor trilostane
therapy in dogs. Vet Rec 2016; 179; 597.

63

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

65

8
Polyuria and Polydipsia
Jennifer L. Garcia, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)
Houston, TX, USA

­Physiology of Water Metabolism

­Etiology/Pathophysiology

Maintenance of water balance is very tightly regulated between the hypothalamus, pituitary gland, and
kidneys. The main hormone involved in this system is
arginine vasopressin (AVP) or antidiuretic hormone.
AVP is produced in the hypothalamus and stored in
the posterior pituitary. The primary stimulus for AVP
release is an increase in plasma osmolality sensed by
osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus or a decrease in
extracellular fluid volume sensed by baroreceptors in
the aortic sinus, left atrium, and carotid sinuses.
Other factors known to stimulate AVP release include
alterations in blood pressure, hypoglycemia, angiotensin II, fever, stress, nausea, pain, exercise, and various drugs, hormones, and metabolic disturbances.
Osmolarity is the concentration of a solutionin
termsof osmoles of solutes per liter of solution.
Inveterinary medicine, osmolarity is used to estimate
the osmolality or tonicityof the extracellular fluid
(ECF) space.
Once released into the circulation, AVP binds to
receptors on the basolateral surface of cells in the
renal distal convoluted tubules and collecting ducts.
This initiates insertion of aqueous (aquaporin) channels into the luminal membrane of these cells. The
hypertonicity of the renal medulla can then draw free
water from the urine filtrate into the distal portion of
the nephron, resulting in concentrated urine.
Production of concentrated or dilute urine depends on
functional kidneys; once greater than two‐thirds of
nephrons have been lost, the patient will be unable to
produce concentrated urine despite the effects of AVP.
Decreased concentrating ability may be noted before
azotemia is evident on routine laboratory tests.

Polydipsia is defined as a fluid intake >90–100 mL/kg/day
in dogs and >45 mL/kg/day in cats. Patients may be categorized as having primary polydipsia with secondary polyuria or primary polyuria with compensatory polydipsia.
Primary polydipsia may arise from psychogenic causes
(such as behavioral or environmental issues), liver disease, neurologic disease, fever, and pain. These patients
will often have hyposthenuric urine (1.001–1.005) and
have low levels of AVP secondary to excessive thirst and
decreased osmolality (285–295 mOsm/kg).
Causes of primary polyuria can be divided into those
which result in an osmotic diuresis versus manifestations
of diabetes insipidus (DI) in which there is AVP insufficiency or insensitivity.
Osmotic diuresis occurs when an osmotically active
solute (e.g., glucose or urea) is present in the glomerular
filtrate at a high concentration. This creates a gradient,
which impedes passive reabsorption of water in the distal
tubules and results in increased water loss. Illnesses such as
diabetes mellitus (DM), chronic renal failure, primary renal
glycosuria, and postobstructive diuresis can cause polyuria
with secondary polydipsia as a result of osmotic diuresis.
Diabetes insipidus can be further categorized as central
or nephrogenic. Central DI (CDI) is the less common variant
of this disorder and results from a complete or partial deficiency in AVP production. Trauma, infection, congenital
anomalies, neoplasia, or idiopathic processes can cause CDI.
Nephrogenic DI (NDI) refers to problems at the level
of the kidney, which prevent the patient from being able
to concentrate urine appropriately in response to changes
in serum osmolality. These patients are insensitive to the
antidiuretic effects of AVP and excrete higher than normal amounts of urine (Box 8.1).

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

66

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

Box 8.1 Diseases associated with secondary
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
Renal failure
Hyperglycemia
Hypercalcemia
Pyelonephritis
Pyometra
Leptospirosis (dogs)
Acromegaly
Renal medullary solute
washout

Hyperadrenocorticism
Hypoadrenocorticism
Hypokalemia
Hepatic disease
Hyperthyroidism (cats)
Polycythemia
Neoplasia
Drugs (i.e., anticonvulsants,
­ lucocorticoids, diuretics)
g

Nephrogenic DI can be further classified as primary
and secondary. The primary form of NDI is due to an
extremely rare congenital structural or functional defect
of the kidneys. Secondary NDI is the most common
cause of polyuria and polydipsia in veterinary medicine
and is due to nonrenal causes, which interfere with the
kidneys’ ability to respond to AVP.

­Signalment
Polyuria and polydipsia (PU/PD) can occur in any breed of
dog or cat and at any age. However, certain diseases are
associated with specific age groups and breeds. For example, primary polydipsia would be a consideration for a
young dog whereas hyperadrenocorticism may be suspected in a middle‐aged patient. Reproductive status
should also be considered as conditions such as pyometra
can result in these clinical signs. In addition, diseases
such as Fanconi syndrome have been described in basenjis and Norwegian elkhounds.

­History and Clinical Signs
A thorough history is critical when evaluating a patient
with polyuria and polydipsia. A recent history of trauma,
drug administration, (including topical medications), or
environmental change will help narrow the list of differentials. Loss of appetite and lethargy may raise the possibility of liver or renal disease whereas polyphagia may
increase the index of suspicion for hyperthyroidism in
cats or hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. Diet should be
discussed as well as salt content may affect water intake.

­Diagnosis
First‐Tier Diagnostic Tests
Physical examination findings in patients with PU/PD
may be unremarkable or nonspecific. Special attention
should be paid to body condition, muscle mass, hydration

status, and recent changes in weight. Organomegaly and/
or lymphadenopathy may raise suspicion of a neoplastic
process. In cats, palpation for thyroid nodules may be
useful in evaluating for possible hyperthyroidism. Females
should be examined for evidence of vulvar discharge.
Pyelonephritis should be suspected in patients with flank
or abdominal pain.
Before embarking on a diagnostic work‐up for the
cause of PU/PD, it is often useful to make sure the problem truly exists. This can be done through a combination
of history and evaluation of the urine specific gravity to
document isosthenuria or hyposthenuria.
It may also sometimes be useful to ask the owners to
quantify water intake at home (remember to discuss
access to other sources of water such as ponds, pools,
toilets, etc.). Water consumption may vary from day to
day so assessing water intake over several days may be
necessary. Polydipsia is documented in a patient with a
water intake in excess of 100 mL/kg/day for dogs and
45 mL/kg/day in cats.
The urine should also be evaluated for other diagnostic
clues.
Urine specific gravity (USG): Patients with normal
renal function who are truly polydipsic should have a
USG <1.030 in dogs and <1.035 in cats. If the USG is
consistently >1.035, other problems such as incontinence or dysuria should be considered.
●● Glycosuria: The presence of glucose may be suggestive
of diabetes mellitus or, in some cases, primary renal
glycosuria.
●● Proteinuria: In conjunction with a low USG, proteinuria may be seen in patients with hyperadrenocorticism, pyelonephritis, lower urinary tract infection, or
glomerulonephritis. A urine culture and/or urine
protein:creatinine ratio may be warranted.
●●

Initial diagnostics should also include a complete
blood count (CBC), chemistry profile with electrolytes, and a total thyroxine level in middle‐aged to
older cats. A urine culture should be performed even
in the face of an inactive sediment. Patients with
underlying diseases such as hyperadrenocorticism or
diabetes may be unable to mount an appropriate
immune response so pyuria may not be noted. In addition, dilute urine can make it difficult to identify
bacteriuria.
These initial tests often provide some direction as to
the underlying cause (e.g., presence of azotemia or an
elevation in liver values). In dogs, leptospirosis should be
considered as a cause of PU/PD in endemic areas even in
the absence of liver or renal abnormalities although the
exact mechanism for why this occurs is not clearly
understood.
The serum sodium concentration may also provide
some insight into whether the patient has primary

VetBooks.ir

8 Polyuria and Polydipsia

polydipsia with secondary polyuria or polyuria with
compensatory polydipsia.
Primary polyuria (results in excess loss of free water) >
elevated Na concentration > osmoreceptors sense
increase in osmolality > trigger thirst response > compensatory polydipsia
●● Primary polydipsia (results in excess intake of free
water) > decreased Na levels > osmoreceptors sense
decrease in osmolality > decrease AVP release > compensatory polyuria
●●

It is important to note, however, that patients with
hypoadrenocorticism will have a low sodium level due to
mineralocorticoid deficiency despite primary polyuria.
Plasma osmolality can also be used to determine if a
patient has primary polydipsia. In clinical practice, this
can be estimated by calculating serum osmolality using
the following formula:
2 × [Na] + [BUN in mg/dL]/2.8+ [Glu in mg/dL]/18
Low osmolality is suggestive of primary polydipsia and
further evaluation for hepatic disease or hyperthyroidism are indicated.
Second‐Tier Diagnostic Tests
Further diagnostics will depend on physical and laboratory
examination findings. For example, an abdominal ultrasound should be considered for patients with flank/abdominal pain in whom pyelonephritis is suspected. For patients
in whom adrenal disease is suspected, an adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) stimulation test should be considered. It is important to remember that approximately
15% of dogs with pituitary dependent and 40% of dogs with
adrenal‐dependent hyperadrenocorticism can have a normal ACTH stimulation test. If hyperadrenocorticism is
strongly suspected and the dog is otherwise healthy, a low‐
dose dexamethasone suppression test is a better option.
Other tests that may be considered, depending on laboratory findings, clinical signs, and signalment, include
pre‐ and postprandial bile acids and imaging studies of
the chest and abdomen. Imaging will be particularly useful for patients suspected of a neoplastic process and in
any patient with hypercalcemia. Abdominal ultrasonography may be useful in looking for masses, enlarged
abdominal lymph nodes, or adrenal enlargement.
Modified Water Deprivation Test (WDT) or
DDAVP trial
A modified WDT should only be considered for patients
in whom more common causes of PU/PD have been
ruled out and central DI, primary NDI, or psychogenic
polydipsia is strongly suspected. Fortunately, very few
cases of PU/PD require performing this test.

In addition to being time‐consuming and difficult to
perform, for patients with underlying undiagnosed illness, this test is contraindicated and may increase the
risk for complications, including death. This test
should never be performed in patients who are
azotemic or dehydrated. In addition, diseases such as
hyperadrenocorticism may show some positive
response, thereby complicating the diagnosis or resulting in misdiagnosis.
Steps for Conducting the Modified WDT

Phase 1
Patients that have had PU/PD for a prolonged period of
time may have wash‐out of their renal medullary concentration gradient and therefore, may be unable to concentrate their urine in the face of water deprivation. For this
reason, it is recommended that once the pet’s water intake
has been quantified, the total amount of water given
should be gradually restricted over 3–5 days until the goal
of 60–80 mL/kg/day is reached. To avoid prolonged periods of water restriction, the total daily water should be
calculated and provided in frequent small portions. A dry
food diet should be fed during this phase. This testing will
require that the owners pay very close attention to the pet
for any signs of illness. Patients with severe polyuria are
at increased risk for hypertonic dehydration and hospitalization during this phase of the WDT should be considered. A USG should be measured at the conclusion of
this phase in case the patient has already reached a USG
>1.030 (supportive of a diagnosis of psychogenic polydipsia) and the WDT is no longer required.
Phase 2
The patient should be admitted to the hospital for a
complete physical examination and assessment of
hydration and mentation status.
●● An indwelling urinary catheter is placed. The bladder
should be emptied completely, and the USG
measured.
●● A blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, packed cell
volume (PCV), total solids (TS), and electrolytes
should be measured.
●● Obtain patient’s body weight.
●● Patient should not have access to food or water.
●● Patient should have the following performed every
1–2 hours.
–– Physical examination to assess hydration and
mentation
–– Completely empty bladder and check USG
–– Obtain weight
●● Every 4–6 hours check BUN, creatinine, PCV, TS, and
electrolytes.
●● The test should be stopped when any of the following
occur:
●●

67

VetBooks.ir

68

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

Table 8.1 Currently available DDAVP preparations and common
dosages
Preparation

Strength

Dose

Intranasal

100 μg/mL (1 drop
= 1.5–4.0 μg
desmopressin)

1–2 drops in conjunctival
sac one to two times daily
Or
2 μg SC one to two times
daily
(can be administered SC if
sterilized through a
bacteriostatic filter)

Injectable

4 μg/mL

2 μg SC one to two times
daily

Oral

0.1–0.2 mg tablets
(each 0.1 mg =
approximately 4 μg
desmopressin)

0.05–0.2 mg PO twice daily
Bioavailability of the oral
preparation may be a
concern

PO, orally (per os); SC, subcutaneously.

–– The patient loses 5% of body weight. Maximal stimulation of AVP release occurs at this point but the
time required to reach dehydration may be a few
hours or up to 12 hours in some patients.
–– There is evidence of clinical dehydration or any
vomiting, lethargy, or altered mentation is noted.
–– Any evidence of azotemia.
–– The USG is >1.030.
Phase 3

If the patient is 5% dehydrated and has not produced
an adequately concentrated urine, desmopressin acetate (DDAVP, a synthetic AVP analog) should be
administered (see Table 8.1 for a list of desmopressin
formulations).
–– Assess mentation and measure weight, BUN, creatinine, PCV, TS, electrolytes.
–– Bladder should be emptied.
–– Administer injectable DDAVP (2-10 μg IV).
Alternatively, an intranasal DDAVP formulation
may be administered into the conjunctival sac (1–4
drops/dog).
●● Empty the bladder in 30 minutes and measure USG.
Repeat every 30 minutes for up to two hours until USG
>1.015. Bladder should be emptied at each time point.
If USG is still below 1.015, empty bladder and measure
USG every hour for up to 8 hours. At the conclusion of
the test, water can be reintroduced slowly (10-20 mL/
kg every 30 minutes for 2 hours).
●●

Interpretation

If the patient achieved an adequate urine concentration
during phase 1 of the test, then a diagnosis of primary
(psychogenic) polydipsia can be made. AVP secretion
and responsiveness are intact.

If concentrated urine was not noted at the end of phase
1, then the patient has primary polyuria – either CDI or
primary NDI (causes of secondary NDI should have been
ruled out prior to the WDT). Administration of DDAVP
differentiates between these two possibilities.
A patient with CDI will achieve an increase in USG
(>1.015) after DDAVP administration whereas a patient
with NDI will show little to no response. Again, patients
with secondary causes of NDI (i.e., hyperadrenocorticism) may also fail to show an elevation in USG after
DDAVP administration, which is why it is imperative
that secondary causes be ruled out prior to the WDT.
Interpretation may also be complicated in cases of pati­
ents with concurrent primary polydipsia and CDI or
NDI.
DDAVP Response Test

In cases where more common causes of PU/PD have
been ruled out and where there is a high index of suspicion for CDI, a DDAVP response test may be conducted
in lieu of a WDT. This can be conducted at home as the
owner continues to monitor water intake.
Measure USG on day 1 and administer DDAVP intranasal preparation (1–4 drops) into the conjunctival sac
twice daily for 5–7 days. Alternatively, the owner may
administer oral DDAVP (tablet) at a dose of 0.1–0.2 mg
every 8 hours for 5–7 days.
●● After 5–7 days, the USG is measured again.
●●

Animals with CDI should demonstrate an increase in the
USG as well as a decrease in water intake. An animal
with NDI or PP will show no response.
Patients with primary polydipsia may continue to drink
excessively despite the DDAVP and there is a risk of water
intoxication in these patients, which is why appropriate
patient selection and owner vigilance are imperative.

­Therapy
Treatment will need to address the underlying disorder.
For patients with CDI, DDAVP will need to be administered daily. DDAVP can be administered topically in the
conjunctival sac or a subcutaneous injection. An oral
preparation is also available but may be more costly and
has been shown to be less effective than parenteral
administration in some patients. See Table 8.1 for recommended dosing schedules.
Regardless of the route of administration, the DDAVP
dose should be titrated up gradually as needed to control
the PU/PD as the effects last 8–24 hours.
For patients with primary psychogenic polydipsia,
gradual water restriction and behavioral modification
therapy may be warranted. Consultation with or referral
to a behaviorist may be considered.

VetBooks.ir

8 Polyuria and Polydipsia

­Further Reading
DiBartola SP. Disorders of sodium and water:
hypernatremia and hyponatremia. In: DiBartola SP, ed.
Fluid, electrolyte, andacid-base disorders. 4th Edition.
St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier; 2012.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Canine and Feline Endo­
crinology and Reproduction, 4th ed. St Louis, MO:
Elsevier, 2015.
Guillaumin J, DiBartola SP. Disorders of sodium and water
homeostasis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract.
2017 Mar; 47(2).
Harb MF, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, et al. Centraldiabetes
insipidus in dogs: 20 cases (1986–1995). J Am Vet Med
Assoc. 1996 Dec1; 209(11).

Nichols R, Peterson ME. Clinical use of vasopressinanalog
desmopressin for the diagnosis and treatment of
diabetes insipidus. In: Bonagura JD, Twedt D, ed’s. Kirk’s
Current Veterinary Therapy XV. Philadelphia: Elsevier
Saunders; 2014.
Rothuizen J, Biewenga WJ, Mol JA. Chronic
glucocorticoidexcess and impaired osmoregulation of
vasopressin release in dogs with hepaticencephalopathy.
Domest Anim Endocrinol. 1995 Jan; 12(1).
Teshima T, Hara Y, Taoda T, et al. Central diabetes
insipidus after transsphenoidal surgeryin dogs with
Cushing’s disease. J Vet Intern Med. 2011 Jan; 73(1).

69

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

71

9
Canine Hypothyroidism
David S. Bruyette, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)
Anivive Lifesciences, Long Beach, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
and Epidemiology
Canine hypothyroidism, while a common endocrinopathy in the dog, may be overdiagnosed due to confusion/
inconsistencies in establishing a definitive diagnosis.
Hypothyroidism is due to decreased thyroidal production of the thyroid hormones thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3). Greater than 90% of cases are primary
and are due to acquired immune‐mediated destruction
of the thyroid gland which is preceded by thyroiditis,
idiopathic atrophy or, less commonly, neoplasia.
Secondary forms of the disease include thyroid‐stimulating hormone (TSH) deficiency, pituitary neoplasia,
and cystic Rathke’s pouch. Tertiary hypothyroidism with
thyrotropin‐releasing hormone (TRH) deficiency has
not been documented in dogs. Congenital cases have
been reported in both dogs and cats.
Hypothyroidism most commonly occurs in young to
middle‐aged dogs with an average age of 7 years. Dogs
with autoimmune disease tend to develop hypothyroidism at a younger age. While thyroid values decrease
within the reference range in senior dogs, hypothyroidism is very uncommon and other factors (see later) are
likely responsible for the observed decreased thyroid
concentrations in euthyroid older patients. Spayed
females and neutered males are at increased risk when
compared to sexually intact animals. Breed predispositions have been reported for golden retrievers and
Doberman pinschers. Thyroiditis is heritable in the beagle, borzoi, golden retriever, Great Dane, Irish setter,
Doberman pinscher, and old English sheepdogs. No
known environmental factors have been identified.

­History and Clinical Signs
As thyroid hormone regulates the metabolic rate and
influences the functions of many organs, clinical signs
are often nonspecific and insidious in onset. Many other
diseases can have similar clinical signs to hypothyroidism, which may lead to an incorrect diagnosis. As such,
laboratory testing of thyroid function is often performed
as part of the diagnostic work‐up in animals with nonthyroidal illness.
Common clinical signs include lethargy, mental dullness, weight gain, exercise intolerance, alopecia, and
obesity. Many metabolic, infectious, neoplastic, congenital, degenerative, and inflammatory diseases can cause
similar clinical signs and biochemical abnormalities seen
with hypothyroidism.

­Diagnosis
Laboratory Diagnosis
Thyroxine is the major secretory product of the thyroid
while the majority of T3 is derived from extrathyroidal
sources. Both T4 and T3 are highly protein bound to
serum carrier proteins such as thyroid‐binding globulin,
transthyretin, and albumin. Only unbound (free) hormone is able to penetrate cell membranes, bind to receptors, and result in biologic activity. Protein‐bound
hormone acts as a reservoir to maintain steady concentrations of free hormone in the plasma despite rapid
alterations in release and metabolism of T3 and T4 and
changes in the plasma protein concentrations.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

72

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

Serum Total T4

Serum T4 is a sensitive (>90–95%) but not specific test
(70–75%) for the diagnosis of canine hypothyroidism.
The vast majority of dogs with hypothyroidism have a
serum T4 below normal, but some normal dogs and
those with a variety of other problems may have a low
serum T4. A diagnosis of hypothyroidism can be ruled
out if the T4 is in the upper 50% of the reference range.
Autoantibodies to T4 occur in about 15% of hypothyroid dogs, and these antibodies may falsely increase the
serum T4 concentration from below normal into or
above the normal range. In‐house testing of total T4 is
not recommended.
Serum Total T3

Serum T3 concentration is an unreliable test for evaluation of thyroid function.
Serum Free T4 (fT4)

Thyroxine is highly (99.9%) protein bound in the circulation. Protein binding can be altered by many nonthyroidal illnesses and by certain drugs. Measurement of the
unbound or free hormone can provide a more accurate
assessment of thyroid function in these cases (sensitivity
>95%, specificity >97%). The sensitivity of fT4 is equivalent to or slightly better than total T4 in diagnosing
hypothyroidism in routine cases. More importantly, fT4
is more specific, particularly when nonthyroidal factors
that can influence total T4 are present. Free T4 is less
affected by most nonthyroidal illness and drugs, but still
can be altered in cases of moderate to severe illness. In
addition, fT4 by equilibrium dialysis is not affected by
the presence of T4 autoantibodies that will falsely elevate
total T4. Measurement of fT4 by equilibrium dialysis
should be performed when uncommon clinical signs of
hypothyroidism are present, the dog is being treated
with a drug that may affect thyroid function, when nonthyroidal illness is present, and if autoantibodies to T4
are detected.
Serum TSH

Primary hypothyroidism results in a decrease in T4 and
thus decreased negative feedback on the pituitary gland.
In response, the pituitary secretes more TSH and plasma
TSH levels increase. In humans, TSH is elevated prior to
any decrease of T4 or fT4 outside the normal range. In
the dog, TSH concentration is elevated in only 65–75%
of cases of hypothyroidism, and thus it lacks sensitivity
for use as a screening test. The combination of decreased
total T4 or fT4 with an elevated serum TSH is diagnostic of hypothyroidism (specificity >95%). Therefore, a
normal TSH does not rule out hypothyroidism, but an

­elevated TSH combined with a low T4 or fT4 provides a
definitive diagnosis.
Diagnosis of Thyroiditis

Antibodies against either T4 or T3 or both are sometimes present in dogs with thyroiditis with or without
hypothyroidism. The presence of these antibodies does
not indicate that the dog is hypothyroid, but suggests
that autoimmune thyroid disease is present. These antibodies frequently cause false elevation of T4 or T3 concentrations that can result in marked elevation of the
hormones. Autoantibodies to T4 are present in about
10–15% of hypothyroid dogs.
Dogs with autoimmune thyroiditis may have circulating antibodies to thyroglobulin, the primary protein in
the colloid of the thyroid gland. This is not a test of thyroid function but rather a marker for the presence of
autoimmune thyroiditis. In one long‐term study at
Michigan State University, 20% of asymptomatic, antithyroglobulin‐positive dogs with normal thyroid function
progressed to hypothyroidism in one year. The presence
of these antibodies in a dog with borderline laboratory
evidence of hypothyroidism and clinical signs supports a
diagnosis of hypothyroidism.
Additional Considerations
Breeds

Certain breeds have normal ranges of thyroid hormones that are different from most other breeds. Few
have been evaluated but greyhounds have serum total
T4 and fT4 concentrations that are considerably lower
than most other breeds. Scottish deerhounds, salukis,
and whippets also have total T4 concentrations that
are well below the mean concentration of dogs in general. Alaskan sled dogs have serum T4, T3, and fT4
concentrations below the reference range of most pet
dogs, particularly during periods of intense training or
racing.
Time of Day

In one study 50% of normal dogs had a low serum T4
concentration at some time during the day.
Medications

The drugs that are known to commonly alter thyroid
function tests are glucocorticoids, phenobarbital, sulfonamides, clomipramine, aspirin, and some other
NSAIDs. Glucocorticoids suppress total T4 and sometimes fT4 as well. Phenobarbital causes decreased total
T4 and mild increases in TSH. Sulfonamides can induce

VetBooks.ir

9 Canine Hypothyroidism

overt primary hypothyroidism with clinical signs and
thyroid function tests that support the diagnosis. The
changes may be reversible when the medication is discontinued. There are dozens of drugs that affect thyroid
function and thyroid function tests in humans, so many
others likely affect the dog as well.
Nonthyroidal Illness

Illness not involving the thyroid gland can alter thyroid
function tests and has been labeled “nonthyroidal illness” or “euthyroid sick syndrome.” Any illness can alter
thyroid function tests, causing a fairly consistent
decrease in total T4 and T3 concentrations in proportion to the severity of illness. Serum TSH concentration
is increased in 8–10% of dogs with nonthyroidal illness. Serum fT4 measured by equilibrium dialysis is
less likely to be affected, but can also be increased or
decreased. However, in dogs with substantial nonthyroidal illness, the fT4 is likely to be decreased. It is recommended that testing of thyroid function be
postponed until the nonthyroidal illness is resolved. If
this is not possible, measurement of T4, TSH, and fT4
is indicated.
Ancillary Testing
Thyroid Gland Ultrasound

Although rarely necessary, ultrasound of the thyroid
glands (by an experienced ultrasonographer) can aid in
differentiating dogs with primary hypothyroidism from
those with nonthyroidal illness. Thyroid glands of hypothyroid dogs tend to be smaller, less homogeneous, and
hypoechoic than those of euthyroid dogs. There is considerable overlap with the ultrasonographic appearance
and size of the thyroid glands of euthyroid and hypothyroid dogs. Thyroid ultrasound can only be used to help
support a diagnosis of hypothyroidism if the thyroid
glands are quite small.

­Treatment
Levothyroxine is the only hormone that appears necessary for treatment of hypothyroidism. The frequency of
levothyroxine dosing is controversial, and the only study
to closely evaluate the response to treatment showed
that once‐daily treatment is adequate. However, in clinical practice some dogs seem to respond better to twice‐
daily treatment.
The initial starting dose is 0.02 mg/kg PO q24h.
In general, you will never have to exceed 0.8 mg as an

initial daily dosage even in very large dogs. If the dog
has significant cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, or hypoadrenocorticism, treatment should be
instituted at 25% of the standard dose, with the
­dosage increased by 25% every two weeks based on
clinical response and postpill testing. Most dogs
show improvement within the first 1–2 weeks, with
increased activity, improved attitude, and partial or
complete resolution of neurologic signs. The cutaneous manifestations of hypothyroidism may take several weeks to months to resolve.
Posttreatment monitoring may be carried out but
clinical response is the most important monitoring
tool. Peak T4 concentrations generally occur 4–6 hours
after administration of levothyroxine and should be in
the high normal to slightly above normal range (40–
70 nmol/L). However, the bioavailability of thyroxine
ranges from 13% to 87% in the same dog from day to
day, bringing into the question the utility of random
postpill monitoring of TT4. It is likely more meaningful
(though more expensive) to measure TSH (especially if
the TSH concentration was elevated pretreatment) or
fT4 concentrations after replacement therapy has been
started, especially in animals that show a poor clinical
response to therapy. Serum TSH concentrations should
be in the normal range or undetectable and fT4 concentrations should be in the normal range. Serum concentrations of TSH and fT4 should not be performed
until the patient has been on supplementation for at
least two weeks. If the patient was initially started on
twice‐daily therapy, treatment can be reduced to once‐
daily treatment when a good clinical response has been
obtained.
Hyperthyroidism is the most common complication of
treatment with levothyroxine, but it is rare in dogs.
Clinical signs are similar to those of hyperthyroidism in
cats and the diagnosis is confirmed by documenting a
substantial elevation of serum T4. Treatment consists of
stopping levothyroxine treatment for 2–3 days, then
instituting treatment at a lower dose.

­Prognosis
Response to therapy should be observed in the first 4–8
weeks post treatment. Improvements in mentation and
physical activity may be noted within the first week
though some abnormalities, especially dermatologic
signs, may take several months to resolve. An absent or
incomplete response to therapy may be due to an incorrect diagnosis, poor owner compliance, inadequate dosing, or poor absorption.

73

VetBooks.ir

74

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

­Further Reading
Bellumori TP, Famula TR, Bannasch DL, Belanger JM,
Oberbauer AM. Prevalence of inherited disorders
among mixed‐breed and purebred dogs: 27,254 cases
(1995–2010). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2013; 242(11):
1549–55.
Lewis VA, Morrow CMK, Jacobsen JA, Lloyd WE. A
pivotal field study to support the registration of
levothyroxine sodium tablets for canine hypothyroidism.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2018; 54: 201–8.
Panciera DL, Purswell BJ, Kolster KA, Werre SR, Trout
SW. Reproductive effects of prolonged experimentally

induced hypothyroidism in bitches. J Vet Intern Med
2012; 26(2): 326–33.
van Dijl IC, Le Traon G, van de Meulengraaf BD, Burgaud
S, Horspool LJ, Kooistra HS. Pharmacokinetics of total
thyroxine after repeated oral administration of
levothyroxine solution and its clinical efficacy in
hypothyroid dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2014; 28: 1229–34.
Ziglioli V, Panciera DL, Troy GC, Monroe WE, Boes KM,
Refsal KR. Effects of levothyroxine administration and
withdrawal on the hypothalamic‐pituitary‐thyroid axis
in euthyroid dogs. Vet Intern Med 2017; 31: 705–10.

VetBooks.ir

75

10
Feline Hyperthyroidism
David S. Bruyette, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)
Anivive Lifesciences, Long Beach, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
and Epidemiology
Two recent large studies have looked at possible environ­
mental or dietary factors involved in the pathogenesis of
hyperthyroidism. One of the studies with a case–control
design looked at 100 cats with hyperthyroidism and 163
control cats. The cats’ medical records were reviewed
and the owners were asked to complete a mailed ques­
tionnaire. Data included demographic variables, envi­
ronmental exposures, and diet to include the preferred
flavors of canned cat food. In this study, housing, expo­
sure to fertilizers, herbicides, regular use of flea prod­
ucts, and the presence of a smoker in the house were not
associated with an increased risk but cats that preferred
fish or liver and giblets flavors of canned cat food had an
increased risk. The results suggested that cats that prefer
to eat certain flavors of canned cat food may have a sig­
nificantly increased risk of hyperthyroidism.
In the second case–control study, owners of 379 hyper­
thyroid and 351 control cats were questioned about their
cats’ exposure to potential risk factors, including breed,
demographic factors, medical history, indoor environ­
ment, chemicals applied to the cat and environment, and
diet. The association between these hypothesized risk
factors and outcome of disease was evaluated. Two
genetically related cat breeds (Siamese and Himalayan)
were found to have diminished risk of developing hyper­
thyroidism. Cats that used litter had higher risk of devel­
oping hyperthyroidism than those that did not. Use of
topical ectoparasite preparations was associated with
increased risk of developing hyperthyroidism. Compared
with cats that did not eat canned food, those that ate
commercially prepared canned food had an approximate
twofold increase in risk of disease. When these four vari­
ables (breed, use of cat litter, consumption of canned cat
food, and use of topical ectoparasite preparations) from

the univariate analysis were selected for further, a persis­
tent protective effect of breed (Siamese or Himalayan)
was found. In addition, results suggested a 2–3‐fold
increase in risk of developing hyperthyroidism among
cats eating a diet composed mostly of canned cat food
and a threefold increase in risk among those using cat
litter. In contrast, the use of commercial flea products
did not retain a strong association. The results of this
study indicate that further research into dietary and
other potentially important environmental factors (cat
litter) is warranted.
Altered G protein expression was found in thyroid
gland tissue from hyperthyroid cats compared to normal
control cats. Adenomatous thyroid glands obtained from
eight hyperthyroid cats and thyroid glands obtained from
four age‐matched euthyroid cats were examined for
expression of G inhibitory protein (Gi) and G stimulatory
protein (Gs). Expression of Gi was significantly reduced
in thyroid gland adenomas from hyperthyroid cats, com­
pared with normal thyroid gland tissue from euthyroid
cats. Expression of Gs was similar between the two
groups. A decrease in expression of Gi in adenomatous
thyroid glands of cats may reduce the negative inhibition
of the cAMP cascade in thyroid cells, leading to autono­
mous growth and hypersecretion of thyroxine. What we
don’t know is what causes the reduction in Gi in hyper­
thyroid cats. The factors mentioned above in the studies
of environmental and dietary risk factors may play a role
in altering the G protein expression found in this study.
Oncogenes and the tumor suppressor gene p53 were
examined in cats with hyperthyroidism. Formalin‐fixed,
paraffin‐embedded thyroid glands from 18 cats diag­
nosed with hyperthyroidism were evaluated immunohis­
tochemically for overexpression of the products of
oncogenes c‐ras (a mitogenic oncogene) and bcl2 (an
apoptosis inhibitor) and the tumor suppressor gene p53.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

76

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

Fourteen thyroid glands from euthyroid cats without his­
tologically detectable thyroid lesions were examined
similarly as controls. Results from these investigations
showed that all cases of nodular follicular hyperplasia/
adenomas stained positively for overexpression of c‐Ras
protein using a mouse monoclonal antihuman pan‐Ras
antibody. The most intensely positively staining regions
were in luminal cells surrounding abortive follicles.
Subjacent thyroid and parathyroid glands from euthy­
roid cats did not stain immunohistochemically for pan‐
Ras. There was no detectable staining for either Bc12 or
p53 in any of the cats. These results indicated that over­
expression of c‐ras was highly associated with areas of
nodular follicular hyperplasia/adenomas of feline thy­
roid glands, and mutations in this oncogene may play a
role in the etiopathogenesis of hyperthyroidism in cats.
As with the study on G protein abnormalities, c‐ras
mutations could either be an initiating cause of hyper­
thyroidism or simply mediate the effects of an as yet uni­
dentified dietary or environmental initiator.
Alterations in the thyrotropin (TSH) receptor were
also examined in cats with hyperthyroidism. The authors
used the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify
codons 480–640 of the previously uncharacterized feline
thyrotropin receptor (TSHR) gene, and determined the
DNA sequence in this transmembrane domain region.
They then analyzed single‐stranded conformational pol­
ymorphisms in thyroid DNA from 11 sporadic cases of
feline thyrotoxicosis and leukocyte DNA from two cases
of familial feline thyrotoxicosis. They also determined
the DNA sequence of this region of the TSHR in five of
the cases of sporadic feline thyrotoxicosis and the two
familial thyrotoxic cats. The normal feline TSHR
sequence between codons 480 and 640 is highly homolo­
gous to that of other mammalian TSHRs, with 95%, 92%,
and 90% amino acid identity between the feline receptor
and canine, human, and bovine TSHRs, respectively.
Thyroid gland DNA from 11 cats with sporadic thyro­
toxicosis did not have mutations in this region of the
TSHR gene. Leukocyte DNA from two littermates with
familial feline thyrotoxicosis did not harbor mutations of
this region of the TSHR gene. These studies suggested
that TSHR gene mutations are likely not involved in
feline hyperthyroidism.
Since its first description in 1979, the incidence of
hyperthyroidism has dramatically increased, prompting
veterinarians and researchers to hypothesize whether
exposure to environmental thyroid‐disruptor chemicals
or other environmental, genetic or dietary factors
are involved in the pathogenesis of hyperthyroidism.
Potential exposure to several substances has been impli­
cated, including organohalogen compounds such as pol­
ychlorinated biphenyls and polybrominated diphenyl
ethers, fertilizers, soy isoflavones, bisphenol‐A primarily

released from “pop‐top” canned cat food lids, and con­
sumption of commercial canned food. One theory as to
why the number and percentage of unexpected outliers
becomes accelerated over the age of 9 years is that it may
take several years of exposure to such environmental,
dietary, and genetic factors before they express them­
selves clinically and hyperthyroidism ensues, although
this topic requires further investigation.

­History and Clinical Signs
With time, we have seen both an increase in the diagno­
sis of hyperthyroidism and a decrease in the severity of
the clinical signs associated with thyrotoxicosis. This is
most likely due to an increased awareness on the part of
the pet owner and the veterinarian as well as the
increased use of T4 concentrations as an integral part of
routine feline health screening. We have also seen addi­
tional work on some of the less obvious manifestations of
hyperthyroidism such as hypertension which may be
clinically silent and/or present initially with ocular signs,
as well as the effects of hyperthyroidism on the cardio­
vascular and renal system (to be discussed later).
As stated earlier, the clinical signs associated with
hyperthyroidism have been decreasing in severity over
the years (Box 10.1). A paper examined the electrocar­
diographic and radiographic changes seen in hyperthy­
roid cats today versus those seen 10–12 years ago. Two
populations (1992–1993 and 1979–1982) of confirmed
hyperthyroid cats were compared to determine whether
the incidence of certain cardiovascular specific manifes­
tations of feline thyrotoxicosis had experienced similar
changes. Sinus tachycardia, which is the most commonly
recognized cardiac manifestation of feline thyrotoxico­
sis, was not as prevalent in the 1993 group when com­
pared to the 1982 group. This was also true for the
finding of an increased R‐wave amplitude on lead II elec­
trocardiography. Both groups had a similar low inci­
dence of atrial and ventricular dysrhythmias; however,
the 1993 group had a significantly higher occurrence of
right bundle branch block. Thoracic radiographs were
deemed necessary in a larger proportion of the 1982
group compared to the 1993 group. Although there were
Box 10.1 Clinical signs of feline hyperthyroidism
Weight loss and poor hair coat
Aggressive or “cranky” behavior
Periodic vomiting
Polyuria and polydipsia
Increased appetite, activity, restlessness, and heart rate
Occasionally, difficulty breathing, weakness, and depression

VetBooks.ir

10 Feline Hyperthyroidism

no significant differences in radiographically defined
cardiac size between the two groups, a larger number of
cats in the 1982 group had evidence of congestive heart
failure. These findings suggest that feline hyperthyroid­
ism is being diagnosed earlier and with less severe clini­
cal signs than when studied a decade ago.

­Diagnosis
Diagnosis most often is based on the presence of one
or more typical clinical signs and increased serum total
thyroxine (T4) concentration. However, up to 10% of
all hyperthyroid cats and 40% of those with mild dis­
ease have serum T4 values within reference range. The
diagnosis of hyperthyroidism should not be excluded
on the basis of a single normal serum T4 value, espe­
cially in a cat with typical clinical signs, a palpable thy­
roid nodule and serum T4 in the upper half of the
normal range. In these cases, serum free T4 (fT4),
measured by equilibrium dialysis, may provide an
alternative means of diagnosing hyperthyroidism in
cats with normal serum total T4 values. Studies docu­
ment that up to 20% of sick euthyroid cats can have
increased fT4 concentration. Therefore, it is most
appropriate and reliable to interpret the two values
together. Mid‐to‐high reference range total T4 and
increased fT4 concentration are consistent with hyper­
thyroidism. In contrast, low total T44and increased fT4
values are usually associated with nonthyroidal illness.
In cases where a strong index of suspicion exists for
hyperthyroidism and test results are equivocal, thyroid
imaging can be of benefit.

­Treatment
Once hyperthyroidism has been diagnosed, all manage­
ment options (thyroidectomy, radioactive iodine,
antithyroid drugs, nutritional management) should
be discussed with pet owners. All options can be ≥90%
effective for controlling hyperthyroidism when used
appropriately. The selected management option will
differ for each cat based on several considerations
(Table 10.1). Radioactive iodine therapy is considered
the gold standard for treatment of hyperthyroidism but
most pet owners currently opt for medical manage­
ment. Until recently, this included oral or transdermal
antithyroid drugs. Now nutritional management using
a limited‐iodine food is another option for cats with
hyperthyroidism.
Radioactive Iodine
Radioiodine treatment is often considered the best
option for many hyperthyroid cats because:
it has the potential to eliminate a benign thyroid tumor
or abnormal thyroid tissue with a single treatment
●● it treats extrathyroidal thyroid tissue, which may occur
in 10–20% of hyperthyroid cats
●● no general anesthesia is required
●● reported side‐effects are minimal.
●●

Cats should be stable prior to radioiodine therapy; those
with clinically significant cardiovascular, renal, gastroin­
testinal, or endocrine (e.g., diabetes mellitus) disease
may not be very good candidates, especially because of
the time necessary for boarding after treatment.

Table 10.1 Advantages/disadvantages of options for managing cats with hyperthyroidism
Option

Advantages

Disadvantages

Thyroidectomy

Cures current tumor

High initial costs
Requires anesthesia
Hospitalization required
Risk of postoperative hypocalcaemia
Irreversible

Radioactive iodine

Cures current tumor
Single treatment
Effective for ectopic tissue
Side‐effects uncommon

High initial costs
Limited availability
Hospitalization required
Irreversible

Antithyroid drugs

Routinely available
Reversible
Costs spread over time

Not curative (controls T4 and signs)
Daily administration needed
Drug side‐effects

Limited‐iodine food

Routinely available
Reversible
Costs spread over time

Not curative (controls T4 and signs)
Cat can only eat a single food

77

VetBooks.ir

78

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

After administration, radioactive iodine is actively
concentrated by the thyroid gland and has a half‐life of
eight days. It emits both beta‐particles and gamma‐radi­
ation; the beta‐particles are responsible for the majority
of tissue destruction, but are only locally destructive,
traveling a maximum of 2 mm. Therefore, no significant
damage to adjacent parathyroid tissue, atrophic thyroid
tissue, or other cervical structures is expected. The main
limitation to widespread use of radioactive iodine is the
requirement for special licensing and the isolation of the
cat for variable periods after treatment. This can range
from several days to several weeks depending on state or
local radiation regulations and the dose administered.
The goal of treatment is to restore euthyroidism
with the smallest possible single dose of radioactive
iodine, while avoiding development of hypothyroid­
ism. Controversy exists as to the best method of calcu­
lating the optimum dose for individual cats. Based on
the majority of reported cases, posttreatment hypothy­
roidism is transient and generally uncommon (2–7% of
cases); even fewer cats have clinical signs or appear to
require thyroid hormone replacement. However, up to
30% (50 of 165 cats) were hypothyroid three months
after radioactive iodine therapy in one study; of these,
56% (19 of 34 hypothyroid cats with available informa­
tion) had clinical signs of hypothyroidism and 52% (23
of 44 cats) were given thyroid hormone supplementa­
tion. Thyroid hormone replacement may be needed in
some cats, especially those with concurrent kidney dis­
ease, since hypothyroidism has been associated with
azotemia and decreased survival time in previously
hyperthyroid cats. Owners should be advised of this
possibility, particularly if their motivation is to avoid
long‐term oral medication.
Antithyroid Drugs
Antithyroid drugs (e.g., methimazole, carbimazole) are
commonly used for treatment of hyperthyroidism in
cats. If administered appropriately, they reliably inhibit
the synthesis of thyroid hormones and thereby lower
serum thyroid hormone concentrations. These drugs
do not affect the thyroid gland’s ability to trap inorganic
iodide or release preformed hormones. They are widely
recommended to stabilize hyperthyroid cats prior to
surgery and are the only drugs that can be used chroni­
cally for management of hyperthyroidism. Almost all
cats are potential candidates unless thyroid carcinoma
is suspected.
Antithyroid drugs used most often in cats include
methimazole and carbimazole; both can be given orally
or formulated for transdermal application. Custom for­
mulation of transdermal products may increase the
expense of therapy and stability of the product is not

guaranteed. Results of a recent prospective study con­
ducted in New Zealand showed that once‐daily treat­
ment for 12 weeks with transdermal methimazole in a
novel lipophilic vehicle was as effective as twice‐daily
carbimazole administered orally.
While many cats have been successfully managed
long term with antithyroid drugs, it is important to
monitor for potential side‐effects that have been associ­
ated with their use. In the study with the largest number
of cats, 18% had side‐effects associated with methima­
zole; a more recent study revealed that 44% of 39 cats
had side‐effects. In 44 cats receiving carbimazole for
one year, 44% had associated side‐effects, with gastroin­
testinal signs (decreased appetite, vomiting, diarrhea)
being most common. In another study, 13% of 39 cats
treated with carbimazole experienced side‐effects. It is
difficult to determine what percentage of side‐effects
are caused by the drug versus something else such as
concurrent disease.
Most adverse reactions occur within the first few
weeks to months after beginning therapy and include
depression, inappetence, vomiting, and self‐induced
excoriations of the head and neck (facial pruritus).
Gastrointestinal signs are less common with transder­
mal administration of methimazole. Mild to serious
hematologic complications, including agranulocytosis
and thrombocytopenia either alone or concurrently,
and more rarely immune‐mediated hemolytic anemia
may also occur. Hepatic toxicity with marked increases
in bilirubin concentration and hepatic enzyme activi­
ties has been described in less than 2% of cats treated
with methimazole. Cessation of therapy is required if
either serious hematologic or hepatic reactions develop.
Serum antinuclear antibodies develop in approximately
50% of cats treated with methimazole for longer than six
months, usually in cats on high‐dose therapy (>15 mg/
day). Although clinical signs of a lupus‐like syndrome
have not been reported, decreasing the daily dosage is
recommended.
Nutritional Management
Production of thyroid hormone requires uptake by the
thyroid gland of sufficient amounts of iodine, which is
provided by dietary intake. The only function for ingested
iodine is for thyroid hormone synthesis. This observa­
tion led to the hypothesis that limiting dietary iodine
intake could be used to control thyroid hormone pro­
duction and potentially manage hyperthyroidism in cats.
After more than a decade of research and development,
a limited‐iodine therapeutic food (Hill’s® Prescription
Diet® y/dTM Feline) containing <0.3 ppm (mg/kg) iodine
on a dry matter basis (DMB) is now available as an option
for managing cats with hyperthyroidism.

VetBooks.ir

10 Feline Hyperthyroidism

Three studies were designed to determine the magni­
tude of iodine control necessary to return newly diagnosed
cats to a euthyroid state; the maximum level of dietary
iodine that maintains cats in a euthyroid state; and the
effectiveness of a therapeutic food formulated based on the
previous studies to control naturally occurring hyperthy­
roidism in cats. In summary, results of these studies
demonstrated that a food with 0.17 or 0.32 ppm iodine
(DMB) maintained normal thyroid hormone concentra­
tions in hyperthyroid cats, helping to further define the
range of iodine effective for managing hyperthyroidism.
After confirming the diagnosis and performing a thor­
ough patient evaluation, nutritional management should
be discussed along with other options for managing
hyperthyroidism. If selected as the management option,
gradual transition to the limited‐iodine food over at least
seven days is recommended. It is very important to
counsel owners so they understand that success of nutri­
tional management depends on the limited‐iodine food
being the sole source of nutrition for their cat.
The first recheck evaluation should be done four weeks
after completing the transition to y/d Feline (i.e., once
the cat has eaten y/d exclusively for four weeks) and as a
minimum should include physical examination and
measurement of T4, BUN, serum creatinine, and urine
specific gravity. All cats should have decreased T4 con­
centrations compared with baseline and many will have
returned to normal by the four‐week evaluation. Clinical
improvement including weight gain, improved hair coat,
and decreased tachycardia/cardiac murmur also may be
noted by the first evaluation. Clinical signs should con­
tinue improving by the next reevaluation at eight weeks
and most cats will be euthyroid. Some require slightly
longer to become euthyroid but it is expected that 90%
will have normal T4 concentrations if the limited‐iodine
food is their sole source of nutrition.
If euthyroidism is not achieved within 4–12 weeks, a
thorough history is indicated to confirm that only the
limited‐iodine food is being fed.
Managing Hyperthyroid Cats with Concurrent
Kidney Disease
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) and hyperthyroidism are
more likely to be diagnosed in older cats so it is not sur­
prising that many hyperthyroid cats have CKD. Untreated
hyperthyroidism complicates the diagnosis of CKD
because it is associated with increased glomerular filtra­
tion rate (GFR) and therefore often masks biochemical
markers of CKD. Regardless of the therapeutic modality
(methimazole, surgical thyroidectomy, or radioiodine),
decreased GFR, increased serum urea and creatinine
concentrations, and development of overt clinical signs
of kidney disease have been reported after successful

treatment of hyperthyroidism. The presence of underly­
ing CKD may affect the prognosis; one study docu­
mented a shorter survival time in hyperthyroid cats with
azotemia. However, two recent studies comparing sur­
vival of cats that developed azotemia with those that did
not after treatment of hyperthyroidism found no signifi­
cant difference between the two groups if cats did not
become hypothyroid post treatment.
The reported occurrence of azotemia after treatment
of hyperthyroidism ranges from 15% to 49%. Iatrogenic
hypothyroidism has been reported to decrease GFR in
human patients. Posttreatment iatrogenic hypothyroid­
ism has been reported in cats after radioiodine therapy
and bilateral thyroidectomy, which constituted the pre­
dominant therapeutic modalities in previous studies.
In one recent study, cats with iatrogenic biochemical
hypothyroidism were almost twice as likely to develop
azotemia post treatment as euthyroid cats. The hypothy­
roid cats with azotemia had shorter survival times than
those without azotemia, whereas, consistent with previ­
ous reports, there was no difference in survival times of
euthyroid cats with or without azotemia.
It is not possible to consistently predict which cats will
develop overt CKD after treatment of hyperthyroidism
or have progression of their kidney disease. This should
be considered when deciding on treatment options, par­
ticularly those that are irreversible (thyroidectomy, radi­
oactive iodine). Regardless of the option selected for
managing hyperthyroidism, it is important to remember
that the only intervention shown to improve quality of
life and prolong survival time in cats with naturally
occurring CKD is feeding a therapeutic renal food. Until
the recent availability of limited‐iodine food, nutritional
recommendations have not generally been considered
for hyperthyroid cats without azotemia. In cats with
compromised renal function but without azotemia (IRIS
Stage 1), the decrease in GFR associated with normaliz­
ing serum T4 levels may be sufficient to prevent effective
clearing of protein metabolic by‐products (BUN and cre­
atinine) when dietary intake of protein and phosphorus
is high. This could contribute to the occurrence of post­
therapy azotemia in hyperthyroid cats.

­Prognosis
Although older studies report survival times of two years
after diagnosis, more recent data show that cats without
concurrent CKD have a median survival of 5.3 years.
Untreated hyperthyroidism is a progressive disease that
can lead to significant morbidity and mortality. Morbidity
and mortality in well‐managed hyperthyroid cats are
more strongly influenced by the presence and severity of
the co‐morbid disease than the hyperthyroidism itself.

79

VetBooks.ir

80

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

­Further Reading
Carney, Ward CR, Bailey, et al. 2016 AAFP guidelines for
the management of feline hyperthyroidism. J Feline Med
Surg 2016; 18(5): 400–16.
Lucy JM, Peterson ME, Randolph JF, et al. Efficacy of low‐
dose (2 millicurie) versus standard‐dose (4 millicurie)
radioiodine treatment for cats with mild‐to‐moderate
hyperthyroidism. J Vet Intern Med 2017; 31(2): 326–34.
Peterson ME, Nichols R, Rishniw M. Serum thyroxine and
thyroid‐stimulating hormone concentration in
hyperthyroid cats that develop azotaemia after radioiodine
therapy. J Small Anim Pract 2017; 58(9): 519–30.

Walter KM, Lin YP, Kass P, Puschner B. Association
of polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) and
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) with hyper­
thyroidism in domestic felines, sentinels for
thyroid hormone disruption. BMC Vet Res 2017;
13(1): 120.
Watson N, Murray JK, Fonfara S, Hibbert A.
Clinicopathological features and comorbidities of cats
with mild, moderate or severe hyperthyroidism: a
radioiodine referral population. J Feline Med Surg
2018; 20(12): 1130–7.

VetBooks.ir

81

11
Hypoadrenocorticism in Dogs and Cats
Patty Lathan, VMD, DACVIM (SAIM)
Mississippi State University, College of Veterinary Medicine, Mississippi State, MS, USA

­Hypoadrenocorticism in Dogs
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Primary hypoadrenocorticism (Addison disease, HOAC)
results from the destruction of >90% of the adrenal cortex. Clinical signs are due to both cortisol and aldosterone deficiency in the majority of patients, although some
patients only have signs of cortisol deficiency (atypical
hypoadrenocorticism).
Aldosterone is the major mineralocorticoid secreted
by the outermost layer of the adrenal cortex, the zona glomerulosa. Its main activities are the conservation of
sodium and water, and excretion of potassium and hydrogen ions (acid), from the distal renal tubules. Aldosterone
secretion is primarily regulated by the renin‐angiotensin‐
aldosterone system, but secretion can also be stimulated
by hyperkalemia. In patients with hypoadrenocorticism
and subsequent aldosterone deficiency, hyperkalemia,
hyponatremia, and hypovolemia are common.
Cortisol is the major glucocorticoid produced by the
innermost layers of the adrenal cortex, the zonae fasciculata and reticularis. Its functions include stimulation of
gluconeogenesis and erythropoiesis, suppression of the
inflammatory response, and maintenance of gastrointestinal mucosal integrity. Cortisol also helps the body deal
with stress. In dogs with HOAC, cortisol deficiency often
results in lethargy, gastrointestinal signs, hypoglycemia,
and anemia.
Cortisol release is regulated by the hypothalamic‐
pituitary‐adrenal axis (HPAA). During times of stress
(emotional, physiologic, other), corticotropin‐releasing
hormone (CRH) is secreted from the hypothalamus,
and stimulates the release of adrenocorticotropic
­hormone (ACTH) from the pituitary gland. ACTH then
stimulates cortisol secretion from the adrenal cortex.
Cortisol has a negative feedback effect on both the

­pituitary and hypothalamus, such that ACTH and CRH
production are decreased when adequate cortisol concentrations are present.
Most naturally occurring cases of primary hypoadrenocorticism in dogs are idiopathic, likely due to immune‐
mediated destruction of the adrenal cortex. Rarely,
infiltration of the adrenal cortex by fungus, neoplasia,
other granulomatous disease, or amyloidosis has been
reported. Trauma, hemorrhage, and infarction may also
lead to Addison disease, as can drugs used to treat hyperadrenocorticism. Although proper use of mitotane usually leads to necrosis of only the zonae fasciculata and
reticularis, improper monitoring, or use in a particularly
sensitive patient, can result in destruction of all three
layers of the cortex, causing both cortisol and aldosterone deficiency. Trilostane is an enzyme inhibitor that
decreases cortisol concentrations, but also decreases
aldosterone concentrations to a lesser extent. It can lead
to cortisol deficiency and, occasionally, aldosterone
deficiency. Additionally, trilostane has been reported to
cause idiosyncratic adrenocortical necrosis, resulting in
both cortisol and aldosterone deficiency.
Secondary hypoadrenocorticism can be caused by
either a pituitary lesion, resulting in ACTH deficiency, or
iatrogenically. Iatrogenic secondary hypoadrenocorticism is caused by abrupt cessation of exogenous glucocorticoids following long‐term use. Long‐term use of
glucocorticoids suppresses production of ACTH.
Without the trophic effects of ACTH, the zonae fasciculata and reticularis atrophy. When the exogenous glucocorticoid is abruptly discontinued (not tapered), ACTH
production occurs, but the adrenal cortex is atrophied
and incapable of producing adequate amounts of cortisol. Thus, signs of cortisol deficiency occur. Aldosterone
deficiency is not present in cases of secondary hypoadrenocorticism, since ACTH has little regulatory control
of aldosterone production.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

82

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

Epidemiology
Hypoadrenocorticism affects approximately 1/2000
dogs. Dogs with other immune‐mediated endocrinopathies, such as hypothyroidism and diabetes mellitus, are
at increased risk.
Signalment

Young to middle‐aged female dogs are predisposed to
Addison disease, although dogs at any age may be affected,
with some studies revealing a more equal distribution
between sexes. Poodles of all sizes, West Highland white
terriers, Great Danes, bearded collies, Portuguese water
dogs, Leonbergers, and Nova Scotia duck‐tolling retrievers (NSDTRs) are predisposed. Notably, NSDTRs may
develop clinical signs at a very young age (as young as 2
months). Heritability has been proven in standard poodles, bearded collies, and NSDTRs.
History and Clinical Signs
The clinical manifestation of hypoadrenocorticism is
highly variable in presenting complaint, chronicity, and
severity. Whereas some dogs present with chronic signs,
others present acutely, in an “Addisonian crisis.” The
pathophysiology for chronic and acute hypoadrenocorticism is the same, and these presentations represent a
continuum of disease progression. If not diagnosed and
treated early in the course of disease, dogs with chronic
signs may present in crisis.
Addison’s disease often causes vague, nonspecific
clinical signs that can be confused with other diseases,
thus its nickname “The Great Pretender.” Nonspecific
signs such as lethargy, inappetence, and weight loss
occur in most patients. A waxing and waning pattern, with exacerbations following stressful events or
improvement following fluid or steroid administration,
is often noted.
Gastrointestinal signs, including vomiting and diarrhea, are common and likely due to the loss of “trophic”
effects of cortisol on the gastrointestinal mucosa. Melena
and/or hematochezia, and abdominal pain, may be
reported by the owners or found on rectal examination.
Exacerbation or onset of gastrointestinal (GI) signs following a stressful event is often reported in dogs later
diagnosed with Addison disease, so HOAC should be
considered in patients with recurrent “stress colitis,” particularly if accompanied by other GI signs, lethargy, or
weakness.
Renal loss of sodium and water, and the resulting decreased
renal medullary concentration gradient due to hyponatremia, sometimes lead to polyuria and polydipsia. Rarely,
seizures due to hypoglycemia occur, and HOAC should be
ruled out in all dogs with unexplained hypoglycemia.

Less common clinical signs include generalized or
hindlimb muscle weakness, megaesophagus (ME), and
muscle cramping. The etiology of these abnormalities
is unclear, but is probably due to aberrant neuromuscular function caused by deranged electrolyte concentrations and/or hypocortisolemia. Muscle weakness can
be severe, and the patient may present for inability to
rise. Generalized debility could explain the weakness,
but some of these dogs are specifically weaker in the
hindlimbs. Regurgitation due to ME is a rare presentation for hypoadrenocorticism, but since the ME usually
resolves with appropriate treatment, HOAC should be
ruled out in all cases of ME.
Hair loss or a change in hair coat color are observed
occasionally in dogs with hypoadrenocorticism, but the
cause is unknown. Hypothyroidism should be ruled out
in these patients following initial management of HOAC.
Approximately 30% of dogs with Addison disease present in hypovolemic shock, or Addisonian crisis. In addition to the aforementioned clinical signs, especially
vomiting, diarrhea, and GI bleeding, these dogs sometimes experience collapse and/or severe generalized
weakness. Classic signs of hypovolemic shock are usually
present, including weak pulse, pale mucous membranes,
and prolonged capillary refill time. Some dogs are also
hypothermic. Heart rate is variable. Whereas most hypovolemic non‐Addisonian dogs are tachycardic (>160
bpm), patients in an Addisonian crisis often have a normal to decreased heart rate. This is due to the effects of
hyperkalemia on cardiac conduction. The presence of a
decreased or normal heart rate in a patient in hypovolemic shock (“relative bradycardia”) should raise suspicion of hyperkalemia and hypoadrenocorticism. In
patients with cardiac changes associated with hyperkalemia, rapid treatment and correction are critical for
the survival of the patient.
Gastrointestinal bleeding, including melena and hematochezia, is frequently seen during crisis. It may be
­present initially or appear within 2–3 days of presentation. Progressively decreasing hematocrit during treatment should increase suspicion of melena, and the
possibility of GI bleeding should not be excluded despite
the absence of melena or hematochezia on the initial
examination. Hospitalization is recommended until the
hematocrit stabilizes or increases. GI blood loss is occasionally severe enough to require blood transfusion.
Diagnosis
Since dogs with HOAC often present with nonspecific
signs, most of the diagnostics are performed early in the
work‐up, prior to significant suspicion of hypoadrenocorticism. A complete blood count, serum biochemistry
analysis, and urinalysis should be performed in each

VetBooks.ir

11 Hypoadrenocorticism in Dogs and Cats

patient with clinical signs consistent with hypoadrenocorticism. Electrolyte analysis must be included in the
minimum database, as sodium and potassium abnormalities are often the first specific indicators of HOAC, and
electrolyte disturbances are common in patients with
gastrointestinal signs of any etiology, and need to be
addressed during treatment.
Serum Biochemistry, Urinalysis, and Complete
Blood Count

Most dogs with HOAC are hyperkalemic and hyponatremic at diagnosis. Dogs with “atypical” hypoadrenocorticism are not (see Atypical Hypoadrenocorticism
later). Potassium concentrations usually remain below
8 mEq/L, but may be as high as 11 mEq/L. Sodium concentrations are usually 120–140 mEq/L, but may be as
low as 100 mEq/L. Some dogs present with one abnormality without the other (e.g., hyponatremia without
hyperkalemia). Hypochloremia follows hyponatremia in
about half the patients. Metabolic acidosis is also common, due to the inability to excrete H+ ions from the distal tubule.
Electrolyte abnormalities are not always detected early
in the course of the disease, and may appear as disease
progresses. Emphasis is sometimes placed on calculation
of the Na+/K+ ratio. The lower the sodium and the
higher the potassium concentration, the lower the ratio.
Although lower ratios make HOAC more likely, a high
ratio does not rule it out, and dogs with low ratios do not
always have HOAC. Therefore, the utility of the ratio is
questionable. Any dog with hyponatremia and/or hyperkalemia should be considered a suspect for HOAC,
regardless of the ratio.
Most patients experience some degree of azotemia,
with increased BUN (90% of dogs) and creatinine (65%).
This is due to a combination of decreased renal perfusion from hypovolemia, and GI blood loss (increased
BUN). Phosphorus is usually increased, as well. Although
the azotemia is primarily pre-renal in nature, most dogs
with HOAC have a urine specific gravity <1.030 (often
<1.020), which is more dilute than expected with prerenal azotemia alone. For this reason, and the presence of
hyperkalemia and hyponatremia, some Addisonian
patients are initially misdiagnosed with acute kidney
injury (AKI). Given the difference in prognosis and treatment, clinicians must consider HOAC in every suspected
AKI patient, especially if the dog has a history of gastrointestinal signs. Severe azotemia caused by HOAC usually resolves quickly following appropriate rehydration.
Primary renal damage is possible with prolonged hypovolemia, but most Addisonian patients recover renal
function. Conversely, patients with AKI take much
longer or never improve. Additionally, significant hyperkalemia and hyponatremia rarely occur in polyuric AKI

patients, but often occur in anuric and oliguric AKI
dogs. Addisonians may initially present with physiologic
oliguria (appropriately decreased urine production in
the face of hypovolemia and/or dehydration). However,
rehydration results in polyuria. Thus, if a hypovolemic,
azotemic, hyperkalemic, hyponatremic dog has significant improvement of attitude and becomes polyuric
upon rehydration, HOAC should be strongly considered
as a differential diagnosis.
Hypocholesterolemia and hypoalbuminemia occur in
approximately 10% and 15% dogs with HOAC, respectively. Both might be due to decreased hepatic production and GI malabsorption. GI blood loss exacerbates the
hypoalbuminemia in some cases.
Hypoglycemia is present in about 15% of HOAC
dogs, probably due to decreased gluconeogenesis and
increased insulin sensitivity. It is usually subclinical, but
occasionally can be severe enough to result in seizures.
Thus, hypoadrenocorticism should be a differential diagnosis in adult dogs with unexplained hypoglycemia.
Total and ionized hypercalcemia occurs in about 30%
of Addisonians. It is not usually the presenting complaint, but HOAC should be considered a differential
diagnosis in hypercalcemic patients.
Increased alanine aminotransferase (ALT), alkaline
phosphatase (ALP), and aspartate aminotransferase
(AST) are also frequently seen (20–30%) in HOAC
dogs, possibly secondary to hepatic hypoperfusion and
cholestasis.
At diagnosis, about 30% of Addisonian dogs are anemic. This increases to 70% following rehydration. It is
usually a mild normochromic, normocytic, nonregenerative anemia, and GI blood loss should be suspected
in patients with severe anemia. The lack of a stress
­leukogram (neutrophilia, lymphocytosis, monocytosis,
and eosinopenia) in a sick dog is suggestive of HOAC.
Occasionally, lymphocytosis and eosinophilia occur
(10%), but neutropenia is rare.
Diagnostic Imaging

Diagnostic imaging is not required to diagnose HOAC in
most patients, but abdominal imaging is often performed
in the initial work‐up of patients with gastrointestinal
signs. Imaging is recommended, however, in Addisonian
patients that do not respond to appropriate therapy. These
patients may have concurrent disease or HOAC due to
infiltrative disease (e.g., neoplasia or fungal disease invading the adrenal cortex).
In patients with primary idiopathic HOAC, abdominal
radiographs and ultrasound may reveal a small liver, consistent with hypovolemia. Adrenal gland length and thickness might be smaller than in normal dogs, but the overlap
in adrenal size between normal and HOAC patients does
not allow definitive differentiation. Thoracic radiographs

83

VetBooks.ir

84

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

often reveal nonspecific signs of hypovolemia, including
microcardia. Megaesophagus is seen infrequently.
Electrocardiogram

Additional diagnostics for patients that present in hypovolemic shock include blood pressure measurement and
electrocardiography. ECG abnormalities are caused by
hyperkalemia. Although rigid criteria associating specific ECG findings with specific potassium concentrations do not exist, cardiac effects are rarely seen when
K+ <7.0 mEq/L, and frequently observed when K+
>9 mEq/L (and may be fatal). With increasing severity of
hyperkalemia, ECG changes may include increased
T‐wave amplitude (“spiked” T wave), shortened Q‐T interval, decreased P‐wave amplitude, prolonged P‐R interval, absent P‐wave, severe bradycardia, and asystole.
Bizarre QRS complexes, including ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation, may also occur. Patients
with ECG abnormalities require immediate interventions to prevent progression to a fatal arrhythmia.
Endocrine Diagnostics

The ACTH stimulation test is required for definitive diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism. A baseline
cortisol concentration alone can help rule out the
­
­diagnosis of HOAC, but cannot be used to definitely
diagnose it.
During an ACTH stimulation test, a supraphysiologic
dose of ACTH is administered, and the cortisol concentration is measured 1–2 hours later. In a dog with normally functioning adrenal glands, ACTH should cause a
significant increase in cortisol concentration. In HOAC
dogs, minimal to no increase in cortisol will occur.
To perform an ACTH stimulation test, a baseline
serum sample is first obtained. Then, 1 μg/kg (up to
250 μg/dog) of synthetic ACTH (cosyntropin or tetracosactrin) is administered intravenously. One hour later,
another serum sample is obtained. Cortisol concentration is then measured in both pre‐ and post‐ACTH
serum samples.
Protocols for the ACTH stimulation test vary when
testing for HOAC or hyperadrenocorticism. The use of
compounded ACTH gel is not recommended for the
diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism, due to inconsistent
results. Additionally, since dogs with HOAC are often
hypovolemic, intramuscular administration of ACTH is
not recommended.
The diagnosis of HOAC requires a post‐ACTH cortisol concentration <2 μg/dL (55 nmol/L), with a post‐
ACTH cortisol concentration >2 μg/dL ruling out the
diagnosis. Rarely, dogs with HOAC have a post-stimulation cortisol between 2 and 3 µg/dL. Note that this test
does not differentiate between primary, secondary, and
iatrogenic Addison disease. However, iatrogenic HOAC,

due to long‐term administration of glucocorticoids,
should be identified based on historical findings.
Administration of glucocorticoids prior to an ACTH
stimulation test can interfere with and/or cause
decreased response to the test. Most synthetic glucocorticoids, including prednisone and methylprednisolone,
cross‐react with the cortisol assay, which can result in
falsely increased cortisol concentrations. Dexamethasone
and triamcinolone do not. Thus, if a steroid is given just
prior to the test, dexamethasone is recommended. Other
short‐acting glucocorticoids (such as prednisone) should
be withheld for 12–24 hours prior to the test. Longer‐
acting glucocorticoids, such as methylprednisolone acetate, should be withheld for at least four weeks prior to
the test to avoid cross‐reactivity.
Administration of glucocorticoids decreases endogenous ACTH concentrations, which causes atrophy of the
adrenal cortex (fasciculata and reticularis). A blunted
cortisol response during the ACTH stimulation test is
expected in patients that have received glucocorticoids
(oral, parenteral, or topical) within a month of the test, or
longer if longer‐acting glucocorticoids (such as methylprednisolone acetate) have been administered. A poststimulation cortisol between 2 μg/dL and 5 μg/dL is often
the result of recent steroid administration and not
hypoadrenocorticism.
One way to save money with ACTH stimulation
tests is to freeze the unused portion of a vial of cosyntropin. Cosyntropin can be frozen in plastic syringes
(not glass, as it binds to ACTH) for up to six months.
The use of a frost‐free freezer is not recommended, as
the effect of the freeze/thaw cycles on the ACTH is
unknown.
A baseline cortisol concentration is a less expensive
way to rule out hypoadrenocorticism. Since the cortisol
concentration in almost any patient with HOAC is <2 μg/
dL, a baseline cortisol concentration of >2 μg/dL rules
out the diagnosis in most dogs. However, if the patient
has a baseline cortisol concentration <2 μg/dL, an ACTH
stimulation test is required for definitive diagnosis of
HOAC.
For the definitive diagnosis of primary hypoadrenocorticism, a potential alternative to the ACTH stimulation test is the cortisol‐to‐ACTH ratio (CAR). Since
dogs with HOAC have low cortisol concentrations and
high ACTH concentrations (due to lack of negative
feedback), the CAR is significantly lower in patients
with hypoadrenocorticism than in normal dogs or dogs
with nonadrenal illness (Lathan et al, 2014, JVIM).
Unfortunately, there is some overlap between dogs with
Addison’s and dogs with non-adrenal illness (Boretti
et al, JVIM, 2015). Thus, at this time, the CAR cannot be
recommended for definitive diagnosis of HOAC when
synthetic cosyntropin is available.

VetBooks.ir

11 Hypoadrenocorticism in Dogs and Cats

Therapy
Acute Management

Patients with hypoadrenocorticism fall along a continuum of disease. While some patients present in hypovolemic shock with severe hyperkalemia, most are less
critical, but require intravenous fluids and other supportive therapy. The most severe cases (true Addisonian
crises) will be discussed in this section.
The initial goal of treatment of Addisonian crisis is
to correct hypovolemia, hyperkalemia and associated
arrhythmias, hypoglycemia, and acidosis. Aggressive
intravenous fluid resuscitation is the top priority. In
addition to correcting hypovolemia, it also helps treat
hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, hypochloremia, and acidosis. One‐third of a shock bolus of crystalloids is
given initially, and response is assessed based on heart
rate, pulse quality/blood pressure, capillary refill time,
and mental status. Additional fluids are then given as
necessary.
Historically, 0.9% NaCl has been recommended as the
fluid of choice, since it contains sodium and chloride
but no potassium. However, Normosol‐R®, Plasma‐Lyte
A®, and/or lactated Ringer’s solution (LRS) are preferred
by some clinicians, since they are more alkalinizing
than saline, thus correcting acidosis more efficiently.
Although they contain a small amount of potassium,
these crystalloids still allow for correction of hyperkalemia via dilution and increased renal perfusion.
Hydroxyethyl starch can also be used in conjunction
with crystalloids for more rapid fluid resuscitation, at a
dosage of 5–10 mL/kg.
Sodium concentration should not be increased by more
than 0.5 mEq/kg/h, as myelinolysis may occur with more
rapid correction. Thus, hypertonic saline should not be
used to treat an Addisonian crisis. Normosol‐R, Plasma‐
Lyte A, and LRS all have lower sodium concentrations
than 0.9% saline (140 mEq/L, 140 mEq/L, 130 mEq/L, and
154 mEq/L, respectively). Their use is sometimes preferred in patients with severe hyponatremia, as they are
less likely to increase the serum sodium concentration as
rapidly as 0.9% saline.
Hyperkalemia is often the most life‐threatening consequence of HOAC, and must be addressed immediately.
Mild to moderate hyperkalemia usually responds to fluid
therapy alone. However, severe hyperkalemia (>9 mEq/L)
and/or hyperkalemia accompanied by life‐threatening
arrhythmias (severe bradycardia, absent P‐waves, idioventricular rhythm) require specific therapy.
Calcium gluconate is given for its cardioprotective
effects, allowing time for fluids and other therapies to
take effect. However, it does not directly decrease the
potassium concentration. A dosage of 0.5–1.5 mL/kg of
10% calcium gluconate is given slowly over 15 minutes,

while monitoring the ECG. Rapid administration may
cause additional arrhythmias, such as shortened Q‐T
interval and more severe bradycardia.
Intravenous regular insulin helps drive the potassium
intracellularly. Dosages of 0.2–0.5 U/kg regular insulin
are administered, followed by 2 g of dextrose (diluted to
25% in an isotonic crystalloid) per unit of insulin administered. Dextrose should then be added to the intravenous fluids (e.g., 0.9% saline or LRS) to produce a
1.25–2.5% dextrose solution, and blood glucose should
be monitored. Generally, 5% dextrose alone (D5W)
should not be given, as it becomes hypotonic and enters
the interstitial space once the dextrose is metabolized.
Hypoglycemia is uncommon, but should be treated
with an IV dose of 1 mL/kg of 25–50% dextrose in a 1:1
solution of dextrose and 0.9% saline. Maintenance fluids
should then be supplemented with dextrose to make a
1.25–5% dextrose solution.
Glucocorticoid deficiency is responsible for the hypoglycemia, gastrointestinal signs, and general debility of
patients in crisis, and may also contribute to hypotension. Supplementation should be instituted after the
life‐threatening issues (hypovolemia, hyperkalemia,
and hypoglycemia) have been initially addressed.
Dexamethasone sodium phosphate (0.25 mg/kg IV) is
recommended, since it does not cross‐react with the
cortisol assay. Since it has approximately eight times
the glucocorticoid activity of prednisone, this is equivalent to 2 mg/kg of prednisone, or 10 times the physiologic dose. Higher doses previously recommended
(such as 2 mg/kg) are excessive and unnecessary.
Hydrocortisone sodium succinate (0.5 mg/kg/h), cortisol acetate (1 mg/kg), and prednisolone sodium succinate (2 mg/kg) can also be used. However, since they
cross‐react with the cortisol assay, they should not be
given until after the ACTH stimulation test.
Additional supportive therapy is provided as necessary.
Dogs with gastrointestinal signs are given gastroprotectants, including proton pump inhibitors (omeprazole or
pantoprazole, which can be given IV) and sucralfate. Due
to potential bacterial translocation from the GI tract,
dogs with significant GI signs may be given prophylactic
antibiotics (such as ampicillin), but this is controversial.
Packed red cell or whole blood transfusion is occasionally
necessary in dogs with severe GI blood loss.
Frequent reassessment of patients is necessary following initial stabilization. Fluid rates should be adjusted to
correct dehydration and azotemia. The ECG should be
reassessed until arrhythmias resolve. Electrolyte concentrations should be rechecked following initial stabilization, and then every 6–12 hours until potassium and
sodium concentrations normalize.
Intravenous fluids are continued until the dog is
able to eat and maintain hydration on its own, and

85

VetBooks.ir

86

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

­mineralocorticoid supplementation (fludrocortisone or
DOCP) is provided following definitive diagnosis of
HOAC. Dexamethasone should be continued at a dose
of 0.15–0.2 mg/kg/day until prednisone can be given
orally. Prednisone is then started at 0.5 mg/kg BID.
Following discharge of the patient, prednisone is usually tapered to approximately 0.5 mg/kg per day, and
then decreased based on clinical signs, as discussed in
chronic management.
Most patients in Addisonian crisis respond quickly to
treatment (within hours), although more severely debilitated patients may take 2–3 days to demonstrate dramatic improvement. Dogs are usually discharged 3–5
days after initial presentation.
Chronic Management

Chronic therapy for hypoadrenocorticism consists
of life‐long glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid
supplementation to replace the missing cortisol and
aldosterone.
Mineralocorticoids are given to correct hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, and hypochloremia. Either a
monthly injection or a twice‐daily pill can be used.
Desoxy­corticosterone pivalate is a long‐acting, injectable mineralocorticoid. It is initially administered at a
dose of 2.2 mg/kg, subcutaneously or intramuscularly,
every 25 days. Electrolyte concentrations are then
measured two weeks and 25 days following the first
injection. The 14‐day measurement helps determine
whether the dose is sufficient, whereas the 25‐day
recheck confirms that the interval is acceptable. If
hyperkalemia and/or hyponatremia are present, the
dose (14‐day recheck) is increased by 10–15%, or the
interval is decreased by two days (25‐day recheck).
The author usually increases the dosing interval by
2–3 days each month, measuring the electrolytes
before each injection to ensure that they are within
reference range, until the interval reaches 30–31 days,
for owner convenience. Most dogs also do not require
the entire 2.2 U/kg, and since DOCP is expensive, the
dose can be decreased by approximately 10% per
month, measuring electrolytes immediately prior to
each injection to ensure that the electrolyte concentrations are still acceptable. The author usually starts
with 1.5 mg/kg and rarely decreases below 1 mg/kg/
month. Clients must understand that using lower
doses leaves room for less error and requires tight
adherence to the dosing schedule. Owners must be
warned not to prolong the dosing interval to save
money without veterinary advice; this often results in
Addisonian crisis, which is significantly more expensive to treat than a single injection of DOCP.
Following stabilization of DOCP dose, electrolytes
should be measured every 3–6 months. Dogs receiving

DOCP injections must also receive a glucocorticoid, as
DOCP has no glucocorticoid activity.
Side‐effects of DOCP are uncommon, but polyuria/
polydipsia (PU/PD) has been reported. This is usually
due to concurrent prednisone administration. However,
PU/PD is occasionally reported to be worse immediately
following DOCP injection, and to improve throughout
the month. In these cases, prolonging the dose interval
or decreasing the dose, while monitoring electrolytes,
may result in improvement.
Fludrocortisone is a shorter‐acting oral mineralocorticoid that is available in 0.1 mg pills. The starting
dose is 0.01 mg/kg twice daily. Electrolytes are measured in one‐week increments until they are within
the reference range. If hyponatremia and/or hyperkalemia are present, the dose is increased by 0.05–
0.1 mg/day. If hypernatremia and/or hypokalemia are
present, the dose is decreased. Once the dose has
normalized, electrolyte concentrations are rechecked
every 3–6 months. The dose often increases during
the first 1–2 years of therapy. Since fludrocortisone
has some glucocorticoid activity, only approximately
50% of dogs need additional glucocorticoids long
term. However, all dogs are started on concurrent
prednisone therapy at initial diagnosis, which is then
tapered as necessary.
Polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, and panting are the
most commonly reported side‐effects of fludrocortisone
therapy. Most of these are due to the glucocorticoid
properties of fludrocortisone, and resolve when the
patient is switched to DOCP.
DOCP is available in two veterinary‐approved
products (Zycortal®, Dechra; Percorten‐V®, Elanco).
Fludrocortisone is available thro­
ugh human
pharmacies.
Glucocorticoids are used to control the nonspecific
and gastrointestinal signs associated with hypoadrenocorticism, and prednisone is most frequently used. All
dogs receiving DOCP need glucocorticoid supplementation, and about 50% of dogs taking fludrocortisone
will need additional glucocorticoid supplementation
long term. The physiologic dose of prednisone is 0.1–
0.25 mg/kg/day, although many dogs (particularly
larger breeds) do well on 0.05 mg/kg/day or less. The
dose is tapered to effect, based on the clinical signs. If
the dog has any gastrointestinal signs or continues to
display vague clinical signs, the dose is increased. If
PU/PD, polyphagia, or panting occur, the dose needs
to be decreased. Remember that the dose is adjusted
based on clinical signs, and that an ACTH stimulation
test is never required to monitor patients with primary
hypoadrenocorticism.
During times of stress, the prednisone dose is usually
increased by 2–4 times (two times is usually sufficient).

VetBooks.ir

11 Hypoadrenocorticism in Dogs and Cats

“Stressful” situations include physiologic and
­emotional stress, such as when a dog goes to the
­veterinary clinic for electrolyte rechecks, when new
visitors are in the household, when the dog goes hunting (if applicable), and when the dog has a concurrent
illness. The increased dose is usually started the
morning before the stress begins, and continued for a
day or two following the end of the stressful event.
Astute clients are usually able to identify when their
dog needs additional prednisone, and adjust the dose
appropriately. However, some clients need frequent
reminders, particularly when they present for electrolyte evaluation.
Prognosis
With appropriate treatment and monitoring, the prognosis for dogs with naturally occurring hypoadrenocorticism is excellent. Dogs enjoy a good quality of
life, and may participate in normal activities, as long
as they are provided with additional prednisone as
needed. Consistent medication and patient monitoring must be stressed to owners, as poor medication
compliance or prolonging the treatment interval for
DOCP, without veterinary approval, may lead to
Addisonian crisis.
Atypical Hypoadrenocorticism
Etiology/Pathophysiology

Atypical hypoadrenocorticism refers to hypoadrenocorticism with clinical signs attributable to cortisol
deficiency only; electrolyte concentrations are within
reference range. At this time, the etiology is unknown.
Individual cases may result from different etiologies.
In some cases, partial immune‐mediated destruction
of the adrenal cortex occurs, sparing the zona glomerulosa and aldosterone synthesis. Occasionally, this is
an early manifestation of “typical” hypoadrenocorticism, and the glomerulosa is eventually destroyed,
leading to concurrent electrolyte abnormalities. In
other cases, dogs may actually be aldosterone deficient but able to compensate and maintain normal
electrolyte concentrations. The compensatory mechanisms are unclear, but aldosterone deficiency has
been documented in patients with normal electrolyte
concentrations.
Secondary hypoadrenocorticism, due to ACTH deficiency, results in signs of cortisol deficiency without
electrolyte abnormalities, as well. However, secondary
HOAC can be identified by low to nonexistent ACTH
concentrations. Dogs with atypical HOAC have normally functioning pituitary glands, and usually increased
ACTH concentrations.

Epidemiology

Atypical hypoadrenocorticism is an uncommon form of
hypoadrenocorticism. However, due to its vague clinical
signs and lack of electrolyte abnormalities on serum biochemistry, it is likely underdiagnosed.
Signalment

The signalment for atypical HOAC is similar to that of
typical HOAC. Young to middle‐aged dogs are predisposed, as are poodles, West Highland white terriers, Great
Danes, and NSDTRs. However, any breed of any age may
be affected.
History and Clinical Signs

Historical findings and clinical signs associated with
atypical HOAC are similar to those in typical HOAC.
Addisonian crisis does not usually occur with atypical
HOAC, partially because hyperkalemia and hyponatremia are not present. Nonspecific signs such as weight
loss, lethargy, and anorexia predominate, while gastrointestinal signs such as vomiting and diarrhea are also
common. Atypical HOAC should always be considered
in dogs with chronic GI signs, especially if they are more
common when the dog is stressed (such as “stress colitis”). Seizures secondary to hypoglycemia and megaesophagus are uncommon, but atypical HOAC should
remain on the rule‐out list for dogs with megaesophagus
and hypoglycemia, even if they have normal electrolyte
concentrations. PU/PD may also be reported in dogs
with atypical HOAC.
Diagnosis

Dogs with atypical HOAC may have many of the same
clinicopathologic abnormalities as dogs with typical
HOAC, except for hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, and
hypochloremia. Although mild to moderate azotemia is
possible, it is less common and less severe than in typical
HOAC. Anemia and hypoalbuminemia are more common in dogs with isolated cortisol deficiency, likely
because typical Addisonians are more hemoconcentrated (hypovolemic) than atypical Addisonians.
Hypocholesterolemia is also common, and hypoglycemia can also occur and result in seizures.
Definitive diagnosis of atypical hypoadrenocorticism
relies upon the ACTH stimulation test, and is interpreted
the same way as with typical hypoadrenocorticism. A
more economical way to rule out atypical HOAC is to
measure the baseline cortisol; patients with cortisol
>2-3 μg/dL do not have the disease. However, if the baseline cortisol is <2 μg/dL, an ACTH stimulation test is
necessary for diagnosis. Although atypical HOAC is
uncommon, it is easily treated and has a good prognosis.
Thus, testing is indicated in patients with unexplained
GI signs, lethargy, and weight loss.

87

VetBooks.ir

88

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

Patients with both atypical HOAC and secondary
HOAC have similar clinical signs of isolated cortisol
deficiency. Endogenous ACTH concentrations should be
measured to differentiate between secondary and primary hypoadrenocorticism. High concentrations indicate that the patient has primary HOAC (due to lack of
cortisol’s negative feedback on the pituitary), whereas
low to unmeasurable concentrations are consistent with
secondary HOAC. If secondary HOAC is diagnosed,
imaging of the brain is recommended, to rule out a pituitary/hypothalamic lesion; however, a distinct anatomic
lesion may not be identified.
Therapy

Therapy for atypical HOAC consists of glucocorticoid
replacement, usually with prednisone, given at 0.1–
0.25 mg/kg/day. Some patients do well on even lower
dosages, particularly big dogs. The author has used
dosages as low as 0.03 mg/kg/day. The goal is to administer enough prednisone to control the clinical signs of
HOAC, while not causing steroid side‐effects.
Additional prednisone (2–4 times the normal dose) is
recommended during times of stress.
Approximately 10% of dogs with atypical hypoadrenocorticism develop signs of mineralocorticoid deficiency
(electrolyte abnormalities) weeks to months after the initial diagnosis (usually within one year). It is impossible to
predict which dogs will develop electrolyte abnormalities, so reevaluation of the electrolytes is recommended
at one and three months following initial diagnosis, and
then every six months thereafter.
Prognosis

Prognosis for atypical hypoadrenocorticism is excellent,
provided that the owners continue to administer medication as recommended. Almost all patients die of disease unrelated to hypoadrenocorticism.

­Hypoadrenocorticism in Cats
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Hypoadrenocorticism is rare in cats. Most cases are idiopathic, but suspected to be due to immune‐mediated
destruction of the adrenal cortex. Neoplastic infiltration
and abdominal trauma have also been reported to cause
HOAC in cats. Concurrent glucocorticoid (cortisol)
and mineralocorticoid (aldosterone) deficiency occurs in
most cats, and isolated glucocorticoid deficiency (“atypical” hypoadrenocorticism) is rare. Secondary iatrogenic
hypoadrenocorticism can result from glucocorticoid
or progestogen (megesterol acetate) administration, but
this is uncommon. In cases of secondary iatrogenic

HOAC, the administered glucocorticoid or progestogen
causes decreased ACTH production from the pituitary
gland. Decreased ACTH production results in atrophy
of the zonae fasciculata and reticularis, leading
to decreased cortisol production. Since ACTH is not
required for the synthesis of aldosterone from the zona
glomerulosa, electrolyte abnormalities do not occur.
Epidemiology
Hypoadrenocorticism is rare in cats, with fewer than 50
cases reported in the literature.
Signalment
Unlike in dogs, there are no sex, age, or breed predispositions. Affected cats range in age from 1.5 to 14 years. The
majority of reported cases have been domestic short‐ or
long‐haired cats, but two British shorthair cats have also
been reported.
History and Clinical Signs
Clinical signs and historical findings are similar to
those described in dogs. The signs may be chronic
(months) or acute (several days), and may wax and
wane. Owners may note improvement following
treatment with fluids and/or glucocorticoids. The
most commonly reported signs include lethargy,
inappetence, and weight loss. Vomiting, PU/PD, and
constipation can also occur. In contrast to dogs, diarrhea has not been reported.
Physical examination usually reveals depression, weakness, dehydration, and hypothermia. About half of the
cats present in hypovolemic shock, characterized by prolonged capillary refill time and weak femoral pulse.
Collapse, ataxia, bradycardia, and abdominal pain are
less common.
Diagnosis
Clinicopathologic findings in cats with HOAC are similar to those in dogs with HOAC. Hyponatremia and
hyperkalemia are almost always present, although one
may occur without the other. Most cats are also
hypochloremic, azotemic, and hyperphosphatemic.
Although the azotemia is usually prerenal, most
Addisonian cats have a urine specific gravity <1.030.
Hypercalcemia, hypoglycemia, and acidemia are less
common than in Addi­sonian dogs, but can be severe.
Alanine aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, and
bilirubin may be mildly increased. Complete blood
count may reveal mild anemia and lymphocytosis;
alternatively, lack of a stress leukogram (neutrophilia

VetBooks.ir

11 Hypoadrenocorticism in Dogs and Cats

and lymphopenia) in a stressed cat should raise suspicion for HOAC.
Diagnostic imaging is not necessary to diagnose
HOAC, but is often performed as part of the diagnostic
work‐up prior to suspicion for HOAC. Thoracic radiographs may reveal pulmonary hypoperfusion or microcardia due to dehydration; abdominal imaging is
usually unremarkable. The ECG may reveal bradycardia, but the other classic ECG abnormalities (spiked
T‐wave, decreased R‐wave, and absent P‐wave) are less
consistent in hyperkalemic cats, though the reason for
this is unclear.
Definitive diagnosis of HOAC in cats relies upon an
ACTH stimulation test. A serum sample is taken prior
to administering 5 μg/kg cosyntropin (or tetracosactrin), which is given intravenously. A poststimulation
sample is collected one hour later. The diagnosis of
HOAC is consistent with a poststimulation cortisol
concentration of <2 μg/kg.
Measurement of endogenous ACTH concentrations
can help determine whether an Addisonian cat with normal electrolyte concentrations has primary or secondary
HOAC. High concentrations are consistent with primary
disease. Low concentrations are expected in cats with
secondary disease.
Therapy
Treatment of feline HOAC is similar to treatment of
canine HOAC. Intravenous crystalloid fluids (0.9%
NaCl, LRS or Plasma‐Lyte A) should be administered
to cats in Addisonian crisis. One‐third of a shock dose
(40–60 mL/kg) is given, and then the patient is reassessed. Dexamethasone (0.15 mg/kg BID) is given
intravenously until oral prednisolone is tolerated.
Prednisolone is started at 1 mg/kg/day, and slowly
tapered to 0.1–0.2 mg/kg/day following discharge. Two
to four times the dose should be given when the cat
experiences stress (going to the veterinarian, visitors in
the house, concurrent illness).
Mineralocorticoid supplementation can be provided
using either desoxycorticosterone pivalate (DOCP,
2.2 mg/kg every 25 days) or fludrocortisone (0.05–0.1 mg/
cat, SID–BID). Dosage adjustments are made based on
electrolyte concentrations, as described for dogs.
Prognosis
Cats in Addisonian crisis tend to respond to treatment
more slowly than dogs, and may require 3–5 days for
significant improvement. Long‐term prognosis for cats
with hypoadrenocorticism is good, provided that the
owners continue to administer medication and monitor as directed.

­Hyperaldosteronism in Cats
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Primary hyperaldosteronism (PHA) results from
excessive aldosterone production by the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal cortex, and usually leads to clinical
signs related to hypokalemia and/or systemic hypertension. Unilateral adrenocortical tumors are the most
common cause; carcinomas are more common than
adenomas. Bilateral adenomas occur rarely. Idiopathic
adrenal hyperplasia (“non-tumorous hyperaldosteronism”), characterized by bilateral micronodular hyperplasia of the zona glomerulosa, is reported less
frequently than the tumorous forms. However, since
definitive diagnosis requires histopathologic confirmation, and these cats are treated medically instead of
surgically, idiopathic adrenal hyperplasia is likely
underdiagnosed.
Aldosterone is the most important endogenous mineralocorticoid in dogs and cats. It primarily acts on the
principal cells of the distal tubules and collecting ducts
in the kidney, stimulating sodium and water reabsorption (thus expanding the vascular volume), and promoting potassium and acid excretion.
Aldosterone is regulated by the renin‐angiotensin‐
aldosterone system (RAAS). Decreased renal perfusion pressure and decreased delivery of sodium to the
distal tubules stimulate the release of renin from
juxtaglomerular cells. Renin cleaves angiotensinogen,
produced by the liver, into angiotensin I. Angiotensin I
is then converted to angiotensin II by angiotensin converting enzyme. Angiotensin II then stimulates aldosterone synthesis via the activity of aldosterone
synthase. Hyperkalemia also has a direct stimulatory
effect on aldosterone secretion, with ACTH contributing to a lesser degree.
Secondary hyperaldosteronism (“hyperreninemic
hyperaldosteronism”) results from increased renin
produced in response to reduced arterial blood volume, such as occurs with congestive heart failure,
renal failure, and liver failure. Primary hyperaldosteronism, however, is due to autonomous secretion of
aldosterone from the zona glomerulosa, and is associated with low plasma renin activity. It is sometimes
referred to as “hyporeninemic hyperaldosteronism”
for this reason.
In addition to expected consequences of hyperaldosteronism, such as hypokalemia and hypertension, some
cats with PHA develop progressive renal disease. There
is evidence that aldosterone itself mediates vascular
fibrosis and inflammation, resulting in glomerular sclerosis, hyaline arteriolar sclerosis, tubular atrophy, and
interstitial fibrosis. Thus, in azotemic patients with

89

VetBooks.ir

90

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

hypokalemia and/or hypertension, determining whether
hyperaldosteronism is primary (PHA) or secondary
(hyperreninemic hyperaldosteronism) can be a diagnostic challenge.
Epidemiology
Primary hyperaldosteronism is rare. However, because
several of the diagnostic findings associated with PHA
are also associated with chronic kidney disease, PHA is
likely underdiagnosed.
Signalment
Middle‐aged to older cats are predisposed (median age
13 years; range 5–20 years), but there does not appear to
be a sex or breed predisposition.
History and Clinical Signs
The most common clinical signs are associated with
hypokalemia and systemic arterial hypertension; polyuria, polydipsia, weight loss, and a palpable abdominal
mass may also be noted (Box 11.1). Hypokalemic myopathy can be acute or chronic in onset and clinical signs can
be mild or severe. Affected cats often have cervical ventroflexion, a plantigrade stance, difficulty jumping, and/
or severe weakness. Forelimb stiffness followed by acute
collapse and dysphagia have also been reported. Whereas
most cats with PHA caused by adrenocortical tumors
present for hypokalemic myopathy, fewer of the cats
with idiopathic adrenal hyperplasia display this clinical
feature.
Ocular changes due to hypertension are more common with idiopathic adrenal hyperplasia, and may
include retinal detachment and sub‐ and intraretinal and
intravitreal hemorrhages. Cats with these lesions usually
present for acute‐onset blindness, hyphema, and/or

Box 11.1 Clinical findings in cats
with hyperaldosteronism
Due to hypokalemia:
Cervical ventroflexion
Plantigrade stance
Difficulty jumping
Weakness
Due to hypertension (systolic BP >180 mmHg):
Ocular changes
Acute blindness
Hyphema
Mydriasis
Polyuria/polydipsia

Figure 11.1 A 13‐year‐old male neutered domestic shorthair
presented for acute blindness due to severe hypertension
(>250 mmHg, as measured by Doppler). Note the mydriasis with
complete bullous retinal detachment and retinal hemorrhages.
Source: Photo courtesy of Martin Coster, DVM, MS, DACVO.

mydriasis (Figure 11.1). Subclinical retinal lesions are
often identified in cats with myopathy, as well.
Diagnosis
The diagnostic evaluation of a cat for PHA includes blood
pressure measurement, complete blood count, serum
biochemistry, urinalysis, imaging, and specific hormone
testing. Cats with idiopathic adrenal hyperplasia are more
likely to be hypertensive, with a median systolic blood
pressure of 210 mmHg (range, 185–270 mmHg) in one
study. Median systolic BP in cats with neoplasia was
185 mmHg (range, 160–250 mmHg) in another study.
Hypertension is often difficult to control in cats with
PHA, and PHA should be suspected in cats with refractory hypertension.
The CBC does not usually reveal any significant abnormalities in patients with PHA. Moderate to severe
hypokalemia is often evident on the serum biochemistry
profile, although not all cats with PHA are hypokalemic.
Significant signs of hypokalemic myopathy are not usually obvious until potassium concentrations decrease to
less than 2.5 mmol/L, but this is variable. Creatine kinase
is markedly increased in cases of hypokalemic myopathy.
Hypernatremia is uncommon, likely because of dilution
from volume expansion.
Some cats with PHA are also mildly to moderately
azotemic, and often develop progressive renal disease as
a consequence of PHA. This is more common in cats with
idiopathic adrenal hyperplasia. Determining whether
hyperaldosteronism is a consequence of chronic kidney
disease, or vice versa, can be difficult and relies on measurement of plasma renin activity, which is not readily
available in the US. Interestingly, phosphorus concentration is often at the lower end of the reference range and
does not become increased with progressive azotemia in
cats with PHA. The reason for this is unclear but may be

VetBooks.ir

11 Hypoadrenocorticism in Dogs and Cats

related to hypersecretion of parathyroid hormone.
Hypercalcemia is also present in some of these cats.
Urine specific gravity is variable at the time of PHA diagnosis, ranging from 1.010 to 1.040 (mean 1.029).
Concurrent diseases reported in cats with PHA include
hyperthyroidism, diabetes mellitus, and hyperprogesteronism. Thus, additional testing is prudent if a patient with
suspected PHA has clinical signs that cannot be explained.
Since PHA caused by adrenocortical tumors and adrenal hyperplasia has different treatment recommendations, abdominal and thoracic imaging is recommended.
Thoracic radiographs can help identify pulmonary
metastases. Abdominal ultrasonography (US), computed
tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) can be used to visualize the adrenal glands and
potential extension of a tumor into the caudal vena cava.
Reported ranges for unilateral adrenocortical tumors
range from 1–3.5 × 1–2.5 cm on US. The contralateral
adrenal may not be seen, or may appear normal. CT and/
or MRI is often used preoperatively to assess invasion of
the caudal vena cava. In cats with bilateral adrenal hyperplasia, adrenal glands may be thickened, partially mineralized, or normal upon US examination. Unfortunately,
imaging is not always definitive. Pulmonary metastases
and caval invasion may be missed, bilateral disease may
be present when unilateral disease is suspected, and an
identified adrenal mass may be nonfunctional or producing something other than aldosterone, such as progesterone, cortisol, or catecholamines.
The gold standard for diagnosis of PHA is the
aldosterone:plasma renin activity ratio, since aldosterone concentration should be increased with concurrent
decrease in plasma renin activity (PRA), resulting in an
increased ratio. However, measurement of PRA is difficult and inconsistently commercially available, limiting
the utility of the ratio.
The plasma aldosterone concentration (PAC) is the
most widely available test for confirmation of hyperaldosteronism. It is increased in all reported cases of PHA
due to adrenocortical carcinomas or adenomas, but may
only be mildly increased or within reference range in
cats with adrenocortical hyperplasia. Additionally, an
increased PAC does not differentiate between primary
and secondary hyperaldosteronism. Measurement of the
PAC:PRA ratio is useful in cases in which PAC is within
reference range, and when clinical information does not
differentiate between primary and secondary hyperaldosteronism (e.g., adrenal glands are of normal size and/or
azotemia is present).
Adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation testing is
not usually necessary for the diagnosis of PHA. However,
suppression testing is used to diagnose PHA in people.
In a small study in cats, an oral fludrocortisone suppression test helped to differentiate some cases of PHA from
other causes of arterial hypertension. Fludrocortisone

was administered (0.05 mg/kg q12h) for four days, and
urine was collected to measure the urine aldosterone to
creatinine ratio (UACR) prior to the first dose, and the
morning after the last evening dose of fludrocortisone.
All of the non‐PHA cats had >50% suppression of the
UACR, while only 3/9 of the PHA cats had >50% suppression of the pretest UACR. This test has its limitations, including the availability of urine aldosterone
measurement, but may be useful in PHA suspects with
PAC within reference range.
Therapy
Initial treatment of PHA is aimed at controlling hypertension and hypokalemia and medical stabilization is
recommended prior to adrenalectomy for adrenal
tumors. Spironolactone is a competitive aldosterone
receptor antagonist that helps control both hypertension and hypokalemia. The starting dose is 2 mg/kg
q12h but this dose may be increased to 4 mg/kg q12h.
Spironolactone has been reported to cause facial dermatitis in Maine Coon cats treated for hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, but this has not been reported in cats
with PHA. Amlodipine, a calcium channel blocker, is
given at 0.625–1.25 mg/cat q12–24h, to help control
hypertension. Potassium gluconate is administered at a
dose of 2–6 mEq PO q12h to alleviate hypokalemia.
While adjusting medication doses, blood pressure and
potassium concentration should be measured weekly.
Myopathy is expected to resolve, although normokalemia may not be achieved. Hypertension usually
resolves with appropriate therapy, but the vision loss is
almost always permanent.
Patients with idiopathic adrenal hyperplasia should be
treated medically. Following medical stabilization, adrenalectomy is ideal for patients with unilateral adrenocortical neoplasia. However, surgery is associated with a
high mortality rate (30% in one study), particularly if the
vena cava is affected. Additionally, some owners have
financial limitations that prohibit surgery, and some cats
have concurrent conditions or metastasis. If the owner
elects not to pursue surgical therapy, medical management can be pursued long term.
The most common complication associated with
adrenalectomy is hemorrhage; in one study, 4/10 cases
experienced intraoperative or perioperative hemorrhage. One patient was stabilized with autotransfusion
and another laparotomy, but the other three patients
were euthanized following failed attempts at surgical
hemostasis.
Postsurgical monitoring includes blood pressure
and potassium monitoring, at least daily for 2–3 days.
Amlodipine and spironolactone are discontinued postoperatively, and potassium supplementation is tapered
until the potassium concentration normalizes.

91

VetBooks.ir

92

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

Prognosis
Cats with unilateral adrenocortical neoplasia that
­survive the perioperative period have good long‐term
survival (up to 1803 days); patients with adenocarcinomas appear to have the same prognosis as cats with

adenomas. Medically managed cats have reported survival times from several months to years. The prognosis
for cats with adrenocortical hyperplasia is not well
defined, but most cats eventually succumb to chronic
kidney disease.

­Further Reading
Djajadiningrat‐Laanen S, Galac S, Kooistra H. Primary
hyperaldosteronism: expanding the diagnostic net.
J Feline Med Surg 2011; 13: 641–50.
Gunn‐Moore D, Simpson K. Hypoadrenocorticism in
cats. In: Rand J, ed. Clinical Endocrinology of

Companion Animals. Ames, IA: Wiley‐Blackwell,
2013, pp. 22–7.
Lathan P. Hypoadrenocorticism in dogs. In: Rand J, ed.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals. Ames,
IA: Wiley‐Blackwell, 2013, pp. 1–21.

VetBooks.ir

93

12
Diabetes Mellitus in Dogs and Cats
Jacquie S. Rand, BVsc, DVSc, MANZVS, DACVIM (SAIM)
School of Veterinary Science, University of Queensland, Gatton, Queensland, Australia; Australian Pet Welfare Foundation, Kenmore, Queensland, Australia

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Glucose is the primary source of energy in the body.
Blood glucose concentrations are tightly controlled by a
feedback system of endocrine hormones. Insulin is produced by the pancreatic beta‐cells in response to
increased blood glucose, and promotes storage of glucose, fatty acids, and amino acids as glycogen, fat, and
protein. Insulin promotes uptake of glucose into most
body cells for use, promotes storage of glucose as ­glycogen
in liver and muscle, and inhibits gluconeogenesis.
Cortisol, glucagon, epinephrine, and growth hormone
oppose the actions of insulin, promoting catabolism of
stored carbohydrate into glucose, stored triglycerides
into free fatty acids and ketone bodies, and stored protein
into amino acids. Because they oppose insulin’s effects,
these four hormones are called “counterregulatory hormones” (Table 12.1).
Diabetes mellitus is a disease characterized by hyperglycemia and associated clinical signs. It is classified into
four broad types in human and veterinary medicine.
●●

Type 1 diabetes is a result of immune‐mediated beta‐
cell destruction, usually leading to an absolute insulin
deficiency. The majority of neutered diabetic dogs have
type 1 diabetes, but this form appears to be very rare in
cats. The etiology of type 1 diabetes in dogs is multifactorial, and likely involves genetic factors and poorly
understood environmental factors, which trigger beta‐
cell injury and inflammation. In type 1 diabetes, following nonspecific beta‐cell injury, autoimmunity then
propagates continued destruction of beta‐cells, preventing regeneration after injury. Factors which trigger
the gastrointestinal immune system are implicated in
human type 1 diabetes, and in dogs, pancreatitis is a
potential triggering factor. As in humans, there is a seasonal influence, with the incidence peaking in winter.
Environmental factors such as chronic insulin r­ esistance

secondary to glucocorticoid administration or obesity,
and diseases which antagonize insulin’s actions would
be expected to hasten onset of clinical signs when
superimposed on a reduced capacity to secrete insulin
as a result of immune‐mediated beta‐cell destruction.
●● Type 2 diabetes is characterized by insulin resistance
with concomitant beta-cell dysfunction. In developed
countries, the majority of feline diabetics are type 2.
Insulin resistance is multifactorial and associated with
genetic factors, obesity, physical inactivity, male gender, and glucocorticoid steroids. Beta‐cell destruction
is initiated and propagated by a variety of factors, not
yet fully understood, that lead to a decline in insulin
secretory capacity. When the increased demand to
produce insulin as a result of insulin resistance is
superimposed on beta‐cell dysfunction, chronic
hyperglycemia ensues. Chronic hyperglycemia is toxic
to beta‐cells and in turn causes injury and death of the
beta‐cells, reducing insulin production even further.
●● “Other specific types of diabetes” includes most other
forms in companion animals, including drug‐induced
diabetes (usually steroid use), endocrinopathies that
antagonize insulin action (acromegaly, hyperadrenocorticism), or exocrine pancreatic disease. Chronic
pancreatitis is the most common cause of canine diabetes in this category, accounting for approximately
30% of cases. Approximately 25–30% of poorly controlled diabetic cats have acromegaly.
●● Gestational diabetes is not a significant cause of diabetes in companion animals in the US, as most companion animals are desexed. Pregnancy and diestrus are
associated with increased progesterone concentrations,
which uniquely in the bitch stimulate the mammary
glands to produce growth hormone. Both hormones
oppose insulin’s glucose lowering effects, leading to
periodic insulin resistance in intact female dogs, and
diestrus‐associated diabetes. Concurrent obesity would
be expected to exacerbate this insulin resistance.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

94

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

Table 12.1 Effects of insulin and counterregulatory hormones
on carbohydrate metabolism
Hormone

Cortisol

Effect on carbohydrates

Increases blood glucose
↓ Glucose uptake by cells
●● ↑ Gluconeogenesis
●● ↑ Glycogenolysis
●● Inhibits insulin
●●

Glucagon

Increases blood glucose
↑ Gluconeogenesis
●● ↑ Glycogenolysis
●● Inhibits insulin
●●

Epinephrine

Increases blood glucose
↑ Gluconeogenesis
●● ↑ Glycogenolysis

­History and Clinical Signs
Diabetes is characterized by hyperglycemia resulting
from insufficient insulin production or function.
Hyperglycemia causes the hallmark clinical signs of
polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, and weight loss
that distinguish diabetes. Some dogs and up to 50%
of cats present with decreased appetite. Other clinical
signs include hepatomegaly, lethargy, cataract for­
mation (dogs), and diabetic neuropathy (mainly cats).
Signs are usually slowly progressive over weeks
to months.
Polyuria and Polydipsia

●●

Growth hormone

Insulin

Increases blood glucose
●● ↓ Glucose uptake by cells
●● ↑ Gluconeogenesis
Decreases blood glucose
↑ Glucose uptake by all cells except liver,
brain, red blood cells
●● ↑ Glycogen formation
●● ↓ Gluconeogenesis, glycogenolysis
●●

­Epidemiology
Diabetes mellitus is the most common disorder of
the endocrine pancreas in dogs and cats. The incidence
in dogs is approximately 0.13%, and the i­ncidence in
cats is approximately 0.5%, depending on the study population, and is influenced by geographical location and
type of veterinary practice (referral or primary
accession).

­Signalment
Diabetes mellitus is a disease of middle‐aged to older
companion animals, with peak prevalence of 7–12 years
of age in dogs and 10–13 years in cats. Intact female dogs
and male cats are predisposed. Various breeds of cat and
dog are overrepresented, and predisposed breeds vary
with geographic area. For example, in the USA, dog
breeds at increased risk include miniature schnauzer,
Samoyed, and miniature poodle, whereas in the UK, in
addition to miniature schnauzer and Samoyed, breeds
more commonly seen include Tibetan, cairn, border and
Yorkshire terriers and Labrador retrievers. In cats,
Burmese are overrepresented in Australia, New Zealand
and the UK, and in the USA, Maine Coon, domestic
longhair, Russian blue and Siamese. Norwegian forest
cats and Burmese are at increased risk in Scandinavia.

Relative or absolute insulin deficiency in diabetes causes
reduced blood glucose uptake by liver, muscle, and adipose tissues, and unchecked glucose production in the
liver, which result in hyperglycemia. In the glomerulus of
the kidney, nearly all the blood glucose is passively filtered into the ultrafiltrate. In the proximal tubule of the
kidney, receptors are capable of resorbing only a fixed
amount of glucose from the ultrafiltrate. This fixed
amount is called the renal threshold, and is approximately 200 mg/dL in dogs and 250–290 mg/dL in cats.
When the amount of glucose in the blood exceeds this
renal threshold, glucose remains in the ultrafiltrate,
­acting as an osmotic diuretic and causing polyuria and
compensatory polydipsia.
Polyphagia
Animals with uncomplicated diabetes mellitus may have
an increased appetite. This is governed by central mechanisms, including increased hunger triggered by nutrient
loss (predominantly glucose), and lack of insulin‐mediated uptake of glucose into cells of the satiety center,
which normally inhibits hunger.
Weight Change
Obesity is a common co‐morbidity in middle‐aged
and senior diabetic dogs and cats. It reduces insulin
sensitivity, and when superimposed on beta‐cell loss
from any cause, will hasten onset of hyperglycemia
and clinical signs. However, untreated diabetes mellitus leads to weight loss, due to malassimilation of
nutrients absorbed from the gut, and urinary loss
of glucose and amino acids. Dogs in which pancreatitis
is either a complicating co‐morbidity or a cause of
their diabetes may later progress to exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPI), which exacerbates weight
loss, and may be first evident as increased frequency
of defecation.

VetBooks.ir

12 Diabetes Mellitus in Dogs and Cats

Hepatomegaly

sorbitol occurs more rapidly than its degradation into
fructose. In the diabetic eye, a large amount of sor­bitol is
produced and acts as an osmotic agent within the lens fibers, drawing water into the lens, leading to lens swelling,
lens fiber collapse, and ultimately cataract formation.
Lens‐induced uveitis is common in diabetic dogs due
to the rapid onset of the cataracts. Lens‐induced uveitis
occurs when the lens becomes swollen and the stretched
lens capsule allows leakage of cataract lens proteins into
the anterior and posterior chambers. This, in turn,
causes iris and ciliary body vasculitis, resulting in serum
protein leakage into the aqueous humor and prostaglandin release from the iris, which continue the uveitis.
Diabetic cataracts are found in 80% of diabetic dogs
within 16 months (Figure 12.1). Diabetic cats are rarely
clinical for cataracts, though recent studies suggest that
mild diabetes‐associated lens opacity is more common
than previously thought. Topical administration of

Insulin promotes storage of lipid in adipose tissue. Relative
or absolute lack of insulin promotes lipid catabolism into
fatty acids, which are transported to the liver. The liver
uses this excess of fatty acids to produce and store triglycerides (lipids), leading to hepatic lipidosis and hepatomegaly. In the diabetic liver, excess fatty acids are also used for
gluconeogenesis, which worsens hyperglycemia, and are
converted into ketone bodies, which cause ketoacidosis.
Cataracts
The pathogenesis of cataracts in diabetics is multifac­torial
and incompletely understood. The enzyme aldose reductase catalyzes the conversion of glucose to sorbitol, and
the enzyme sorbitol dehydrogenase catalyzes the conversion of sorbitol to fructose. In the eye, the formation of
(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 12.1 Diabetic cataracts in a dog. (a) An 11‐year‐old cross‐bred dog photographed shortly after diagnosis of diabetes mellitus.
(b) The same dog three months later. Diabetic cataracts had developed rapidly and the owners reported sudden vision loss. (c) The same
dog following phacoemulsification surgery to remove the cataract from the right eye. Source: Fleeman and Rand 2000. Reproduced with
permission.

95

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

VetBooks.ir

96

Figure 12.2 Cat with plantigrade stance. Source: Rand 2013.
Reproduced with permission of John Wiley & Sons.

aldose reductase inhibitors three times daily retards
progression of ocular changes.
Diabetic Neuropathy
The majority of diabetic dogs, cats, and people have microscopic evidence of nerve injury, including demye­lination,
remyelination, and axonal degeneration. However, less
than 50% of cats with diabetes mellitus have clinical neuropathy with hindlimb paraparesis, a plantigrade stance,
and decreased ability to jump, as well as reduced reflexes
and proprioceptive deficits (Figure 12.2). Weakness and
muscle wasting are present in 50% of diabetic cats. Clinical
diabetic neuropathy is rarely recognized in dogs.

­Diagnosis of Diabetes Mellitus
Diagnosis of diabetes mellitus is based on demonstration
of persistently increased blood glucose concentration,
and is typically associated with glucosuria and classic
clinical signs of polyuria and polydipsia. In dogs, blood
glucose concentrations above the renal threshold of
200 mg/dL (11 mmol/L) are considered diabetic. In
humans and cats, blood glucose concentrations persistently above normal but below that considered diabetic
(>117 to < 180 mg/dL; >6.5 to <10 mmol/L) are associated
with increased risk of developing diabetes and considered
prediabetic in cats. Persistent hyperglycemia of ≥180 mg/
dL (10 mmol/L) should be considered diabetic, but it will
only be accompanied by clinical signs once it exceeds the
renal threshold of 250–290 mg/dL (14–16 mmol/L). Stress
hyperglycemia and postprandial hyperglycemia may
complicate diagnosis of diabetic hyperglycemia in cats.

The presence of elevated plasma fructosamine (approximately >400 μmol/L; reference range varies by laboratory) or glycated hemoglobin (A1c) (reference range
depends on assay used) in symptomatic pets with hyperglycemia and glucosuria helps confirm the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus. However, fructosamine is not consistently
increased above the reference range in cats until blood glucose is approximately >300 mg/dL (>17 mmol/L), making
it unsuitable for differentiating stress hyperglycemia from
diabetes when blood glucose is 300 mg/dL (17 mmol/L) or
less. In contrast, unpublished data suggest the new Baycom
A1c is more sensitive at distinguishing transient hyperglycemia secondary to stress from persistent hyperglycemia of
diabetes or prediabetes. Fructosamine is formed when
blood glucose ­irreversibly binds plasma proteins (mainly
albumin). Fructosamine concentration is roughly proportional to the average blood glucose concentration over the
preceding 7–14 days, which is the half‐life of albumin in
dogs and cats. Therefore, while a single blood glucose
measurement reflects blood glucose at one moment in
time, fructosamine is used as an indicator of blood glucose
over a longer period of time and is used to document persistent hyperglycemia. Similarly, glycated hemoglobin is
formed when blood glucose irreversibly binds hemoglobin (especially hemoglobin A1), and its concentration
reflects the average blood g­lucose concentration over
approximately 70 days (erythrocyte lifespan).
A new test (Baycom A1c) validated for cats is available,
and may be useful for differentiating cats with blood glucose in the normal range from those with a persistent mild
hyperglycemia, for example prediabetic cats with glucose
concentrations of 130–180 mg/dL (7.2–9.9 mmol/L) or cats
with subclinical diabetes (>180 mg/dL up to the renal thres­
hold of 250–290 mg/dL; >10 mmmo/L to 14–16 mmol/L).
In cats, stress hyperglycemia may be confused with
diabetic hyperglycemia on initial presentation. Stress
hyperglycemia is usually (but not always) lower than
­diabetic hyperglycemia, with median blood glucose in
stressed cats around 305 mg/dL (16.9 mmol/L) with a
wide range (126–505 mg/dL; 7–28.1 mmol/L). Median
blood glucose in newly diagnosed diabetic cats is around
475 mg/dL (26.4 mmol/L) with a wide range of 180–
1100 mg/dL (10–61. mmol/L) that overlaps with the
range of stress hyperglycemia. Diabetic hyperglycemia
and glucosuria will be persistent over time, and will
always be accompanied by typical clinical signs if blood
glucose is above the renal threshold. In contrast, stress
hyperglycemia typically resolves in 3–4 hours but may
take 24 hours in a very few cats. Therefore, in most cats,
an easy way to rule out persistent hyperglycemia of diabetes or prediabetes, is to test a repeat sample from the
ear after the cat has been sitting quietly in a cage for 4
hours; in the majority of cats with stress hyperglycemia,
blood glucose will be <117 mg/dL (6.5 mmol/L).

VetBooks.ir

12 Diabetes Mellitus in Dogs and Cats

Fructosamine is most often normal in cats with stress
hyperglycemia, but elevated in diabetic cats that have
been markedly hyperglycemic (>360 mg/dL; 20 mmol/L)
for at least 3–5 days. However, a normal fructosamine
concentration does not rule out prediabetes or diabetes
associated with more moderate hyperglycemia, whereas
Hb1c appears more sensitive. Home blood glucose monitoring with a meter calibrated for feline blood may also
assist in identifying prediabetic cats with persistent mild
elevation of glucose (>117–162 mg/dL; 6.5–9 mmol/L).
A typical work‐up for dogs or cats with suspected
­diabetes mellitus will include a complete blood count,
chemistry profile with electrolytes, urinalysis, and urine
culture via sterile collection. Some veterinarians routinely use fructosamine or, less commonly, glycated
hemoglobin to document persistent hyperglycemia.
In dogs, if ­hypothyroidism or hyperadrenocorticism is
suspected, it is best tested after diabetes is regulated,
because of the effect of poorly regulated diabetes on
interpretation of tests. In intact female dogs, measurement of serum progesterone may also be helpful; ­elevated
progesterone levels in diestrus or pregnancy increase
secretion of growth hormone, a counterregulatory hormone, leading to insulin resistance. In cats, a total T4
and feline leukemia virus/feline immunodeficiency virus
(FeLV/FIV) test is warranted. Middle‐aged to older cats
with polyuria/polydipsia, polyphagia, and weight loss
should be screened for diabetes mellitus and hyperthyroidism, as the diseases cause similar clinical signs, and
may occur concurrently. For patients with atypical or
additional clinical signs, consider a thyroid panel (total or
free T4 and thyroid‐stimulating hormone), insulin like
growth factor (IGF-1), t­ rypsinogen‐like immunoreactivity
(TLI), pancreatic lipase immunoassay (PLI), cobalamin
and folate, adrenal function testing, thoracic and abdominal radiographs, and abdominal ultrasound as indicated
based on the patient’s history and clinical exam findings.
Cats with diabetes and blood glucose above the renal
threshold have weight loss, and cats with a stable weight
or weight gain should be tested for acromegaly. If IGF-1
is in the normal range, but clinical signs are consistent
with acromegaly, test again after 6 weeks of insulin
therapy.

­Therapy
Nearly all veterinary patients with diabetes mellitus are
managed with a combination of insulin therapy, diet, and
weight management.
Human and veterinary insulins are categorized both
by onset and duration of action, and by protein source.
Based on onset and duration of action, insulins are
short acting, intermediate acting, and long acting.

Short‐acting insulins are generally used in hospital for
intensive blood glucose control, while intermediate‐
and long‐acting insulins are used both in hospital and at
home for long‐term, daily glycemic control. Based on
protein source, insulins are human, human analog (synthetic insulin that is altered from the natural form but
retains biological function), bovine, or porcine. Porcine
and canine insulin have an identical amino acid
sequence, while bovine and feline insulin differ by just
one amino acid.
Traditionally, veterinarians have managed canine and
feline diabetes with a variety of veterinary or human
insulins (Table 12.2). Veterinary insulins include porcine
lente (Vetsulin/Caninsulin®, Merck), and protamine zinc
human recombinant insulin (ProZinc®, Boehringer
Ingelheim Vetmedica). Human insulins or insulin analogs include human‐origin lente (no longer available),
neutral protamine Hagedorn (isophane, NPH, various
manufacturers), glargine (Lantus®, Sanofi‐Aventis),
detemir (Levemir®, Novo Nordisk), glargine 300 U/mL
(Toujeo, Sanofi-Aventis) and degludec (Tresiba®, Novo
Nordisk). Premixed combinations of short‐acting lispro
(Eli Lilly) or aspart (Novo Nordisk) insulin with longer‐
acting protamine insulin are also available as intermediate‐acting insulins (Humalog® Mix 75/25 and Novolog®
70/30, respectively).
The goals of treatment in canine diabetes include
resolution of polyuria, polydipsia and abnormal body
condition, while avoiding clinical hypoglycemia, diabetic ketoacidosis, urinary tract infections, and other
complications through excellent glycemic control. In
dogs, American Animal Hospital Association guidelines recommend the use of porcine lente, PZI, or NPH
insulins, and a complete and balanced diet that lacks
simple carbohydrates.
A stable routine for meals, snacks, and exercise is crucial for good glycemic control; frequent changes in type
of food or amount fed should be avoided (Box 12.1). The
best diet for diabetic dogs is yet to be determined. Diets
recommended include high‐fiber/restricted‐fat diets,
which as a consequence are high in carbohydrate (>45%),
and diets with moderate fiber and restricted carbohydrate (<30% metabolizable energy [ME]), which as a
­consequence are higher in fat and protein. High‐fiber
diets may help to delay glucose absorption from the
­gastrointestinal tract and reduce postprandial hyperglycemia. A number of prescription canine diabetic diets
are available with increased fiber, although most have
carbohydrate levels >45% ME. If used with NPH insulin,
these high‐fiber diets may exacerbate postprandial
hyperglycemia in some dogs, because peak gastrointestinal glucose absorption occurs after peak insulin action,
and in these cases are better fed 1–2 hours after insulin
administration. High‐fiber/moderate‐fat diets may cause

97

VetBooks.ir

98

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

Table 12.2 Insulin types used in companion animal medicine and their characteristics
Brand name

Product

Manufacturer

Concentration

Origin

Size

Humulin N

NPH

Eli Lilly

U‐100

Human

10 mL vial
3 mL pen

Vetsulin/
Caninsulin

Lente

Merck

U‐40

Porcine

10 mL vial
2. mL pen

Humalog Mix
75/25 and 50/50

Lispro (rapid acting)
plus lispro protamine
(intermediate)

Eli Lilly

U‐100

Recombinant human

10 mL vial
3 mL pen

Novolog Mix
70/30; 50/50

Aspart (rapid acting)
plus aspart protamine
(intermediate)

Novo
Nordisk

U‐100

Recombinant human

10 mL vial
3 mL pen

ProZinc

PZI (protamine zinc)

Boehringer Ingelheim

U‐40

Recombinant human

10 mL vial

Lantus

Glargine

Sanofi‐Aventis

U‐100

Recombinant human analog

10 mL vial
3 mL pen

Toujeo

Glargine

Sanofi‐Aventis

U‐300

Recombinant human analog

1.5 mL pen

Detemir

Levemir

Novo Nordisk

U‐100

Recombinant human analogue

10 mL vial
3 mL pen

Tresiba

Degludec

Novo Nordisk

U‐100, U‐200

Recombinant human analog

10 mL vial
3 mL pen

Intermediate acting

Long acting

Box 12.1 Dosing protocol for dogs on lente, NPH, glargine or detemir
Starting dose is 0.5 U/kg administred BID for NPH, lente
(Caninsulin/Vetsulin, Merck) and glargine (Lantus,
Sanofi‐Aventis) insulin in dogs. Note starting dose for
dogs on detemir (Levemir, Novo Nordisk) is 0.125 μ/kg
BID. Dogs are on average four times more sensitive to
detemir than other insulin.
●● Home blood glucose monitoring is recommended using
a meter calibrated for dog blood. Continuous or flash
glucose monitoring systems are also very useful for
assessing duration of action and adjusting insulin dose,
but they measure interstitial blood glucose and are not
calibrated for dogs. Their accuracy for determining
actual nadir blood glucose concentration is poor.
●● In the intitial stabilization phase, reassess dogs weekly.
Feed a prescription diet formulated for diabetic dogs
and keep amount fed and type of diet constant on a
daily basis. Low carbohydrate is best when using lente,
glargine or determir. Adjust amount of energy fed to
achieve and maintain ideal body weight. If excessive
weight loss occurs with a diabetic diet, swap to a premium maintenance diet with low carbohydrate and
moderate fiber content.
●● Increase insulin dose when the nadir (lowest) glucose
concentration is >145 mg/dL (8 mmol/L) and when the
blood glucose measurements obtained just prior to the
morning and evening insulin injection are both
≥180 mg/dL (10 mmol/L).

●●

Do not change insulin dose when the nadir is 90–145 mg/
dL (5–8 mmol/L) and when the blood glucose measurements just prior to the morning and evening insulin
injection are both ≥180 mg/dL (10 mmol/L).
●● Decrease insulin dose either when the nadir is <90 mg/
dL (5 mmol/L) or when at least one of the blood glucose
measurements just prior to the morning and evening
insulin injection is <180 mg/dL (10 mmol/L).
●● Once the dog is well controlled, the target nadir glucose concentration can be lower, e.g., 70–110 mg/dL
(4–6 mmol/L).
●● Assessment of the dog’s clinical signs determines the
magnitude of the change in insulin dose. When clinical
signs of uncontrolled diabetes (water drunk >70 mL/kg/
day, ketonuria, or lethargy) are present, increase insulin
dose by 20% rounded down to the nearest unit. When
dog has shown no clinical signs during the preceding 2
weeks, insulin dose adjust by 1 unit. Similarly, when
reducing dose, adjust down by 1 unit if no clinical signs,
but by 20% if signs of hypoglycemia.
●● The protocol for serial blood glucose evaluation comprises administration of the dog’s usual meal and insulin
dose in the morning and 12 hours later at night and
blood glucose measurement with a portable glucose
meter every 2 hours for 12 hours beginning immediately prior to the morning insulin injection and meal
until immediately before the next insulin injection.
●●

VetBooks.ir

12 Diabetes Mellitus in Dogs and Cats

Results of serial blood glucose concentration testing
determine whether the insulin dose should be
increased, left unchanged, or decreased. Be conservative with dose increases because severe clinical hypoglycemia kills dogs.
●● Dogs are considered to have stable glycemic control
when the following criteria are all met over 2 months:
(a) fluctuation of insulin dose by 1 unit or less, (b)
water drunk <70 mL/kg/day, (c) stable body weight,
and (d) absence of ketonuria. The period required to
achieve stablization ranges from 3 to 10 months
(median 7 months).

significant weight loss in some diabetic dogs, and thus
are not suitable for most lean or underweight dogs. A
variety of commercially available, nonprescription grain‐
free diets are available which are lower in carbohydrate
and higher in protein and fat, but have not yet been used
in clinical trials with diabetic dogs. Dietary fat restriction
(<30% ME) should be considered for diabetic dogs with
concurrent chronic pancreatitis or persistent hypertriglyceridemia. It is usually recommended that insulin be
given within one hour of a meal and in most cases, for
convenience, it is given at the time of insulin injection.
The primary goal of treatment in feline diabetes is to
obtain remission; that is, maintenance of euglycemia
without the need for insulin therapy or oral hypoglycemic drugs. Remission is possible in 80% or more of newly
diagnosed feline diabetics if managed to achieve normal
or near normal blood glucose concentrations soon after
diagnosis. Probability of remission is increased when a
low‐carbohydrate (<15% ME), high‐protein diet (Hills®
m/d, Purina® DM, or others) is used in combination with
long‐acting insulins such as glargine or detemir administered twice daily. Lower remission rates are reported
using PZI or porcine lente insulin or when a moderate‐
carbohydrate diet is fed. Rapid institution of excellent
glycemic control, ideally in conjunction with home monitoring, contributes to remission, while institution of
tight control six months or more after diagnosis is associated with significantly lower rates of remission (84%
versus 34%) (Box 12.2). Because remission often occurs
within 4–8 weeks of therapy if cats are managed optimally, weight loss is not a major factor in achieving
remission but it is critically important for maintaining
remission. Eating does not need to be coordinated with
insulin administration, especially if a low‐carbohydrate
diet and long‐acting insulin are used. Type and amount
of food and snacks should be consistent each day, and
snacks must be low carbohydrate.

●●

If duration of action of NPH or lente insulin apprears to
be substantially less than 12 hours and signs of poor
control persist, try detemir if the dog is >5–10 kg (note
lower dose with detemir). If insulin sensitivity is normal, dosing dogs weighing <5–10 kg can be problematic with detemir. If necessary, it can be diluted with
saline or sterile water or a special diluting solution
from the manufacturer. Alternatively, glargine 300 U/
ml (Toujeo) appears to be useful in some poorly controlled dogs and is best combined with a low carbohydrate diet.

Exogenous Insulin Resistance
Insulin resistance means decreased sensitivity to endogenous or exogenous insulin. Endogenous insulin resistance is a major factor in the pathogenesis of type 2
diabetes in cats, when superimposed on reduced beta‐
cell function. Insulin resistance should be investigated in
dogs or cats when insulin therapy does not have the
expected effect – animals are consistently hyperglycemic
despite insulin doses of greater than 1–1.5 units of insulin per kg body weight per dose (not per day).
Insulin resistance may incorrectly be diagnosed when
insulin is stored, handled or administered improperly. It
can also be misdiagnosed when duration of insulin action
is too short to maintain good glycemic control and results
in marked hyperglycemia prior to each insulin injection,
despite increasing dose. Hyperglycemia following a
hypoglycemic episode is often attributed to a rebound
phenomenon associated with secretion of counterregulatory hormones, termed a Somogyi phenomenon.
However, evidence for this pathogenesis as a cause of
hyperglycemia following hypoglycemia is lacking in veterinary and human medicine. This pattern of hypoglycemia followed by marked hyperglycemia is a relatively rare
occurrence in cats treated with glargine or detemir (1.5%
of blood glucose curves), and inadequate duration of
insulin action should be suspected rather than attributing the hyperglycemia to a rebound effect and associated
insulin resistance. Persistent hyperglycemia also causes
insulin resistance which likely explains why insulin dose,
after an initial increase over 1–2 months in newly diagnosed animals, typically decreases over a similar period
in both dogs and cats which remain insulin dependent.
Acromegaly is a syndrome of excess growth hormone
production, which typically causes profound endogenous insulin resistance. It is rare in dogs, and caused by
mammary tissue oversecretion. It is relatively common in
cats, with at least 25–30% of poorly controlled diabetic

99

VetBooks.ir

100

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

Box 12.2 Home blood glucose monitoring protocol for glargine or detemir using a preinsulin blood glucose concen­
tration measured using a glucometer calibrated for feline blood, used in a feline‐only practice for the last 8 years
Newly diagnosed diabetics (<2 months insulin therapy)
Blood glucose concentration >235 mg/dL (>13 mmol/L)
Blood glucose concentration 126–235 mg/dL (7–13 mmol/L)
Blood glucose concentration 72–<126 mg/dL (4–<7 mmol/L)
Blood glucose concentration <72 mg/dL (<4 mmol/L)

Increase the dose by 0.5 IU
Keep the dose the same
Decrease the dose by 0.5 IU
Do not give insulin and call the clinic to discuss

Longer‐term diabetics (>2 months insulin therapy)
Blood glucose concentration >450 mg/dL (>25 mmol/L)
Blood glucose concentration 270–450 mg/dL (15–25 mmol/L)
Blood glucose concentration 108–<270 mg/dL (7–<15 mmol/L)
Blood glucose concentration 90–<126 mg/dL (5–<7 mmol/L)
Blood glucose concentration <90 mg/dL (<5 mmmo/L)

Increase the dose by 1 IU
Increase the dose by 0.5 IU
Keep the dose the same
Decrease the dose by 0.5 IU
Do not give insulin and call clinic to discuss, check
for remission depending on dose

If using a glucometer calibrated for human blood, decrease target glucose concentration by 20% (approximately 18 mg/dL; 1 mmol/L).
Source: Adapted from Rand 2017.

cats subsequently shown to have acromegaly, and is
caused by pituitary oversecretion. Cats that have poor
glycemic control despite adequate or increased insulin
doses should have insulin‐like growth factor (IGF)
measured and, if possible, brain imaging. Occasionally,
diabetic cats with acromegaly are not insulin resistant at the time of diagnosis, but this is atypical.
Hyperadrenocorticism causes clinically significant
endogenous insulin resistance and is more common in
dogs than cats. Approximately 1 in 20 dogs with hyperadrenocorticism develops diabetes.
Clinically significant insulin resistance occurs when
concurrent disease causes upregulation of glucocorticoids, epinephrine, glucagon, and other counter­regulatory
hormones. Any concurrent infection or inflammatory
disease, endocrine or cardiac disease, or neoplasia can
contribute to insulin resistance. In dogs, common concurrent diseases that can contribute to insulin resistance
include hyperadrenocorticism, acute pancreatitis, urinary
tract infection, neoplasia, hypothyroidism, kidney disease, severe obesity, and oral infection. In cats, common
concurrent diseases include pancreatitis, hepatic lipidosis, cholangiohepatitis, urinary tract infection, kidney disease, hyperthyroidism, acromegaly, inflammatory bowel
disease, obesity, oral infection, and heart disease.
Diabetic Ketoacidosis
Diabetic ketoacidosis is a form of decompensated diabetes
mellitus in which cells use free fatty acids as an energy
source, because they cannot access glucose due to absolute
or relative insulin deficiency. In the presence of elevated

glucagon and other counterregulatory hormones, free
fatty acids are broken down into ketoacids. As ketoacids
and glucose accumulate in the blood, metabolic disturbances occur, which can be profound and life‐threatening,
and include dehydration, hypovolemia, elevated anion
gap, metabolic acidosis, electrolyte disturbances,
azotemia, elevated liver enzymes, hyperlactatemia, and
clinical signs of vomiting and anorexia. Treatment involves
rehydration and the use of short‐ and long‐acting insulins
to reduce ketone production and establish euglycemia.
Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state is another syndrome of decompensated diabetes mellitus. It is characterized by profound hyperglycemia greater than 600 mg/
dL (33.3 mmol/L) and hyperosmolality >320 mOsm/kg,
with a normal pH and no or mild ketonemia or ketonuria. It is less common than diabetic ketoacidosis. In the
classic form, animals are not ketotic or acidotic, but
mixed forms occur with severe hyperosmolality, compounded by ketoacidosis.

­Prognosis
Improved diets, insulin types, and the availability of home
monitoring have led to improvements in canine and
feline diabetes management in recent years. Most important of these is diabetic remission, thought to be attainable in 80% or more of newly diagnosed feline diabetics if
managed to achieve normal or near normal blood glucose
concentrations. Current data on prognosis that incorporates recent improvements in management are lacking.
Older data suggest that in diabetic animals managed with

VetBooks.ir

12 Diabetes Mellitus in Dogs and Cats

insulin therapy, median survival time from diagnosis is
2–3 years for dogs and 1.5 years for cats. Prognosis is
likely better for cats that undergo diabetic remission.
Approximately 25–30% of cats relapse and require
insulin to control blood glucose, and this increases with
duration of remission. A small proportion of cats (approximately 22%) achieve a second remission, but most
remain insulin dependent. Factors predisposing to diabetes such as obesity and corticosteroid administration are
likely also important factors associated with relapse.
Intermittent home blood glucose is recommended for
cats in remission to detect deteriorating glycemic status.
Cats with impaired fasting glucose (>117 mg/dL and
<180 mg/dL; >6.5 mmol/L and <10 mmol/L) or impaired
glucose tolerance are at increased risk of relapse. Diabetic
cats in remission with fasting blood glucose >135–
162 mg/dL (>7.5–9 mmol/L) when measured after overnight hospitalization or at home, and blood glucose
>250 mg/dL (>14 mmol/L) three hours after a glucose
tolerance test (using 1 g/kg glucose IV) have an 86%
probability of relapsing within nine months. In contrast,
no cat with normal fasting glucose and normal glucose
tolerance became diabetic again during the follow‐up
period (17–37 months). A low‐carbohydrate diet should
continue to be fed during remission.

­Conclusion
Diabetes mellitus is a common endocrinopathy in middle‐aged and older dogs and cats. The disease results

from insulin deficiency. Most dogs have type 1 diabetes
mellitus from immune‐mediated pancreatic destruction, and most cats have type 2 diabetes mellitus from
a combination of beta‐cell failure and insulin resistance associated with obesity, inactivity, breed, and
other factors.
Diagnosis is made by the demonstration of persistent
hyperglycemia and glucosuria along with typical clinical
signs of polyuria, polydipsia, and others.
Treatment is with exogenous insulin administration
and an appropriate diet, and involves frequent blood
­glucose monitoring (ideally, home blood glucose monitoring), appropriate dose adjustment, and a stable daily
schedule, together with elimination of factors that
­promote insulin resistance. In cats, diets that are low in
carbohydrate assist with glycemic control. Complications
include diabetic ketoacidosis, cataracts (dogs), muscle
wasting, plantigrade stance (cats), and urinary tract
infections. The treatment goal for diabetic dogs is to
resolve clinical signs and achieve ideal body condition
while avoiding complications and blood glucose
extremes. The primary treatment goal for diabetic cats is
diabetic remission and maintenance of euglycemia without the need for insulin therapy. Diabetic remission is
achievable in 80% or more of newly diagnosed diabetic
cats managed to achieve normal or near normal blood
glucose. For cats that remain insulin dependent, goals of
therapy are resolution of clinical signs while avoiding
life‐threatening hypoglycemia. Cats that remain poorly
controlled with insulin doses above 1U/kg BID should be
tested for acromegaly.

­Further Reading
American Diabetes Association. Diagnosis and
classification of diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care 2010;
33(Suppl 1): S62–9.
Callegari C, Mercuriali E, Hafner M, et al. Survival time
and prognostic factors in cats with newly diagnosed
diabetes mellitus: 114 cases (2000–2009). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2013; 243(1): 91–5.
Crenshaw KL, Peterson ME. Serum fructosamine
concentration as an index of glycemia in cats with
diabetes mellitus and stress hyperglycemia. J Vet Intern
Med 1996; 10(6): 360–4.
Fleeman LM, Rand JS. Long‐term management of the
diabetic dog. Waltham Focus 2000; 10(3): 16–23.
Fleeman L, Rand J. Canine diabetes mellitus. In: Rand J, ed.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals. Ames,
IA: John Wiley & Sons, 2013, pp. 143–68.
Gilor C, Graves TK. Synthetic insulin analogs and their use
in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2010; 40(2): 297–307.

Goossens MM, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, Griffey SM.
Response to treatment and survival in 104 cats with
diabetes mellitus (1985‐1995). J Vet Intern Med 1998;
12(1): 1–6.
Guyton AC, Hall JE. Unit XIV: Endocrinology and
Reproduction. In: Textbook of Medical Physiology, 10th
edn. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders, 2000, pp.
836–98.
Hendrix DVH. Diseases and surgery of the canine anterior
uvea. In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary Ophthalmology, 4th
edn. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing Professional, 2007,
pp. 812–58.
Hess RS. Insulin resistance in dogs. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2010; 40: 309–16.
Kooistra HS. Growth hormone disorders: acromegaly
and pituitary dwarfism. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC,
eds. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th
edn. St Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2010,
pp. 1711–16.

101

VetBooks.ir

102

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

Kruth SA, Cowgill LD [Abstract] Renal glucose transport
in the cat. Proceedings of the American College of
Veterinary Internal Medicine Forum, 1982, p. 78.
Marshall RD, Rand JS, Morton JM. Treatment of newly
diagnosed diabetic cats with glargine insulin improves
glycaemic control and results in higher probability of
remission than protamine zinc and lente insulins.
J Feline Med Surg 2009; 11(8): 683–91.
Melián C, Pérez‐Alenza MD, Peterson ME. Hyperadreno­
corticism in dogs. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds.
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edn.
St Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2010, pp. 1816–40.
Nelson R. Canine diabetes mellitus. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman
EC, eds. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th
edn. St Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2010, pp. 1782–95.
Niessen SJM, Church DB, Forcada Y. Hypersomatotropism,
acromegaly, and hyperadrenocorticism in feline diabetes
mellitus. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2013; 43:
319–50.
O’Brien M. Diabetic emergencies in small animals. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2010; 40: 317–33.

Rand J, Gottlieb S. Feline diabetes mellitus. In: Ettinger S,
Feldman E, Cote E, eds. Textbook of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, 8th edn. St Louis, MO: Saunders, 2017, pp.
1781–1795.
Rand J. Feline diabetes mellitus. In: Clinical Endocrinology
of Companion Animals. Ames, IA: John Wiley & Sons,
2013, pp. 169–90.
Reusch C. Feline diabetes mellitus. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman
EC, eds. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine,
7th edn. St Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2010,
pp. 1796–816.
Roomp K, Rand JS. Evaluation of detemir in diabetic
cats managed with a protocol for intensive blood
glucose control. J Vet Intern Med 2012; 14(8):
566–72.
Rucinsky R, Cook A, Haley S, Nelson R, Zoran DL,
Poundstone M. 2010 AAHA diabetes management
guidelines for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
2010; 46: 215–24.
Scott‐Moncrieff JC. Insulin resistance in cats. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2010; 40: 241–57.

VetBooks.ir

103

13
Hypoglycemia in Patients without Diabetes Mellitus:
Evaluation and Management
Rhett Nichols, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)
Antech Diagnostics, Farmingdale, NY, USA

Hypoglycemia is defined as a blood glucose concentra­
tion of <60 mg/dL (3.3 mmol/L). Because of the effective­
ness of defense mechanisms against falling glucose
concentrations, hypoglycemia is an uncommon clinical
event in nondiabetic adult dogs and cats, although two
exceptions are xylitol toxicity and babesiosis caused by
Babesia canis rossi in the dog. However, hypoglycemia
does occur with regularity in neonates, toy and minia­
ture breed dogs less than 6 months of age without porto­
systemic vascular anomalies (PSVA), and young dogs
with PSVA. In addition, hypoglycemia is a very common
complication in insulin‐treated diabetic dogs and cats;
the incidence of owner‐reported “occasional” hypoglyce­
mic episodes ranges from 35% to 40%. Although animals
with diabetes are not spared the risk for the same hypo­
glycemic disorders as those without diabetes, the vast
majority of their hypoglycemic episodes are the result of
diabetes treatment. Furthermore, because the patho­
physiology of hypoglycemia in diabetes is distinct, and
the diagnostic and management approaches are different
for pets without diabetes, this chapter will only address
the evaluation and management of hypoglycemia in
patients without diabetes mellitus. In addition, insulin‐
secreting pancreatic endocrine tumors, more commonly
known as insulinomas, will be covered in Chapter XX.

­Maintenance of Normal Glucose
Concentrations in Healthy Dogs and Cats
Cell function and metabolism are dependent on energy
sources delivered via the circulation. There are two
major sources of energy: meals (ingested carbohydrates,
proteins, and fat) and glucose that is produced by the
liver. The liver initially produces glucose by the break­
down of stored glycogen (glycogenolysis). As glycogen
stores are depleted, glucose levels are augmented by

gluconeogenesis. The whole process of gluconeogene­
sis is quite complex and is dependent on certain
substrates such as amino acids and free fatty acids
­
mobilized from muscle and adipose tissue. In addition,
a normally functioning endocrine system is also
­necessary to maintain glucose homeostasis and prevent
hypoglycemia. Insulin is the dominant glucose‐lower­
ing hormone. It suppresses endogenous glucose
­production and stimulates glucose utilization. The glu­
cose‐raising or counterregulatory hormones include
epinephrine, glucagon, growth hormone (GH), and
­cortisol. These increase hepatic glucose production by
stimulating glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis and
also inhibit glucose utilization by tissues.
Because the brain cannot synthesize glucose, store gly­
cogen, or use physiologic circulating concentrations of
alternative fuels effectively, maintenance of brain func­
tion, and ultimately survival, requires a continuous sup­
ply of glucose from the circulation. That, in turn, requires
maintenance of the plasma glucose concentration within
the physiological range because blood‐to‐brain glucose
transport is a direct function of the arterial plasma glu­
cose concentration. Glucose counterregulatory mecha­
nisms effectively prevent or rapidly correct hypoglycemia.
These critical physiologic defenses include a decrease in
insulin secretion as glucose levels decline within the
physiologic range; an increase in glucagon secretion; or,
in its absence, an increase in epinephrine secretion, both
occurring as glucose levels decline just below the physi­
ologic range. In addition, increased cortisol and GH
secretion are involved in the defense against prolonged
hypoglycemia. If these defense mechanisms fail, blood
glucose levels will continue to fall, and as a result, insulin
secretion is virtually completely suppressed at glucose
levels <60 mg/mL.
In essence, hypoglycemia develops when the sum of
glucose utilization from the circulation (largely by the

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

104

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

brain but also by the renal medulla, red blood cells, and
insulin‐sensitive tissues, such as muscle) exceeds the
sum of glucose delivery into the circulation (from
ingested carbohydrates and hepatic and renal glucose
production).

Box 13.1 DAMN IT diagnosis mnemonic
D
A
M
N
I

­Clinical Signs of Hypoglycemia
Clinical hypoglycemia is a blood glucose level low
enough to cause symptoms, including impairment of
brain function. For example, values below 50 mg/dL
(2.8 mmol/L) are often accompanied by symptoms, but
values below the lower end of the normal reference
range may not be. Hence clinical hypoglycemia, which is
also referred to as “the hypoglycemic syndrome,” is
not defined by hypoglycemia alone, but according to
Whipple’s triad – hypoglycemia accompanied by symp­
toms that are relieved by the administration of glucose or
by feeding.
Symptoms of hypoglycemia are categorized as neuro­
glycopenic (lack of glucose supply to the brain) or auto­
nomic (largely the result of the sympathoadrenal
discharge triggered by hypoglycemia). The neuroglyco­
penic signs range from lethargy, weakness, ataxia, and
unusual behavior to seizures and coma. Clinical signs
resulting from stimulation of the sympathoadrenal sys­
tem include restlessness, muscle tremors, and hunger.
Clinical manifestations are dependent on the duration
and severity of hypoglycemia. For example, in healthy
people, symptoms of hypoglycemia develop at a mean
plasma glucose concentration of 55 mg/dL. However,
people with recurring fasting hypoglycemia appear to
tolerate low blood glucose levels (e.g., <40 mg/dL) for
prolonged periods without exhibiting clinical signs. This
adaptive process to chronic severe hypoglycemia also
occurs in animals.

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Identification of randomly obtained or a fasting blood
glucose concentration below 60 mg/dL is cause for
concern in dogs or cats. Although this finding is not
always diagnostic of organic disease, normal dogs
and cats have consistently been shown not to have
blood glucose concentrations decline below this level.
Therefore, once artifactual hypoglycemia has been
ruled out as a possible cause, organic disease is a likely
cause of persistent hypoglycemia. Failure in any one of
the key steps in the production or conservation of glu­
cose may result in hypoglycemia and clinical signs of
hypoglycemia. The many causes of hypoglycemia and

T

= Degenerative or Developmental
= Anomalous or Autoimmune
= Metabolic, Mechanical, or Mental
= Nutritional or Neoplastic
=	
Inflammatory, Infectious, Ischemic, Immune‐
mediated, Inherited, Iatrogenic, or Idiopathic
= Traumatic or Toxic

a list of differential diagnoses are given using the acro­
nym DAMN IT scheme for diagnosis (Box 13.1).
Artifactual Hypoglycemia
Artifactual hypoglycemia, also called pseudohypoglyce­
mia, is not a clinical syndrome but rather a result of arti­
factually low blood glucose concentration in vitro, mainly
in the presence of leukocytosis, polycythemia, or both.
In dogs, it has been reported that the glucose concentra­
tion in whole blood kept at room temperature can
decrease by as much as 10 mg/dL/h. Presumably, this
decrease in glucose concentration is due to continuing
utilization of glucose by cells present in the blood.
Therefore, whole blood obtained for glucose determina­
tion should be centrifuged within an hour after collec­
tion, separated and refrigerated or frozen to minimize
artifactual lowering of blood glucose concentration. In
addition, the practice of measuring glucose in whole
blood immediately after collection using portable hand‐
held glucometers specifically designed and manufac­
tured for measuring human blood glucose, while quick
and convenient, is less accurate than measurements by
an accredited veterinary laboratory. Because dogs, cats,
and humans have different ratios of glucose between the
plasma and red blood cells, if a portable hand‐held glu­
cometer is used to determine the blood glucose, it is rec­
ommended to use the AlphaTRAK® glucometer (Abbott
Animal Health) which is calibrated specifically for dogs
and cats.
Another cause of artifactual hypoglycemia is labora­
tory error. Incorrect values can occur with any assay
and therefore, it is always wise to confirm a finding
of hypoglycemia by evaluating another blood sample
before more sophisticated or extensive studies are
performed.
Other less common causes of pseudohypoglycemia are
seen with the following conditions.
Leukemias (e.g., chronic lymphocytic leukemia) and
benign forms of leukocytosis (e.g., leukemoid reactions).
●● Chronic hemolytic anemia accompanied by a high
(>3%) nucleated red blood cell count.
●●

VetBooks.ir

13 Hypoglycemia in Patients without Diabetes Mellitus

Polycythemia vera: an 87% decrease in blood glucose
levels over four hours has been reported.
●● Hypovolemic shock: poor capillary circulation leads to
increased glucose transit time, promoting increased
glucose extraction by the tissue. Capillary blood sam­
pling from the ear or paw pads is low compared to cen­
tral venous glucose levels which are normal.
●●

Congenital Hepatic Disease: Portosystemic
Vascular Shunts, Microvascular Dysplasia,
and Glycogen Storage Disease
The most common congenital cause of hepatic‐induced
hypoglycemia is portosytemic vascular anomalies
(PSVA). PSVA is really an “umbrella term” which includes
dogs with extrahepatic shunting (PSVA‐E) or intrahe­
patic shunting (PSVA‐I). In addition, many small‐breed
dogs with PSVA have concurrent microvascular dyspla­
sia (MVD). The prevalence of hypoglycemia in dogs with
PSVA varies from 5% to 10%. The hypoglycemia associ­
ated with PSVA is presumably caused by chronic hepatic
hypoperfusion which leads to insufficient glycogen
stores and inadequate hepatocellular function to support
gluconeogenesis.
Signalment

There is no gender predilection while the average age at
presentation is 1.5 years for PSVA‐E and 1.0 year for
PSVA‐I, although dogs can be as young as 1 month or as
old as 12 years. Significant difference in body weight
between PSVA‐E and PSVA‐I correlates with the long‐
recognized propensity for PSVA‐E to occur in small‐
breed dogs and PSVA‐I to occur in large‐breed dogs.
Breed prevalence for PSVA‐E implicates high risk in the
Yorkshire terrier and several other small breeds includ­
ing shih tzu, Maltese, pug, miniature schnauzer, West
Highland white terriers, bichon frise, miniature and toy
poodles, Havanese, cairn terriers, silky terriers, and mix­
tures of these breeds. The most prevalent breed with
PSVA‐I is the Labrador retriever, followed by mixed‐
breed dogs and Siberian huskies.
History

Historical features of PSVA include pediatric hypoglyce­
mia, small body stature (runt of the litter), episodic inap­
petence, vomiting, salivation, polyuria and polydipsia,
and signs associated with ammonium biurate urolithiasis
(hematuria, stranguria, and pollakiuria). Neurobehavioral
signs of hepatic encephalopathy may be unapparent or
may include ataxia, obsessive circling, and head pressing.
Laboratory Findings

In a cohort of 610 dogs with PSVA at Cornell University,
no dog with a portosystemic shunt was undetected when

tested with paired serum bile acids. Therefore, the most
reliable tests for detection of a portosystemic shunt are
paired fasting and postprandial bile acid (100% detec­
tion), 80% demonstrate low protein C activity (this test
reflects the severity of shunting), >60% show microcyto­
sis, low total protein and cholesterol, and a urine specific
gravity <1.025, and biurate crystalluria occurs in approx­
imately 33% and 22% of PSVA‐E and PSVA‐I respec­
tively. It is important to remember that usually, biopsy
alone cannot differentiate PSVA and MVD and that
MVD alone is not associated with signs of illness (e.g.,
clinical hypoglycemia).
Other Diagnostics

Imaging studies are needed to differentiate PSVA‐E from
PSVA‐I and MVD and are important for surgical and
medical treatments. These include transsplenic micro­
bubble studies, transsplenic and colorectal technetium‐
99m scintigraphy. However, the gold standard of imaging
studies is contrast multisector CT imaging and three‐
dimensional image reconstruction, which provides
­optimal comprehensive information for diagnosis and
surgical planning for PSVA.
Treatment

It is inarguable that optimal therapy for symptomatic
PSVA is shunt attenuation. However, it is important to
remember that all symptomatic PSVA dogs will benefit
from medical management, yet all dogs do not require all
forms of therapy. For example, a wide spectrum of PSVA
patients at Cornell University have been managed medi­
cally with survival outcome and survival duration no dif­
ferent than for shunt ligation.
Glycogen Storage Diseases
Glycogen storage diseases (GSD) are rare congenital
hepatic disorders in which hypoglycemia results from
the inability to convert glycogen to glucose because of
the absolute or relative deficiency of the enzymes neces­
sary for the breakdown of glycogen stores in the liver.
Type III GSD (Cori disease), a deficiency of amylo‐1,6‐
glucosidase, was documented in puppies with massive
hepatomegaly caused by glycogen accumulation, failure
to thrive, and muscle weakness. Type I GSD (von Gierke
disease) has been documented in the Maltese breed.
This uncommon disorder is a deficiency of glucose‐6‐
phosphatase caused by a defect in the glucose‐6‐phos­
phatase gene. Affected puppies develop progressive
hepatomegaly characterized by diffuse hepatocellular
vacuolization, tremors, weakness, and neurologic signs
when hypoglycemic. Biochemical abnormalities include
fasting hypoglycemia, hypercholesterolemia, hypertri­
glyceridemia, and elevated uric acid levels. Confirmatory

105

VetBooks.ir

106

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

tests include histologic evaluation of liver biopsies and
specific enzyme assays that are rarely performed in vet­
erinary medicine. And lastly, GSD type IV has been doc­
umented in a family of Norwegian forest cats. It leads to
death as a result of perinatal hypoglycemic collapse or
late juvenile‐onset neuromuscular degeneration.
Idiopathic Causes of Liver‐Associated
Hypoglycemia in Young Animals: Neonatal
and Juvenile Hypoglycemia
Neonatal Hypoglycemia

The blood glucose concentration in the healthy neonate
falls during the first few hours after birth because of the
loss of continuous transplacental infusion of glucose.
Thereafter, the neonate is dependent on glycogenolysis
and gluconeogenesis to maintain euglycemia between
feedings. Limited glycogen stores, small muscle mass,
and lack of adipose tissue as alternative energy sources
place the neonate at risk for hypoglycemia. That said, the
ill neonate should always be evaluated for hypoglycemia,
especially if sepsis, toxic milk syndrome, or starvation is
suspected or hypothermia is noted. Orally administered
glucose or frequent bottle feeding can help correct or
prevent hypoglycemia.
Juvenile Hypoglycemia

Hypoglycemia of toy and miniature breed dogs younger
than 6 months of age is common. Deficiency of gluco­
neogenic precursors such as the amino acid alanine or an
age‐related transient malfunction or deficiency of
enzymes responsible for gluconeogenesis is implicated
in this syndrome. Insufficient food supply of any cause
such as starvation or gastrointestinal disturbances may
cause hypoglycemia within 24 hours of fasting. In addi­
tion, underlying conditions such as PSVA that cause ano­
rexia or impaired liver function may contribute to the
precipitation of this syndrome. Many of these puppies
have a history of being recently purchased along with a
recent change in environment and diet. Presenting signs
may include weakness, depression, vomiting and diar­
rhea with or without intestinal parasites, ataxia, stupor,
and seizures. Similar forms of juvenile hypoglycemia
have not been well documented in kittens.
Treatment and Prognosis

Intravenous administration of a 20% or 50% dextrose
solution (0.8 mL to 0.2 mL per 100 g body weight respec­
tively) is indicated if there are neurologic signs. If the pup
can take the glucose solution orally, this is administered
at regular intervals until appetite returns. The small
amounts of food are given at two‐hour intervals. If tube
feeding is needed, oral rehydration is guided by electro­
lyte measurements. Clinical improvement occurs rapidly

following glucose administration. The prognosis is good
if hypoglycemia is corrected before brain damage occurs.
The risk of developing hypoglycemia decreases with
increasing age and body weight.
Nonislet Cell Tumor‐Induced Hypoglycemia
Hypoglycemia can be a manifestation of neoplastic dis­
ease. Tumors related to the occurrence of hypoglycemia
can, as a general rule, be divided into three groups. First,
tumors can produce excess insulin such as pancre­
atic insulinomas or ectopic insulin‐producing tumors.
Second, hypoglycemia can be caused by tumor‐related
factors such as destruction of the liver by massive tumor
infiltration. And lastly, there is now convincing evidence
that secretion of insulin‐like growth factor (IGF)‐2 and
incompletely processed IGFs (e.g., pro‐IGF‐2 or “big”‐
IGF‐2) causes hypoglycemia in humans. This mecha­
nism has also been documented in a few cases of
hypoglycemia in dogs. Nonislet cell tumor‐induced
hypoglycemia (NICTH) can arise in virtually every
benign and malignant tumor. However, it mainly occurs
in patients with solid tumors of mesenchymal (e.g., leio­
myosarcoma, fibrosarcoma) and epithelial origin (e.g.,
hepatoma, hepatocellular carcinoma), but rarely in
patients with tumors of hematopoietic or neuroendo­
crine origin. The most frequent nonpancreatic tumors
associated with hypoglycemia are leiomyoma, leiomyo­
sarcoma, hepatoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, and
tumors with extensive hepatic metastasis.
Pathophysiology

Understanding the cause of hypoglycemia with NICTH
involves a brief review of the IGF system. The IGF sys­
tem is composed of two IGF ligands (IGF‐1 and IGF‐2)
and two IGF receptors: the IGF‐1 receptor (IGF1R)
and IGF‐2 receptor (IGF2R). Both IGF‐1 and IGF‐2 are
structurally and functionally related to insulin but the
glucose‐lowering effect of IGFs is 10 times lower than
that of insulin, although in healthy human subjects the
serum concentration of IGFs is about 1000 times
higher than insulin. The crucial event in the develop­
ment of NICTH seems to be overexpression of the
IGF‐2 gene by the tumor. NICTH is characterized by
recurrent fasting hypoglycemia and is associated with
the secretion of precursors of IGF‐2 (“big”‐IGF‐2) by
the tumor.
Diagnosis

Dogs with hypoglycemia caused by NICTH are usually
brought to the veterinarian with clinical signs of hypo­
glycemia, or hypoglycemia may be noted on a biochemi­
cal profile in an asymptomatic patient during a wellness
exam. The diagnosis of a nonislet cell tumor requires a

VetBooks.ir

13 Hypoglycemia in Patients without Diabetes Mellitus

thorough physical examination, thoracic and abdominal
radiographs, abdominal ultrasonography, and histo­
pathologic examination of the tumor, which is often
located in the abdominal cavity.
Treatment

The long‐term therapeutic strategies in NICTH involve
complete removal of the tumor or reduction of the
tumor mass. In order to treat hypoglycemia, a short‐
term beneficial effect is best achieved with (continu­
ous) parenteral administration of glucose and dietary
guidelines. Glucocorticoids, at least in humans, seem
to be the most effective form of medical therapy in
terms of long‐term relief from hypoglycemia by stimu­
lating glyconeogenesis and suppressing, although not
in all cases, the production of “big”‐IGF‐2. In addition,
moderate to high doses of glucocorticoids may cause
shrinkage of the tumor.
Hypoadrenocorticism
Incidence

Hypoadrenocorticism should always be on the rule‐out
list for hypoglycemia. Of 506 dogs diagnosed with
hypoadrenocorticism at UC Davis Veterinary Medical
Teaching Hospital, 116 (25%) were hypoglycemic at the
time of diagnosis. Interestingly, however, clinical signs
attributable to hypoglycemia appear to be uncommon.
In this cohort of cases, hypoglycemic seizures and other
clinical signs that may have been caused by hypoglyce­
mia, such as ataxia and disorientation, were observed in
only 30 dogs (6%).
Pathophysiology and Treatment

With glucocorticoid deficiency, glucose production by
the liver (i.e., gluconeogenesis) is decreased and the sen­
sitivity of insulin receptors in peripheral tissues is
increased. In tandem, these factors predispose the ani­
mal with adrenal insufficiency to hypoglycemia. That
said, the blood glucose concentration should always be
measured in a dog suspected or known to have hypoad­
renocorticism. A 2.5–5% dextrose infusion, usually
added to lactated Ringer’s or normal saline solution,
should be administered as soon as hypoglycemia is docu­
mented in addition to glucocorticoid replacement ther­
apy. If the pretreatment serum sodium and potassium
concentrations are normal, mineralocorticoid replace­
ment is not necessary over the short term, and may never
be indicated in some dogs with adrenal insufficiency
(atypical hypoadrenocorticism). These dogs, despite low
serum aldosterone concentrations, are able to maintain
normal serum sodium and potassium levels for reasons
that are unclear.

Critical Illness and Hypoglycemia: Renal
Failure, Acquired Liver Disease, Sepsis,
and Virulent Babesiosis
Renal Failure

Renal failure is associated with hypoglycemia in critically
ill diabetic and nondiabetic human patients, but the
impact of renal failure on the blood glucose concentra­
tion is unpredictable in dogs and cats. In most cases, the
blood glucose concentration is normal. However, hyper­
glycemia may develop as a result of uremic‐induced car­
bohydrate intolerance and insulin resistance in a dog or
cat with impaired insulin secretion; this phenomenon
has been referred to as “pseudodiabetes.” Alternatively,
renal failure may induce hypoglycemia.
Several mechanisms for the development of hypoglyce­
mia during renal insufficiency have been proposed. These
include reduced renal gluconeogenesis and decreased
caloric intake related to inappetence. Normally, renal glu­
coneogenesis may supply as much as 45% of new glucose
during prolonged starvation. Additional defects in glu­
cose homeostasis occur in renal insufficiency, including
an increased insulin half‐life related to decreased renal
degradation or excretion of insulin, impaired hepatic gly­
cogenolysis and gluconeogenesis, inadequate glucose
counterregulatory responses, or a combination of these
factors. It should be emphasized that hypoglycemia is
rarely the cause of death in the critically ill patient with
renal failure and is considered more a marker for multi­
system failure than a cause of mortality.
Acquired Hepatic Dysfunction

Hypoglycemia has been associated with a wide spectrum
of liver diseases in people. These disorders include eve­
rything from type 1 glycogen storage disease, cirrhosis,
viral hepatitis, procainamide‐induced hepatitis, chole­
cystitis, and metastatic infiltration to fulminant liver fail­
ure after cardiac arrest. In dogs and cats, hypoglycemia
often results from severe destruction of the liver from
bacterial infection, hepatotoxins, neoplasia, and chronic
fibrosis/cirrhosis with the development of acquired por­
tosystemic shunts. The underlying cause of hypoglyce­
mia results from inadequate amounts of functional liver
tissue for optimal gluconeogenesis and glycogen storage
to maintain normal blood glucose levels.
The diagnosis of acquired liver dysfunction is usually
quite straightforward. Common CBC, serum biochemi­
cal profile and urinalysis abnormalities may include
microcytosis, low serum albumin, BUN and cholesterol
concentrations, elevated serum bilirubin levels, elevated
paired serum bile acid concentrations, ammonium biu­
rate crystals in the urine, radiographic evidence of abnor­
mal liver size, and/or ultrasonographic changes consistent
with abnormal echotexture or liver size. A liver biopsy is

107

VetBooks.ir

108

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

necessary to determine the exact cause of the liver disor­
der and may help guide specific treatment options such as
the selective use of antibiotics, glucocorticoids, copper
chelation, ciclosporin, lactulose, and dietary therapy.
Sepsis‐Induced Hypoglycemia

Systemic illness caused by microbial (usually bacteria)
invasion of normally sterile parts of the body is referred
to as sepsis. Sepsis plus organ dysfunction or hypoperfu­
sion is termed severe sepsis. And severe sepsis accompa­
nied by hypotension is termed septic shock.
Impaired glucose homeostasis has been well docu­
mented in patients with sepsis. Hyperglycemia is the
most common blood glucose abnormality seen early in
the course of bacterial sepsis. In preterminal sepsis, pro­
found hypoglycemia may occur because of hyperinsu­
linemia, increased tissue uptake of glucose, and the
failure of hepatic glucose production. It is postulated
that sepsis‐related hypoglycemia is a manifestation of
nonspecific inflammatory responses mediated by high
levels of cytokines, including tumor necrosis factor and
interleukin‐6.
The signs and symptoms of sepsis are highly variable.
They are influenced by the virulence and “bioburden’ (the
amount) of the organism, the portal of entry (e.g., skin,
gut, urinary tract) and host susceptibility (the young and
very old and patients with weakened immune systems are
most at risk). Patients with sepsis can present with a fever
or hypothermia and CBC findings may show a leukocyto­
sis with a left shift or leukopenia. Common causes of sep­
sis‐induced hypoglycemia include parvovirus infection,
prostatic and liver abscesses, pyothorax, pyometra, hem­
orrhagic gastroenteritis, and gram‐negative bacteremia.
The diagnosis of sepsis‐induced hypoglycemia is often
one of suspicion or identification of an infection based on
history, physical examination and CBC findings, and
other diagnostics such as bacterial cultures, radiography
and ultrasonography, and resolution of hypoglycemia
after initiation of antibiotic therapy.
Virulent Babesiosis

Hypoglycemia has been identified as a life‐threatening
metabolic complication in almost 20% of severely ill dogs
suffering from babesiosis caused by Babesia canis rossi.
This highly virulent subspecies of Babesia canis is
endemic only to South Africa. Clinical signs include pale
mucous membranes, depression, tachycardia, tachyp­
nea, anorexia, weakness, splenomegaly, and fever. The
clinical signs are attributed to tissue hypoxia resulting
from anemia and a concomitant systemic inflammatory
response syndrome caused by marked cytokine release.
The severe form of the disease is characterized by hemo­
lytic anemia and severe acid–base derangements, with
secondary multiple organ failure and complications such

as acute renal failure, hepatopathy with marked icterus,
hypoglycemia, acute respiratory distress syndrome,
­cerebral pathology, and additional immune‐mediated
erythrocyte destruction. Mortality is around 12%. A fea­
ture of the disease is that, in contrast to babesiosis in
other domestic species, pups and immature dogs are also
severely affected. Only one case of Babesia canis rossi
has been reported in a dog in the United States and that
was a dog imported from South Africa.
Several contributing factors have been implicated as
causes of the hypoglycemia. These include increased
peripheral requirement for glucose during febrile and
critical illness, obligatory demands of the parasites that
use glucose as their major fuel, hyperinsulinemia, failure
of hepatic gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis, and
increased glucose consumption by anaerobic glycolysis
because of tissue hypoxia.
Blood glucose concentration should ideally be meas­
ured in all dogs requiring inpatient treatment for babe­
siosis, but is mandatory in collapsed dogs, puppies and
dogs with severe anemia, vomiting, or icterus. Many
dogs have probably been misdiagnosed with cerebral
babesiosis in the past, and hypoglycemia should be sus­
pected in any dog with coma or other neurologic signs.
Response to treatment with selected antibabesial com­
pounds such as imidocarb dipropionate, atovaquone,
azithromycin, clindamycin, and doxycycline is variable,
and intravenous dextrose does not reliably improve gly­
cemic status or survival.
Persistent Hyperinsulinemic Hypoglycemic
Syndrome
In humans, persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of
infancy (PHHI) represents the most common cause of
hyperinsulinism in neonates and children; currently,
many authors prefer the term congenital hyperinsulin­
ism (CHI). Severe recurrent hypoglycemia associated
with an inappropriate elevation of serum insulin defines
CHI. This disturbance of the normal relationship
between glucose concentration and insulin secretion is
caused by a variety of genetic mutations. If left untreated,
CHI can lead to brain damage or death secondary to
severe hypoglycemia. Although it was initially thought to
affect only infants and children, numerous cases have
been reported in adults of all ages but at a much lower
incidence. CHI is often poorly responsive or unrespon­
sive to medical management, necessitating 95% or near‐
total pancreatectomy.
Recently, a persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemic
syndrome, not associated with sepsis or insulinoma, was
diagnosed in two dogs. Both dogs were less than 12
months of age. The clinical signs in these dogs were
­similar; hypoglycemic‐induced seizures unresponsive to

VetBooks.ir

13 Hypoglycemia in Patients without Diabetes Mellitus

intravenous glucose administration and anticonvulsant
therapy. The owners of these dogs chose euthanasia
because of poor response to therapy and poor prognosis.
Blood was cultured from one dog using a special enrich­
ment PCR media to rule in or rule out an infection
caused by a fastidious bacteria; Bartonella hensalae
was amplified and sequenced from this dog’s blood. In
the other dog, Bartonella kohlerae was amplified and
sequenced retrospectively from paraffin‐embedded
­tissue. Despite isolating Bartonella spp. from both dogs,
it is unclear whether B. hensalae and B. kohlerae contrib­
uted to the pathogenesis of this unusual and rare
­hypoglycemic syndrome. That said, persistent hyperin­
sulinemic hypoglycemic syndrome should be suspected
in any young dog with hypoglycemia refractory to intra­
venous glucose. Moreover, until more is known about
the cause of this syndrome, testing and treating
for Bartonella should be a diagnostic and therapeutic
consideration.
Xylitol Toxicity
Xylitol exposure, even in small amounts, can cause hypo­
glycemia and severe liver damage in dogs. Xylitol is a 5‐
carbon sugar alcohol that is used primarily as an artificial
sweetener that has less than two‐thirds of the calories of
most sugars. The two major sources of xylitol exposure
are food and dental or medical products. Initially, expo­
sure to xylitol in dogs was from “sugar‐free” chewing
gums. However, with demands from human diabetic
patients, particularly because of the popularity of Atkins‐
like “low‐carb” diets, many foods now contain xylitol. A
large number of low‐carbohydrate foods, including
breads, candies, gums, and deserts, have xylitol as the
sweetener of choice. Xylitol has a wide margin of safety
in mammals with the exception of dogs. Oral exposures
as low as 0.1 mg/kg have induced hypoglycemia in the
dog, and levels of 0.5 mg/kg have resulted in hepatotoxic­
ity in some dogs. For example, one piece of Trident gum
contains 0.22 g of xylitol and the popular breath mint Ice
Breakers contains 1 g of xylitol per piece and therefore,
nine pieces of Trident or two Ice Breaker pieces could
potentially cause xylitol toxicity in a 20 kg dog. The lit­
erature reports no cases of xylitol toxicity in cats.

has been steadily rising over the last few years, with a
resultant surge in xylitol cases reported to the APCC.
Clinical Signs and Laboratory Abnormalities

In laboratory experiments, xylitol directly stimulates
insulin synthesis and secretion within 30 minutes after
ingestion. However, in clinical cases, the onset of clinical
signs varies based on the form of xylitol used in the prod­
uct ingested. The powder used in candies and mints is
absorbed quickly and signs can be seen in 30 minutes.
Gum must be chewed to release the xylitol. If the gum is
swallowed whole it leaches into the stomach, and the
onset of clinical signs can be delayed 8–18 hours.
Vomiting is often the first symptom. Clinical signs can
include ataxia, depression, dilated pupils, and seizures
(related to hypoglycemia), and lethargy, inappetence,
vomiting, and diarrhea (related to liver failure).
Laboratory abnormalities initially include hyperinsuline­
mia, hypoglycemia, hypophosphatemia, hypokalemia,
and increased AST and ALT concentrations. Dogs that
do not exhibit hypoglycemia immediately after ingestion
of xylitol may still develop acute liver failure. These dogs
may develop severe signs 24–72 hours later.
Diagnosis

The diagnosis of xylitol toxicity is made by history of
exposure, clinical signs, and serum biochemical abnor­
malities consistent with xylitol poisoning. Because the
serum half‐life of xylitol is about two minutes and there
is rapid progression of the toxic effect, testing for xylitol
in the blood is not realistic.
Treatment and Monitoring

Blood glucose levels should be determined initially and
monitored at least every four hours for 24 hours or
longer, as indicated. Liver enzyme levels and prothrom­
bin time/partial thromboplastin time (PT/PTT) should
be monitored every 24 hours for 48–72 hours. It is not
uncommon to have a transient elevation in ALT (300–
800) very quickly after ingestion. Electrolyte status and
packed cell volume (PCV) should also be monitored
regularly.
There is no antidote for xylitol toxicity.
Induce emesis if the xylitol ingestion is recent.
●● Use of activated charcoal is of limited efficacy with
xylitol because it is not effective at binding xylitol.
●● IV fluid support: important to restore or maintain
hydration, treat hypoglycemia, and prevent or treat
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Patients
with normal blood glucose levels should receive a 2.5%
dextrose solution.
●● Hypoglycemia caused by xylitol toxicity is usually
responsive to IV dextrose solutions. Refractory cases
●●
●●

Prevalence

Recently, there has been a rapid increase in the number
of products containing xylitol. According to the ASPCA
Animal Poison Control Center (APCC), the number of
reported xylitol exposures in dogs has been increasing
steadily and exponentially over the past few years. In
2007, theAPCC began to log xylitol cases. That year, the
center received 1764 calls about xylitol. In 2012, the fig­
ure was 3184. The number of products containing xylitol

109

VetBooks.ir

110

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

may be treated with glucagon or dexamethasone.
Feeding small frequent meals may be beneficial in help­
ing to manage hypoglycemia.
●● Use antiemetics and gastrointestinal protectants as
needed.
●● Avoid drugs that are metabolized by the liver.
●● Antibiotics may be indicated in acute liver failure
cases to treat concurrent infection (clavamox or
amoxicillin, ampicillin, cephalexin, or cefadroxil with
metronidazole).
Duration of Treatment and Prognosis

The length of treatment depends on the severity of clini­
cal signs. Treatment for cases without liver involvement
may last 1–3 days. Treatment should continue until glu­
cose levels are normal. Treatment of cases with liver
involvement may last weeks. The prognosis for patients
that only develop hypoglycemia is good. Prognosis for
patients who develop liver failure is guarded and depends
on the severity of the disease. Typically, there are no lin­
gering medical issues once liver problems have been suc­
cessfully resolved.

­Diagnostic Approach to Disorders
Associated with Hypoglycemia
After confirming the finding of hypoglycemia, the
­history (including exposure to insulin, sulfonylureas,
or xylitol), signalment, physical exam findings, and a
careful review of available laboratory data guide the
evaluation. This information will either provide clues
to the cause of hypoglycemia or exclude hypoglycemia
caused by acknowledged drugs or toxins, critical ill­
nesses, hormone deficiencies, or a nonislet cell tumor.
A test of adrenocortical function is reasonable although

hypoadrenocorticism is not commonly found as a cause
of hypoglycemia in dogs in the absence of other clinical
clues. Nonislet cell tumor hypoglycemia is often associ­
ated with a large, clinically apparent mesenchymal
tumor (e.g., leiomyoma and leiomyosarcoma) as well as
epithelial tumors that are associated with the liver (e.g.,
hepatoma or hepatocellular carcinoma).
As part of the signalment, age of the animal can be
quite useful in narrowing down the long list of rule‐outs
for hypoglycemia. For example, hypoglycemia in a puppy
or kitten is often idiopathic in origin or related to starva­
tion, PSVA, or sepsis. In young adult dogs, hypoglycemia is
usually caused by hepatic insufficiency, hypoadrenocor­
ticism, or sepsis. And in older dogs, hepatic insufficiency,
insulinoma (see Chapter XX), nonislet cell tumor‐induced
hypoglycemia, hypoadrenocorticism, and sepsis are the
most common causes of hypoglycemia.
The results of routine and specialized tests can also be
quite helpful diagnostically. For example, dogs with adre­
nal insufficiency without the classic electrolyte changes
of hyperkalemia and hyponatremia often have hypoal­
buminemia, hypocholesterolemia and a resting cortisol
<2 μg/dL, although an ACTH response test is required
for a definitive diagnosis. Paired fasting and postprandial
serum bile acids are diagnostic for virtually all dogs with
a portosystemic shunt, and CBC findings which include
a neutrophilic leukocytosis with a left shift in a hypogly­
cemic febrile dog or cat are highly suggestive of sepsis.
When the cause of the hypoglycemic disorder is not
evident in a seemingly well adult dog, serum glucose and
insulin concentrations should be measured during an
episode of spontaneous hypoglycemia to rule out an
insulinoma. The key pathophysiologic feature of endog­
enous hyperinsulinism (e.g., an insulinoma) is the failure
of insulin secretion to fall to very low rates as blood
­glucose concentrations fall to hypoglycemic levels.

­Further Reading
Allison RW, Yeagley T, Levis K, et al. Babesia canis rossi
infection in a Texas dog. Vet Clin Pathol 2011; 40:
345–50.
Baurnstark ME, Sieber‐Ruckstuhl N, Muller C, et al.
Evaluation of aldosterone concentrations in dogs with
hypoadrenocorticism. J Vet Intern Med 2014; 28: 154–9.
Breitschwerdt EB, Loar A, Hribernik T, McGrath R.
Hypoglycemia in four dogs with sepsis. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 1981; 178: 1072–6.
Breitschwerdt EB, Goldkamp C, Castleman W, et al.
Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia syndrome in 2 dogs
with bartonellosis. J Vet Intern Med 2014; 28: 1331–5.
Center SA. Differentiating portosystemic shunts from
microvascular dysplasia. Paper presented at NJVMA

129th Annual Meeting, March 1–3, 2013, Florham
Park, NJ.
Cohen M, Post GS, Wright JC. Gastrointestinal
leiomyosarcoma in 14 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2003; 17:
107–10.
Cryer PE. Hypoglycemia, functional brain failure, and
brain death. J Clin Invest 2007; 117: 868–70.
Cryer PE, Polansky KS. Glucose homeostasis and
hypoglycemia. In: Wilson JD, Foster DW, Kronenberg
HM, Larsen PR, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology,
9th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 1998.
Cryer PE, Axelrod L, Grossman A, et al. Evaluation and
management of adult hypoglycemia. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2009; 94(3): 709–28.

VetBooks.ir

13 Hypoglycemia in Patients without Diabetes Mellitus

Daughaday WH. The pathophysiology of IGF‐II
hypersecretion in non‐islet cell tumor hypoglycemia.
Diabetes Rev 1995; 3: 63–72.
Daughaday WH. Hypoglycemia due to paraneoplastic
secretion of insulin‐like growth factor‐I. J Endocrinol
Metab 2007; 92: 616.
Dunayer EK. Hypoglycemia following canine ingestion of
xylitol‐containing gum. Vet Hum Toxicol 2004; 46: 87–8.
Dunayer EK. New findings on the effect of xylitol ingestion
in dogs. Vet Med 2006; 101: 792–7.
Dunayer EK, Gwaltney‐Brant SM.Acute hepatic failure and
coagulopathy associated with xylitol ingestion in eight
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006; 229: 1113–17.
Duncan AW, Maggie RG, Breitschwerdt EB. A combined
approach for the enhanced detection and isolation of
Bartonella species in dog blood samples: pre‐
enrichment culture followed by PCR and subculture
onto agar plates. J Microbiol Meth 2007; 69: 273–81.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW, eds. Canine and Feline
Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd edn. Philadelphia,
PA: WB Saunders, 2004.
Fyfe JC, Kurzhals R, Hawkins M, et al. A complex
rearrangement in EGB1 causes both perinatal
hypoglycemic collapse and late‐onset‐juvenile
neuromuscular degeneration in glycogen storage
disease type IV of Norwegian forest cats. Mol Genet
Metab 2007; 90: 383–92.
Guettier JM, Gorden P. Hypoglycemia. Endocrinol Metab
Clin North Am 2006; 35: 753–66.
Karam JH. Hypoglycemic disorders. In: Greenspan FS,
Gardner DG, eds. Basic and Clinical Endocrinology, 6th
edn. New York: McGraw‐Hill, 2001.
Keller N, Jacobson L, Nel M, et al. The prevalence and risk
factors of hypoglycemia in virulent canine babesiosis. J
Vet Intern Med 2004; 18: 265–70.
Leifer CE, Peterson M, Matus R, et al. Hypoglycemia
associated with nonislet cell tumor in 13 dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 1985; 185: 53–5.

Niessen SJ, Powney S, Guitian J, et al. Evaluation of a
quality‐of‐life tool for cats with diabetes mellitus. J Vet
Intern Med 2010; 24(5): 1098–105.
Niessen SJ, Powney S, Guitian J, et al. Evaluation of a
quality‐of life tool for dogs with diabetes mellitus. J Vet
Intern Med 2012; 26(4): 953–61.
Peterson ME. Xylitol. Top Compan Anim Med 2013; 28:
18–20.
Rees P, Schoeman JP. Plasma insulin concentrations in
hypoglycemic dogs with Babesia canis rossi infection.
Vet Parasitol 2008; 152: 60–6.
Rothman DL, Magnusson I, Katz L, et al. Quantitation of
fasting glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis in humans
with NMR. Science 2001; 254: 533.
Senniappan S, Arya VB, Hussain K. The molecular
mechanisms, diagnosis and management of congenital
hyperinsulinism. Indian J Endocrinol Metab 2013; 17:
19–30.
Service FJ. Hypoglycemic disorders. N Engl J Med 1995;
332:1144–1152
Service FJ. Classification of hypoglycemic disorders.
Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1999; 28: 501–17.
Van Toor AJ, van der Linde‐Sipman J, van den Ingh T, et al.
Experimental induction of fasting hypoglycemia and fatty
liver syndrome in three Yorkshire terrier pups. Vet Quart
1991; 13: 16–23.
Vroom MW, Slappendel RJ. Transient juvenile
hypoglycemia in a Yorkshire terrier and a Chihuahua.
Vet Quart 1987; 9: 172–6.
Xia Z, He Y, Yu J. Experimental acute toxicity of xylitol in
dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2009; 32: 465–9.
Zini E, Glaus T, Minuto F, et al. Paraneoplastic hypo­
glycemia due to an insulin‐like growth factor type‐II
secreting hepatocellular carcinoma in the dog. J Vet
Intern Med 2007; 21: 193–5.

111

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

113

14
Canine Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndromes
Deborah Greco, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM)
Desert Veterinary Specialists, Palm Desert, CA, USA

Many endocrine disorders, such as lymphocytic thyroid­
itis, hypoadrenocorticism, and type 1 diabetes mellitus,
have an autoimmune basis. When endocrine immune
disorders occur in the same individual, they are known
as autoimmune polyglandular syndromes (APS). These
syndromes (APS) can be further divided into APS type 1
(diabetes ­mellitus, ectodermal mucositis, etc.), APS type
2 (hypoadrenocorticism, hypothyroidism, etc.), and APS
type 3 (liver cirrhosis plus endocrinopathies). The com­
bination of hypoadrenocorticism and hypothyroidism is
called Schmidt syndrome after the pathologist who
described concurrence of these two diseases in human
beings. Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 2 is
the only one that has been described in dogs.

­Etiology and Pathophysiology
Polyendocrine gland failure or autoimmune polyglan­
dular syndrome, the most common form of which is APS
type 2, has been well documented in humans. Autoimmune
polyglandular syndrome type 2 is defined as the occur­
rence of two or more of the following disorders in the
same individual: adrenal insufficiency, primary hypothy­
roidism, type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM), primary hypog­
onadism (premature ovarian failure, immune‐mediated
orchitis), myasthenia gravis, megaesophagus, immune‐
mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA), immune‐mediated
thrombocytopenia (ITP), hypoparathyroidism, hypopitu­
itarism, and celiac disease.
Circulating organ‐specific autoantibodies are com­
monly present in APS type 2. Environmental factors
­combined with an HLA‐associated genetic predisposi­
tion are thought to trigger the process. Cell‐mediated
immune abnormalities in the type 2 syndrome include
defects and alterations of cell surface markers, but the
most consistent abnormality is a functional defect leading

to a decrease in suppressor T cell activity. Approximately
45% of all human patients with idiopathic (autoimmune)
adrenal insufficiency will develop one or more additional
endocrinopathies (usually hypothyroidism).
The genetics of APS has been studied extensively in
human beings. APS 2 is inherited as an autosomal domi­
nant trait in humans associated with the presence of
human leukocyte antigens (HLA). In families where this
syndrome has been documented in several individuals,
the inheritance of major histocompatibility loci haplo­
type correlates most strongly with the disease. Many
individuals with this haplotype have circulating organ‐
specific autoantibodies directed against cytochrome
P450 without clinical signs of disease. Recently, one study
found that a higher proportion of dogs with hypoadreno­
corticism were P450scc autoantibody p
­ositive when
compared to hospital controls (24% vs 1%). Lymphocytic
and plasmacytic destruction of the affected endocrine
glands may be documented histologically.
Hypoadrenocorticism is the most common initial endo­
crinopathy observed in polyendocrine gland failure in
dogs and is usually followed by the development of hypo­
thyroidism. However, type 1 diabetes combined with
immune‐mediated thyroid disease (Hashimoto t­ hyroiditis)
is also a common combination of immune endocrinopa­
thies in humans and has been described in dogs. Studies
show that 45–50% of humans with adrenal insufficiency
associated with polyendocrine gland failure (onset 20–30
years) develop a second endocrinopathy. The most com­
mon ­second endocrinopathy, primary hypothyroidism,
develops 10–20 years after the first endocrinopathy.
In a retrospective of 225 cases of canine hypoad­
renocorticism, 4% of the dogs (n = 9) also suffered from
hypothyroidism, two dogs had concurrent IDDM and
hypoadrenocorticism, and one had concurrent hypoad­
renocorticism, hypothyroidism, IDDM, and hypopar­
athyroidism. Another retrospective of 45 dogs with

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

114

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

adrenal insufficiency reported four with concurrent
hypothyroidism, one dog with concurrent IDDM and
one dog with concurrent primary gonadal hypoplasia.
A single case of type 2 APS has been described in a
middle‐aged female dog presenting in a hypothyroid
­
­crisis; treatment of the hypothyroid state resulted in
­precipitation of the hypoadrenocorticism. The presence
of serum autoantibodies to thyroid and adrenal tissue
was observed in this dog as evidence of APS type 2.

performed because of continued lethargy despite
­adequate mineralocorticoid replacement therapy, persis­
tent hyponatremia, hypercholesterolemia, dermatologic
disease, bradycardia, obesity, and heat‐seeking behavior.
In cases of combined DM and hypothyroidism, diabetes
mellitus insulin resistance is usually the reason for
­thyroid testing.

­History and Clinical Signs

In two studies, dogs with concurrent diabetes and hypo­
thyroidism showed significantly lower serum sodium
concentration and had significantly higher fasting serum
cholesterol compared with nonhypothyroid diabetic
dogs; similarly, dogs with hypoadrenocorticism com­
bined with hypothyroidism exhibited significantly lower
sodium and higher serum cholesterol than dogs with
hypoadrenocorticism alone. These two chemistry abnor­
malities are highly suggestive of hypothyroidism in a dog
with otherwise well‐regulated hypoadrenocorticism or
in a poorly regulated diabetic dog. Severe hyponatremia
(<120 meq/L) is a sign of Schmidt syndrome in humans.
Thyroid testing should be performed in diabetics dogs
that exhibit poor glucose regulation, persistent hypona­
tremia and hypercholesterolemia, obesity or weight gain,
lethargy, dermatologic disease, and regurgitation.
Resting serum cortisol concentration is often subnormal
(<2 μg/dL) in dogs that suffer from APS 2 that manifests as
hypoadrenocorticism and all will show inadequate
response to adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimu­
lation. Endogenous ACTH levels should be increased due
to primary adrenal insufficiency and loss of negative feed­
back to the pituitary gland. One reported case of Schmidt
syndrome (APS 2) had evidence of lymphocytic adenohy­
pophysitis in addition to adrenalitis and thyroid gland
atrophy; immune‐mediated pituitary disorders have been
reported in humans as well. Mean basal thyroxine (T4)
and free T4 levels are usually low to low normal and
endogenous thyroid‐stimulating hormone (TSH) is usu­
ally elevated in dogs with multiple endocrinopathies
resulting from APS.

Most of the dogs in reported studies were diagnosed with
hypoadrenocorticism initially and the mean age of onset
of the disease was in young adulthood. Dogs are usually
diagnosed with a second endocrinopathy approximately
one year after the first endocrinopathy.
A familial tendency was observed in one study where
two dogs were mother and daughter and one dog had a
sibling with hypoadrenocorticism. Hypoadrenocorticism
is inherited in several breeds, including standard ­poodles,
West Highland white terriers, Nova Scotia duck tolling
retrievers, Portuguese water dogs, and Leonbergers; how­
ever, there may be different DLA haplotypes depending
on breed. There is a distinct breed predisposition for
primary hypothyroidism with golden retrievers,
­
Doberman pinschers, Irish setters, miniature schnauzers,
dachshunds, cocker spaniels, and beagles. Diabetes
­mellitus (type 1a), which has an autoimmune basis, is seen
with increased frequency in Samoyeds, Tibetan ­terriers,
Australian terriers, keeshonds and several other breeds. In
fact, one study showed that the DLA‐DRB1*009/DQA1*/
DQB1*008 haplotype was associated with DM in certain
breeds (Samoyed, Tibetan, and cairn terriers) and that the
DLA‐DQA1*001 allele is also associated with hypothy­
roidism in dogs, suggesting a common susceptibility allele
for canine immune‐mediated endocrinopathies.
A decreasing insulin requirement is often the earliest
sign of adrenal insufficiency in a patient with type 1
­diabetes mellitus secondary to APS in human beings.
In contrast, dogs with concurrent hypothyroidism
and IDDM often have increasing insulin requirements;
hypothyroidism may cause insulin resistance resulting
from lipid abnormalities or other factors.
The most common presenting complaints for hypoad­
renocorticism as the initial diagnosis include lethargy,
collapse, vomiting, weight loss, weakness, ataxia, a­ norexia,
bradycardia, megaesophagus, and diarrhea. Clinico­
pathologic features include hyponatremia, hypercholes­
terolemia, hyperkalemia, hypochloremia, azotemia,
hypocalcemia, and hypercalcemia.
In dogs diagnosed with hypoadrenocorticism as
the initial endocrinopathy, thyroid evaluation is often

­Diagnosis and Prognosis

­Therapy
Treatment of multiple endocrinopathies consists of
­specific hormone replacement. For dogs with hypoad­
renocorticism, treatment with fludrocortisone (0.018 mg/
kg PO q24h) or deoxycorticosterone pivalate (DOCP)
(1 mg/kg IM monthly) should be initiated first, followed
by levothyroxine therapy (22 μg/kg once or twice daily
PO). One should be aware that aggressive levothyroxine
therapy might precipitate a life‐threatening adrenal c­ risis

VetBooks.ir

14 Canine Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndromes

in a patient with APS so starting once daily would be sug­
gested. When the hypothyroid and hypoadrenal states
occur concurrently, the rate of clearance of cortisol and
cholesterol is reduced due to low serum t­hyroxine con­
centrations. When thyroid supplementation is initiated,
cortisol clearance increases suddenly without a compen­
satory increase in cortisol synthesis because of destruc­
tion of adrenal tissue. As a result, ­thyroid therapy may
precipitate an adrenal crisis. Hence, one should assess
adrenal function prior to initiation of levothyroxine ther­
apy in animals with suspected m
­ ultiple endocrinopa­
thies. In dogs with diabetes mellitus and hypothyroidism,
one must balance the insulin dose with the levothyroxine
therapy. A reduction of 25% of the insulin dose is recom­
mended when starting levothyroxine at 22 μg/kg BID. In
dogs with hypoadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus,
the insulin dose will need to be gradually increased as
supplementation with glucocorticoids (0.22 mg/kg PO
q24h) and DOCP will cause insulin resistance.

­Conclusion
In summary, multiple endocrine deficiencies occur with a
low incidence in dogs with hypoadrenocorticism, hypo­
thyroidism, IDDM, and perhaps hypoparathyroidism.
This syndrome appears to be similar to APS 2 of human
beings. Veterinarians should be aware of some of the fea­
tures, such as persistent hyponatremia and hypercholes­
terolemia, which may indicate the presence of multiple
endocrinopathies in the same individual. Dogs with
hypoadrenocorticism that exhibit inadequate response to
therapy, persistent hypercholesterolemia and hypona­
tremia despite normalization of serum potassium, derma­
tologic disease, and/or bradycardia should be evaluated
for thyroid function. Diabetic dogs that exhibit inadequate
glycemic control associated with persistent hyponatremia,
hypercholesterolemia (>500 mg/dL), obesity and derma­
tologic disease should also be tested for hypothyroidism.

­Further Reading
Adissu HA, Hamel‐Jolette A, Foster RA. Lymphocytic
adenohypophysitis and adrenalitis in a dog with adrenal
and thyroid atrophy. Vet Pathol 2010; 47: 1082–5.
Bartges JW, Nielson DL. Reversible megaesophagus
associated with atypical primary hypoadrenocorticism
in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992; 201: 889–91.
Blois SL, Dickie E, Kruth SA, Allen DG. Multiple
endocrine diseases in dogs: 35 cases (1996‐2009). J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2011; 238: 1616–21.
Boag AM, Christie M, Syme H, Catchpole B. A
longitudinal study of autoantibodies against cytochrome
P450 side‐chain cleavage enzyme in dogs (Canis lupus
familiaris) affected with hypoadrenocorticism (Addison’s
disease). Vet Immunol Immunopathol 2018; 202: 41–5.
Bowen DSM, Riley W. Autoimmune polyglandular
syndrome in a dog: a case report. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
1986; 22: 649–54.
Catchpole B, Adams JP, Holder AL, Short AD, Ollier WE,
Kennedy LJ. Genetics of canine diabetes mellitus: are the
diabetes susceptibility genes identified in humans
involved in breed susceptibility to diabetes mellitus in
dogs? Vet J 2008; 195: 139–47.
Catchpole B, Kennedy LJ, Davison LJ, Ollier WE. Canine
diabetes mellitus: from phenotype to genotype. J Small
Anim Pract 2014; 49: 4–10.
Cutolo M. Autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes.
Autoimmun Rev 2014; 13: 85–9.
Dultz G, Matheis N, Dittmar M, Bender K, Kahaly GJ.
CTLA‐4 CT60 polymorphism in thyroid and
polyglandular autoimmunity. Horm Metab Res 2009;
41: 426–9.

Ford SL, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, Niwa D. Insulin
resistance in three dogs with hypothyroidism and diabetes
mellitus. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993; 202: 1478–80.
Fritzen R, Bornstein SR, Scherbaum WA. Megaoesophagus
in a patient with autoimmune polyglandular syndrome
type II. Clin Endocrinol 1996; 45: 493–8.
Greco DS. Polyendocrine gland failure in dogs. Vet Med
2000; 6: 481.
Haines DM, Lording PM, Penhale WJ. Survey of
thyroglobulin autoantibodies in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1984;
45: 1493–7.
Husebye E, Lovas K. Pathogenesis of primary adrenal
insufficiency. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab
2009; 23: 147–57.
Kimmel SE, Ward CR, Henthorn PS, Hess RS. Familial
insulin‐dependent diabetes mellitus in Samoyed dogs.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2002; 38: 235–8.
Kahaly GJ. Polyglandular autoimmune syndromes. Eur
J Endocrinol 2009; 161: 11–20.
Kahaly GJ. Polyglandular autoimmune syndrome type II.
Presse Med 2012; 41: e663–e670.
Konno S, Ichijo T, Murata M, et al. Autoimmune
polyglandular syndrome type 2 with myasthenia gravis
crisis. Neurologist 2009; 15: 361–3.
Kooistra HS, Rijnberk A, van den Ingh TS. Polyglandular
deficiency syndrome in a boxer dog: thyroid hormone
and glucocorticoid deficiency. Vet Quart 1995; 17:
59–63.
Massey J, Boag A, Short AD, et al. MHC class II association
study in eight breeds of dog with hypoadrenocorticism.
Immunogenetics 2013; 65: 291–7.

115

VetBooks.ir

116

Section 2 Endocrine Disease

Michels AW, Gottlieb PA. Autoimmune polyglandular
syndromes. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2010; 6: 270–7.
Pejin R, Stokic E, Novkovic M, Banic‐Horvat S, Cvijanovic
M. [Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome, type 2
associated with myasthenia gravis]. Vojnosanit Pregl
2012; 69: 358–62.
Peterson ME, Kintzer PP, Kass PH. Pretreatment clinical
and laboratory findings in dogs with
hypoadrenocorticism: 225 cases (1979–1993). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 1996; 208: 85–91.
Schmidt MB. Eine biglandulare erkrankung bei morbus
Addisoni. Dtsch Pathol Ges 1926; 21: 212–21.
Short AD, Boag A, Catchpole B, et al. A candidate gene
analysis of canine hypoadrenocorticism in 3 dog breeds.
J Hered 2013; 104: 807–20.
Smallwood LJ, Barsanti JA. Hypoadrenocorticism in a
family of Leonbergers. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1995; 31:
301–5.

Uibo R, Aavik E, Peterson P, et al. Autoantibodies to
cytochrome P450 enzymes P450scc, P450c17, and
P450c21 in autoimmune polyglandular disease types
I and II and in isolated Addison’s disease. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 1994; 78: 323–8.
Van den Driessche A, Eenkhoorn V, van Gaal L, de Block C.
Type 1 diabetes and autoimmune polyglandular
syndrome: a clinical review. Neth J Med 2009; 67: 376–87.
Villano MJ, Huber AK, Greenberg DA, Golden BK,
Concepcion E, Tomer Y. Autoimmune thyroiditis and
diabetes: dissecting the joint genetic susceptibility in a
large cohort of multiplex families. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2009; 94: 1458–66.
Wehbe E, Grant ME. Severe hyponatremia and Schmidt’s
syndrome. Clin Exp Nephrol 2008; 12: 211–14.
Wemeau JL, Proust‐Lemoine E, Ryndak A, Vanhove L.
Thyroid autoimmunity and polyglandular endocrine
syndromes. Hormones 2013; 12: 39–45.

VetBooks.ir

117

Section 3
Cardiovascular Disease

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

119

15
Approach to the Patient with Suspected Cardiovascular Disease
Ingrid Ljungvall, DVM, PhD, DECVIM-CA (Cardiology) and Jens Häggström, DVM, PhD, DECVIM-CA (Cardiology)
Department of Clinical Sciences, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden

Suspicion of cardiac disease in dogs and cats may arise
due to information obtained from owner complaints
and/or physical findings. Unfortunately, most of the
common clinical signs of heart disease are not specific
for heart disease. Likewise, heart disease may occur concurrently with other disease, making it unclear whether
the clinical signs are due to cardiac disease or something
else. The approach to the patient with suspected cardiovascular disease is therefore to obtain as much information as possible in order to make a correct diagnosis.

­Signalment
Signalment information is the first step in the clinical w
­ ork‐
up of a patient with suspected heart disease as some diseases are more commonly seen in specific types of animals.
However, this type of data is only supportive in nature, and
does not provide sufficient evidence for a definite diagnosis.
The signalment data should include information concerning age, species, breed, sex, and geographic location.
Age
Age can provide valuable information in a patient with
suspected cardiac disease; congenital heart disease,
which is defined as a heart defect present at birth, is more
likely in young pets. However, congenital heart disease
may remain undiscovered in middle‐aged or old dogs and
cats not previously examined by a veterinarian. Acquired
heart disease, defined as a heart condition developing
after birth, is most frequently found in middle‐aged and
old dogs and cats, although its presence in a younger
individual cannot be excluded. For both dogs and cats,
presence of cardiac neoplasia is more common in older
individuals. Extracardiac disease may affect the heart by
causing myocyte damage in dogs and cats of any age.

Species and Breed
Some specific heart diseases, both congenital and
acquired, are more commonly identified in individuals of
certain breeds compared to others (see separate disease
chapters), which supports a genetic background for these
disorders.
Sex
Very little is known concerning the effect of sex on the
prevalence of congenital heart disease in dogs and cats.
In most studies, no sex predilection has been reported.
However, sex appears to affect the prevalence of the
most common forms of acquired heart disease in dogs
(myxomatous mitral valve disease [MMVD] and dilated
cardiomyopathy [DCM]) and cats (cardiomyopathy).
Males appear affected at an earlier age in both cats and
dogs, which leads to a slightly higher proportion of
affected individuals at a given age and a higher cause‐
specific mortality. The reason for this influence of sex is
unknown.
Geographic Location
Information concerning the geographic origin of the pet
is important because the prevalence of certain congenital and acquired heart diseases differs between continents, countries, and even within countries. Again, this
likely reflects different gene pools within breeds, but it
underlines the importance of interpreting results of disease prevalence with caution. It is also important to
obtain information about where the animal has lived
geographically because some diseases, for example parasitic diseases (e.g., dirofilarosis), are prevalent in certain
areas but nonexistent in others.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

120

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

­Case History and Owner Complaints
A thorough medical history provides important information and is an integral part of the cardiovascular
examination. The questions may vary depending on the
nature of the animal’s health problem. Information
obtained from the owner interview and findings at the
physical examination are used to formulate a problem
list, which can be used in the decision to pursue further
clinical testing.
Dogs and cats with heart disease can present with clinical signs related to the heart condition but also, the pet
can be completely free of signs of disease and the only reason for the cardiac examination is an incidental finding of
a heart murmur or arrhythmia. Common owner complaints for a pet with heart disease include increased respiratory rate (tachypnea), difficulty of breathing and
changed respiratory pattern (dyspnea), coughing (unusual
in cats), abdominal distension (ascites), fainting (syncope),
tongue and mucous membrane cyanosis, weight loss, and
weakness and exercise intolerance. These signs of heart
disease can be grouped into four main categories:
respiratory abnormalities caused by left‐sided congestive heart failure (CHF)
●● exercise intolerance, weakness, wasting, and syncope
caused by low cardiac output
●● abdominal distension caused by right‐sided CHF
●● cyanosis caused by reduced oxygenation of peripheral
blood.
●●

Unfortunately, none of these signs is specific for heart disease, and may be caused by a wide variety of disorders.
Dyspnea, Tachypnea, and Cough
The most common sequela of heart disease in dogs and
cats is left‐sided CHF. The increased pulmonary venous
pressure leads to pulmonary congestion and edema formation, causing respiratory signs such as dyspnea,
tachypnea, and cough (unusual in cats). Dyspnea may
appear in many different forms in pets with heart disease. In working dogs, an experienced owner might note
a changed respiratory character during and/or after work
at an earlier stage of disease. However, many dogs and
cats do not exercise in this intense manner, which means
that owners do not observe changed respiration until it is
apparent at rest (at a comparably advanced stage).
In general, the respiratory rate gradually increases followed by a worsening of dyspnea, but the respiratory
signs may develop at different rates in different diseases
and individuals. Accordingly, it is useful to have the
owner monitoring the respiratory rate at home in an animal at risk for developing CHF. Dogs and cats without
decompensated CHF have in general a sleeping/resting

respiratory rate of <30/min. As a general rule, long‐
standing (weeks or months) respiratory signs that have
not worsened over time speak against CHF. Respiratory
signs, with or without cough, while lying down or asleep,
a phenomenon called nocturnal dyspnea/coughing, are
common early signs of left‐sided CHF. The severity of
dyspnea can range from mild, with only minimal changes
in breathing pattern and respiratory rate, to severe life‐
threatening dyspnea, when the pet is unwilling to lie
down (orthopnea), usually with respiratory rates >50/
min. The owner often describes changed breathing
sounds in animals with severe pulmonary edema. Cats
with left‐sided CHF frequently develop pleural effusion
alone or in addition to pulmonary edema, and these cats
can exhibit a paradoxical breathing pattern.
Dogs presenting with left‐sided decompensated CHF
may present with cough. Cough is not commonly associated with CHF in cats, and owner complaints of coughing in cats should raise the suspicion of other respiratory
disease. In dogs, there is also a problem distinguishing
cough caused by other diseases, such as small bronchial
disease and tracheal collapse, from cough associated
with pronounced cardiomegaly with or without CHF.
There is no definitive way of distinguishing cardiac from
noncardiac cough in dogs. A noncardiac cough is more
frequently nonproductive, loud and “honky,” whereas
cough caused by left‐sided CHF can be softer and may
have a more productive “wet” character, in particular
in large dogs with DCM where co‐existing respiratory
disease is less common.
Exercise Intolerance, Weakness, Wasting,
and Syncope
Variable degrees of weakness and exercise intolerance
often develop in dogs and cats with heart disease.
However, exercise intolerance can be difficult to assess in
cats. Weakness and exercise intolerance can occur as a
consequence of a reduced cardiac output resulting in
reduced peripheral perfusion with reduced oxygen and
nutrient delivery to skeletal muscles.
Weakness, exercise intolerance, and syncopal events
can develop due to pulmonary hypertension or cardiac
arrhythmia, intermittent or sustained, in dogs and cats
with heart disease. Pets with sustained bradycardia or
tachycardia are often weak even at rest and exhibit significant exercise intolerance. In cases of intermittent
arrhythmia, the owner often describes a rapid change in
the dog’s behavior, consciousness, or postural tone.
Defecation and urination can accompany these events.
Even though syncope can occur in dogs and cats with
heart disease, it is not specific for heart disease or heart
failure, which underlines the importance of obtaining an
accurate and detailed case history.

VetBooks.ir

15 Approach to the Patient with Suspected Cardiovascular Disease ﻿

In dogs with CHF and a chronic reduction of peripheral
perfusion, a loss of body weight may be apparent.
Sequential measurements of body weight over time can be
useful to identify subtle weight loss. However, identification of weight loss may be problematic if loss of muscle
mass is masked by concurrent fluid retention.
Abdominal Distension
Abdominal distension can be caused by a wide variety of
diseases, both cardiac and noncardiac in origin. In heart
disease, abdominal distension is the result of right‐sided
CHF leading to congestion of abdominal organs (such as
the liver) and transudation of fluid into the abdominal
cavity. This usually occurs slowly, and remains unnoticed by the owner until quite advanced stages. In other
conditions, such as pericardial effusion, the ascites may
develop more rapidly.
Cyanosis
Cyanosis is defined as a blue to blue‐gray discoloration of the mucous membranes as the result of
increased ­concentration of deoxygenated hemoglobin.
It can be evident on physical examination and also
described by the owner. Discoloration of the tongue
and mucous membranes is a common complaint of
owners suspecting heart disease in their pet, but can
be difficult to identify or replicate at the clinic.
Additionally, cyanosis can be difficult to identify
because of pigmentation of the skin and mucous membranes. Cyanosis in veterinary patients is usually associated with severe left‐sided CHF or congenital heart
disease. In case of severe left‐sided CHF, other significant signs of disease always accompany the cyanosis.
In some cases of congenital heart disease leading to
right‐to‐left shunting of blood, some animals can
have reduced exercise capacity, pelvic limb weakness
and frequently have to sit down during play or exercise. Depending on the degree of shunting, some of
these a­ nimals can be cyanotic at rest but the cyanosis
becomes more apparent with physical exercise.

­Physical Examination
A thorough physical examination is the foundation for
the clinical work‐up in dogs and cats with suspected heart
disease. The examination includes general inspection and
observation (e.g., attitude, body condition, mobility,
degree of anxiety, and respiratory pattern), and a thorough physical examination to identify abnormalities in
other organ systems. The cardiovascular examination
includes evaluation of the peripheral circulation (mucous

membranes), systemic veins (jugular veins), peripheral
arterial pulses, the precordium (left and right chest wall
over the heart), palpation of abdomen to identify ascites,
and auscultation of heart and lungs.
Mucous Membranes
The mucous membrane color and capillary refill time
are used to evaluate peripheral perfusion. The mucous
membranes of the oral cavity are usually used for this
purpose, but also ocular and caudal (vaginal or preputial) membranes can be examined. Preferably findings of caudal membranes should be compared with
findings in the oral cavity. Findings of bluish discoloration are suggestive of cyanosis (see earlier), darkish red is suggestive of erythrocytosis, and pale
membranes are suggestive of anemia and/or decreased
perfusion. Capillary refill time (CRT) is conducted to
evaluate peripheral perfusion. While commonly performed, CRT is a comparably insensitive method to
detect abnormal perfusion.
Systemic Veins
The jugular veins should be inspected in cases with suspected heart disease, and clipping or wetting of the fur
may be required to visualize these vessels. Distension or
pulsations of the jugular veins, while the animal is sitting
with the neck moderately extended, are indicative of
increased systemic venous pressure (right‐sided CHF) or
occlusion (most commonly neoplasia or thrombosis) of
the vessel at the level between the right heart and the jugular vein. Because there is no valve between the right atrium
and the systemic veins, changes in pressure in the right
atrium are transmitted within the systemic veins, and can
be caused by right atrial contractions at high systemic
venous pressure or tricuspid regurgitation. Sometimes,
the carotid arterial pulse is transmitted through the soft
tissues, mimicking a venous pulsation (so‐called false
venous pulsations). Differentiation between true and false
venous pulsations can be obtained by applying pressure to
the jugular vein at a level slightly below the area of the
pulsation. If the pulsation disappears, it is a sign of true
venous pulsation; if it continues, it is a sign of false venous
pulsation.
Peripheral Arterial Pulsations
The strength and quality of the femoral arterial pulses
are subjectively assessed by simultaneous palpation of
both femoral arteries in a standing animal. Sufficient
pressure should be placed on the vessels to occlude them,
so that pulsation is no longer palpable. The pressure is
then slowly released until maximal pulsation is evident.

121

VetBooks.ir

122

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

Evaluation of Fluid Accumulation

This subjective evaluation provides information on the
pulse pressure (i.e. the difference between systemic arterial peak systolic and diastolic pressures) and potential
presence of various heart diseases.
The quality of pulses in the two limbs should be compared, particularly in cats. Absent femoral arterial pulse in
one or both limbs may be indicative of arterial thromboembolism. The femoral artery should be palpated simultaneously with cardiac auscultation to detect heartbeats that
do not produce pulses. Arrhythmias can cause the heart to
contract before it is properly filled with blood, producing
variable pulses or pulse deficits.

Right‐sided CHF leads to accumulation of fluid in body
cavities, most commonly in the abdomen. The abdomen
should therefore be palpated for ballottement and the
presence of fluid accumulation (ascites). Mild ascites is
difficult to detect, whereas moderate to severe ascites is
comparably easy to detect. Pleural effusion is more difficult to detect and thoracic radiography or centesis is
often required to obtain a definite diagnosis. The limbs
should also be inspected for the presence of peripheral
edema, although this is an extremely unusual finding in
dogs and cats with heart disease.

Palpation of the Precordium

Auscultation

The precordium is evaluated by placing palms and fingers on each side of the thorax over the cardiac ostia
(Figure 15.1). Normally, the cardiac contraction (precordial impulse) is best felt on the left side of the thorax over
the apical area. Changes in cardiac size and shape, or
space‐occupying thoracic masses can cause a shift of the
location of the precordial impulse. A weak impulse can
be caused by obesity, hypovolemia, thoracic masses,
pleural or pericardial effusion, or pneumothorax.
Increased precordial impulse can be caused by hyperkinetic conditions such as stress or anemia or conditions
characterized by cardiac volume overload and cardiomegaly, such as severe MMVD or DCM. Severe valvular
regurgitation or stenosis can cause palpable “buzzing”
vibrations called a precordial thrill. The intensity of the
auscultated heart murmur is always greatest over the
area of the thrill.

(a)

Cardiac auscultation is an important component of the
physical examination in dogs and cats with suspected cardiac disease. An exact diagnosis can seldom be established
based solely on cardiac auscultation, but optimal auscultation technique can substantially narrow down the list of
differential diagnoses. Auscultation allows assessment of
heart rate, rhythm, and presence of abnormal sounds, such
as murmur, click, and additional heart sounds.
Auscultation should be performed in a quiet environment, and background noise should be minimized. The
animal should preferably be standing on all four limbs
during cardiac auscultation as abnormal sounds, which
can easily be mistaken for heart murmurs, can arise in a
recumbent animal due to rubbing of the heart against the
chest wall. Furthermore, localization of the area of origin
of different cardiac sounds is more easily achieved in a

(b)

Figure 15.1 Principal areas of cardiac auscultation in dogs. The valve relationships are the same in cats, whereas intercostal space (ICS)
guidelines differ slightly for cats and are, accordingly, mentioned in parentheses. Because of the small size of the feline heart, murmurs in
cats are often described as sternal versus parasternal, basilar versus apical, and left versus right. (a) Left hemithorax: M = mitral valve area:
5th (cat: 5th–6th) ICS at the costochondral junction. A = aortic valve area: 4th ICS (cat: 2nd–3rd ICS) just above the costochondral junction.
P = pulmonic valve area: 2nd–4th (cat: 2nd–3rd) ICS just above the sternum. (b) Right hemithorax: T = tricuspid valve area: 3rd–5th (cat:
4th–5th) ICS near the costochondral junction.

VetBooks.ir

15 Approach to the Patient with Suspected Cardiovascular Disease ﻿

standing animal. The entire cardiac area should be
­auscultated thoroughly. The areas of auscultation of the
heart are shown in Figure 15.1.
The areas of the ventral thorax adjacent to the sternum
should always be auscultated in cats, as murmurs and gallop rhythms often are heard best at this location. If
needed, the animal’s mouth should be manually gently
closed for brief periods of time as panting can generate
referred sounds, which can be mistaken for murmurs.
Evaluation of heart sounds and murmurs is often difficult
in purring cats. The purring can be stopped by quickly
occluding a nostril, by placing the cat in the proximity of
a running tap, by holding cotton wool soaked in alcohol
near the cat’s nose, or by blowing short bursts of air into
the face of the cat. Breathing sounds, especially in cats,
can be mistaken for sounds originating from the heart,
and differentiating heart sounds from breath sounds can
be facilitated by watching the cat’s breathing pattern
while simultaneously ausculting the heart.
Heart Rate and Rhythm

Dogs in CHF are likely to be tachycardic, although the
degree of tachycardia may be modest. Tachycardia in
CHF patients results from parasympathetic withdrawal
and increased sympathetic tone. Cats in decompensated
CHF may present with normal, increased or decreased
heart rate. Healthy dogs have either a regular heart
rhythm or a respiratory sinus arrhythmia where the heart
rate increases during inspiration and decreases during
expiration due to changes in vagal tone. This phenomenon can be exaggerated, particularly in the presence of
respiratory disease. Dogs presenting with respiratory
sinus arrhythmia are unlikely to be in decompensated
CHF with pulmonary edema. Healthy cats normally have
a regular heart rhythm, and the finding of respiratory
sinus arrhythmia in cats warrants further examination of
potential respiratory disease. Other arrhythmias in dogs
and cats, such as the detection of premature beats or long
periods of asystole, can indicate presence of heart disease,
and further diagnostic tests such as an electrocardiogram
are then indicated.
Heart Sounds and Murmurs

Two heart sounds are normally audible in healthy dogs
and cats. The first heart sound (S1), which is heard
loudest at the heart apex, occurs concurrently with closure of the atrioventricular valves, whereas the second
heart sound (S2), which is heard loudest at the heart
base, occurs concurrently with closure of the semilunar
valves. The intensity of heart sounds is influenced by
many factors, such as auscultation technique, body
condition, and presence of cardiac disease. Heart sound
intensity can be decreased in animals affected by obesity, pericardial or pleural effusions, space‐occupying

lesions (such as thoracic masses), diaphragmatic
­hernias, shock, bradycardias, or severely affected myocardial function. The intensity of S2 is commonly
dampened in dogs with severe MMVD. Heart sound
intensity can be increased in animals with increased
sympathetic tone, cardiac enlargement, or in those with
narrow chest conformation. Intensity of heart sounds
often varies from beat to beat in animals affected
by cardiac arrhythmias, such as atrial fibrillation and
ventricular tachycardia.
In dogs and cats, the presence of S3 and/or S4 signifies a gallop heart sound (tripling or quadrupling of the
heart sounds, resembling the canter of a horse), and is
generally an indication of myocardial disease in dogs
and cats. The S3 (ventricular gallop) occurs early in
diastole, and is associated with rapid ventricular filling
during early diastole into a ventricle with decreased
compliance, and is typically heard in dogs with conditions characterized by ventricular volume overload,
such as DCM, MMVD or patent ductus arteriosus
(PDA). The S4 (atrial gallop) occurs later in diastole,
and is associated with vigorous atrial contractions in
animals with conditions characterized by increased
resistance to ventricular emptying or impaired ventricular compliance. This typically occurs in disorders with
ventricular concentric hypertrophy, such as in cats with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) or systemic
hypertension. The S4 can also be present in dogs with
third‐degree atrioventricular (AV) block, dogs with
ruptured chordae tendineae, or even in healthy cats due
to decreasing ventricular compliance with age. The S3
and S4 can be superimposed in animals with tachycardia (most commonly in cats), resulting in one additional
diastolic sound called a summation gallop.
Systolic clicks are transient, mid to late systolic
sounds, which are higher in frequency than gallop
sounds and are mainly heard in dogs with abnormal AV
valve leaflet movement, such as mitral valve prolapse in
dogs affected by mild MMVD. Clicks occurring in early
systole can be associated with abnormal valve leaflet
movement or great vessel dilation in dogs with aortic or
pulmonic stenosis.
Murmurs are auditory vibrations caused by high‐
velocity and turbulent blood flow through the heart and
vessels. Murmurs can be characterized by timing within
the cardiac cycle, anatomic location, radiation area,
intensity (loudness), frequency (pitch), and shape of
vibration pattern (which is visualized by phonocardiography). Most cardiovascular diseases in dogs and cats
result in systolic murmurs, which most commonly start
immediately after the S1, but they can also start later in
systole. Systolic murmurs can last for only a portion of
the systole (early, mid or late systolic murmurs), throughout systole from the end of S1 to the beginning of S2

123

VetBooks.ir

124

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

(holosystolic murmur), or, rarely, throughout systole from
the beginning of S1 to the end of S2 (pansystolic murmur). Diastolic turbulent blood flow is rare in dogs and
cats, and can be relatively difficult to detect. Diastolic
murmurs most commonly start immediately after the S2.
Continuous murmurs last throughout systole and diastole. The most common heart disease associated with a
continuous murmur is PDA where the murmur commonly peaks in intensity at the time of the S2.
Point of maximum intensity (PMI) of a murmur is
commonly the location over the thorax where the murmur is loudest, and can serve as a guide to the origin of
the murmur. The PMI is associated with a particular
valve region (i.e., pulmonic, aortic, mitral, tricuspid).
The small size of the feline heart makes it difficult to distinguish the different valve areas on the thorax.
Accordingly, localization of murmurs in cats is often
described as sternal versus parasternal, base versus apex,
and left versus right. The areas of auscultation of the
heart in dogs are shown in Figure 15.1. The area of murmur radiation refers to how widely the murmur can be
heard from the PMI, and generally increases with
increasing turbulence.
Table 15.1 Classification of murmur intensity

Low‐intensity
murmurs

Moderate‐
intensity
murmurs

High‐intensity
murmurs

Grade

Description

Grade 1

A very soft, barely audible
murmur localized to a
small area

Grade 2

A soft murmur, heard
immediately, localized to a
small area

Grade 3

A moderately loud murmur,
evident at more than one
location

Grade 4

A loud murmur that radiates
considerably to other areas,
but without a consistent
palpable precordial thrill
(vibrations created by
turbulence within the heart
through the chest wall)

Grade 5

A loud murmur that radiates
considerably to other areas,
accompanied by a palpable
precordial thrill

Grade 6

Very loud murmur that
radiates considerably to
other areas, accompanied by
a palpable precordial thrill,
and is audible without the
use of a stethoscope or when
the stethoscope is slightly
lifted off the thoracic wall

Murmurs are traditionally graded on a scale of 1–6.
However, evidence exists that a four‐grade scale can be
used for some heart diseases without losing clinically
important information (Table 15.1).
For some cardiac diseases, such as MMVD and aortic/
pulmonic stenosis, grading of murmurs serves as a rough
estimate of disease severity. However, a lack of agreement
exists between severity of cardiac disease and murmur
grade for other conditions, such as for ventricular septal
defects, dilated or restrictive cardiomyopathy (DCM/
RCM), and feline cardiomyopathies. Although the majority of dogs with heart disease have an audible murmur, it is
important to remember that some cardiac diseases (such
as pericardial diseases, cardiac neoplasia, DCM, atrial septal defects [ASD], right‐to‐left shunting PDA, and primary
myocardial diseases in cats) do not necessarily produce
blood flow turbulence and an audible murmur (Table 15.2).
Presence of a heart murmur does not always signal structural cardiac disease as murmurs in cats and dogs can also
arise due to other physiologic processes. Physiologic murmurs tend to be fairly quiet (grade 1/6–3/6), and may vary in
intensity with changes in heart rate. Mild dynamic right ventricular outflow tract obstruction is a common cause of murmurs in healthy cats in stressful situations such as examination
at a veterinary hospital. Puppies and kittens may have “innocent” physiologic murmurs assumed to arise due to large
stroke volumes relative to the size of their great vessels and/
or due to physiologic anemia. These murmurs usually disappear before approximately 5 months of age. Murmurs may
also be created in an anemic animal due to the combination
of decreased blood viscosity and increased stroke volume.
High‐output diseases, such as chronic renal disease and
hyperthyroidism, can also give rise to a systolic murmur due
to increased velocity of the ejected blood. Finally, murmurs
are common in fit dogs with athletic hearts, where the murmurs are caused by mild mitral/tricuspid valve insufficiency
and/or a large stroke volume into the aorta.
Respiratory Auscultation
Normal respiratory sounds differ in frequency (pitch),
intensity (loudness), and timing along different parts of
the animal’s upper and lower respiratory tract. Normal
lung sounds are comparably soft sounds heard louder on
inspiration than expiration, whereas normal sounds auscultated over the trachea are much louder and higher
pitched and heard well on both inspiration and expiration. Based on location and sound characteristics, normal lung sounds are commonly termed vesicular,
bronchial, or bronchovesicular, even though the term
“vesicular” incorrectly implies that sounds are made in
the vesicles (alveoli) of the lung.
Auscultation of the lungs of a cardiovascular patient
may reveal abnormal sounds superimposed on normal

VetBooks.ir

15 Approach to the Patient with Suspected Cardiovascular Disease ﻿

Table 15.2 Simplified table for presumptive diagnosis of murmur origin in common heart conditions
Point of maximal
intensity

Timing

Associated heart conditions

Cause of murmur

Sound quality

Left heart base

Systolic

Physiologic or innocent
murmurs

Turbulence in aorta/pulmonary
artery

Soft or musical.
Crescendo‐decrescendo

Aortic and pulmonic stenosis
(tetralogy of Fallot)

Turbulence in aorta/pulmonary
artery

Soft to harsh (depending
on disease severity).
Crescendo‐decrescendo

Atrial septal defect

Turbulence in pulmonary artery

If present, soft.
Crescendo‐decrescendo

Diastolic

Aortic and pulmonic
regurgitation

Turbulence in left or right
ventricle

Soft, blowing (barely
audible). Decrescendo

Left axillary
region/left heart
base

Continuous
(systole and
diastole)

Left to right shunting patent
ductus arteriosus (PDA)

Turbulence in the main
pulmonary artery

“Machinery” sound of
varying intensity
throughout the cardiac
cycle. Crescendo‐
decrescendo in systole
peaking at S2

Left heart apex

Systolic

Mitral regurgitation
(secondary to myxomatous
mitral valve disease, mitral
dysplasia, etc.)

Turbulence in the left atrium

Soft (blowing), musical,
or harsh, depending on
disease severity.
Decrescendo or plateau
shaped

Right heart
apex

Systolic

Tricuspid regurgitation
(secondary to myxomatous
tricuspid valve disease,
tricuspid dysplasia,
pulmonary hypertension, etc.)

Turbulence in the right atrium

Soft to harsh depending
on disease severity.
Decrescendo if mild in
intensity, plateau shaped
when moderate/severe
in intensity

Right heart base
(cranially near
the sternum)

Systolic

Ventricular septal defects (left
to right shunting)

Turbulence in the right
ventricle/right ventricular
outflow tract

Harsh and plateau
shaped (occasionally
varying conformation
throughout systole)

Parasternal
(cats)

Systolic

Left ventricular outflow tract
obstruction with or without
mitral regurgitation
(commonly caused by
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy)

Turbulence in the left ventricular
outflow tract, sometimes
accompanied by turbulence in
the left atrium if systolic anterior
motion (SAM) is present

Soft to harsh,
crescendo‐decrescendo

Systolic

Dynamic right ventricular
outflow tract obstruction
(DRVOTO) (commonly
stress‐induced or caused by
hemodynamic alterations)

Turbulence in the right
ventricular outflow tract

Soft
crescendo‐decrescendo

lung sounds. Auscultation of dogs and cats presenting
with pulmonary edema often reveals harsh lung sounds,
or high‐frequency crackles at the end of inspiration.
Crackles are interrupted, nonmusical, crepitant sounds,
which in general are associated with conditions in which
some airways are closed. Crackles should not be considered pathognomic for pulmonary edema as primary respiratory disease can also produce crackles. Wheezes,
which are high‐frequency musical sounds of longer
duration associated with narrowing of an airway, can
also be heard in animals with pulmonary edema. Animals

can present with interstitial pulmonary edema without
any abnormal auscultatory sounds other than increased
bronchovesicular sounds due to hyperpnea.
Attenuated or absent bronchovesicular sounds can be
due to pleural effusion or shallow breathing. Animals
with pleural space disease, such as pleural effusion in
cats in decompensated CHF, often present with a paradoxical respiratory pattern with prominent abdominal
wall movements. Thoracic auscultation in these animals
may reveal dull lung sounds, muffled heart sounds, or an
auscultable fluid line.

125

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

127

16
Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease
Valérie Chetboul, DVM, PhD, DECVIM-CA (Cardiology)
National Veterinary School at Alfort, Maisons‐Alfort, France

The diagnosis of canine and feline heart diseases as well as
that of heart failure is predominantly based on thoracic
radiography associated with standard transthoracic echocardiography, also called conventional echocardiography.
In the late 1980s, the miniaturization of tran­sesophageal
probes led to the use of transesophageal echocardiography
especially for analyzing specific abnormalities or for monitoring surgical and interventional techniques. During the
last decade, newer imaging modalities such as tissue
Doppler imaging, strain and strain rate imaging, and
speckle tracking echocardiography have been introduced
in veterinary cardiology, allowing an accurate assessment
of myocardial performance, deformation, and synchrony.
The following chapter provides an overview of these imaging techniques and their application in clinical settings,
with particular emphasis on the two most commonly
used in practice: thoracic radiography and conventional
echocardiography.

­Cardiac Radiography
Although most radiographic findings are not specific and
therefore do not lead to an accurate definitive diagnosis
of a given heart disease, thoracic radiography remains a
key complementary examination to detect heart enlargement, assess the presence or absence of congestive heart
failure, and distinguish between respiratory and cardiovascular diseases.
Normal Thoracic Radiography
Heart and thoracic vessels should be systematically
evaluated on at least two good‐quality views taken
during inspiration – the dorsoventral view and a lateral
view. Ventrodorsal views may also be used, but dorsoventral views usually provide a better definition of

caudal pulmonary vessels and of the hilar area than the
ventrodorsal view, and therefore allow a better assessment of cardiogenic pulmonary edema, particularly in
the canine species. Additionally, dorsoventral views
are often better tolerated than ventrodorsal views in
the case of dyspnea. Ventrodorsal views, which are
most often associated with a more central position of
the heart within the thorax, may sometimes be used to
complement the dorsoventral view to detect small volumes of pleural effusion and to better assess specific
lung lesions.
In both canine and feline species, the heart shape is
most often relatively ovoid with a pointed ventral apex.
Nevertheless, several noncardiac factors (Table 16.1) can
influence heart size and shape, including respiratory
phase, pericardial fat accumulation (Figure 16.1), age and,
most of all, breed (see details below and Figure 16.2). All
these are important to take into consideration, as they
may be a source of misinterpretation of cardiomegaly.
Lateral Views

Either right or left lateral views may be performed.
Nevertheless, as some variations may exist according to
positioning of the patient, the same lateral projection
should be used to ensure a reliable comparison of radiographic findings over time in sequential radiographs.
On lateral views, the heart, which is located between
the third and sixth intercostal spaces, tends to “lie”
more on the sternum in cats than in dogs, and in older
cats (>7 years old) more than in younger cats (Figure
16.3). The maximum heart width (or maximum cranial–caudal diameter) is usually around two intercostal
spaces in the cat and between 2.5 and 3.5 intercostal
spaces in the dog, with breed variations (Figures 16.2
and 16.3). For example, the heart in “barrel‐chested”
dogs tends to be more globular, with a greater sternal

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

128

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

Table 16.1 Main noncardiac‐related factors able to induce cardiac
silhouette changes on thoracic radiographs
Factors

Radiographic change

Age
Young age (dog)

Heart tends to be larger relatively to
the thoracic cavity size than that of
adult dogs

Old age (cat)

Heart of cats >7 years old tends to
have a more horizontal orientation on
lateral views, with a prominent aortic
arch on lateral, DV, and VD views

Breed

See Table 16.2, text, and Figure 16.2

Patient positioning

Chest rotation can increase the
apparent heart base size and that of
the left atrium

Respiration phase
Expiration

Fat
The heart appears wider than in
inspiration with increased sternal
contact (therefore potentially
mimicking right heart enlargement)

Body condition score
Overweight

Pericardial and mediastinal fat
accumulation can mimic cardiomegaly
(Figure 16.1)

Cachexia

Cachexia can be associated with a
small cardiac silhouette (microcardia)

Hypovolemia

Hypovolemia is associated with
microcardia and small vessels
(pulmonary vessels and caudal vena
cava)

Lung, mediastinal, pleural and sternal diseases
Lung parenchymal
and mediastinal mass
lesions

Such lesions can modify position and
axis of the heart and can also obscure
cardiac margins (“positive silhouette”
sign). The cranial cardiac silhouette
may also be masked by the thymus in
puppies

Lung atelectasis

Atelectasis can cause a mediastinal
shift and therefore can modify position
and axis of the heart

Sternal deformations
(congenital or
acquired)

Such lesions can modify position and
axis of the heart

DV, dorsoventral; VD, ventrodorsal.

contact than that of narrow‐ and deep‐chested dogs,
which appears elongated with a more vertical orientation (Figure 16.2).
Right heart chambers are approximately positioned
cranially and left chambers caudally to the line drawn
from the tracheal bifurcation to the apex (base–apex
axis). Both atrial chambers are located dorsally and

Figure 16.1 Lateral thoracic radiograph of an obese dog. The
cardiac silhouette appears falsely enlarged owing to mediastinal
and pericardial fat accumulation. Fat, which is characterized by
slightly lower density than the heart, is clearly seen ventrally to
the heart. Source: Medical Imaging Unit, ENVA.

the ventricular chambers ventrally to the line drawn
perpendicular to the base–apex axis and running
along the ventral border of the caudal vena cava
(Figure 16.4).
The vertebral heart score (VHS) may be used to objectively assess heart size, and to confirm and determine
the severity of cardiomegaly in both cats and dogs
(Figure 16.5). The mean ± SD canine VHS is 9.7 ± 0.5
vertebrae (range: 8.5–10.6). Nevertheless, VHS values
are influenced by breed‐dependent heart shape and size,
thoracic conformation (long versus short thorax), and
thoracic vertebrae abnormalities such as hemivertebrae.
For example, abnormal thoracic vertebrae have recently
been shown to be associated with a significant increase
of VHS in the bulldog and Boston terrier. Such breed‐
dependent variations of VHS (Table 16.2) represent a
limitation of the vertebral heart‐size method in the dog.
Nevertheless, the VHS system is easy to use and may be
helpful to objectively compare heart size in sequential
radiographs.
Feline VHS seems to be less subject to variations
than canine VHS, with normal values of 7.5 ± 0.3
vertebrae.
Dorsoventral View

As in the lateral views, the normal canine cardiac
shape varies widely among breeds, with a wider and
more rounded cardiac silhouette in barrel‐chested

VetBooks.ir

16 Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease

(a)

Dobermann

(b)

French Bulldog

Figure 16.2 Lateral thoracic radiographs of two normal dogs from different breeds (a: Doberman; b: French bulldog). Both cardiac shape
and size vary markedly between the two dogs. Note the elongated upright orientation of the Doberman’s heart and the wider silhouette,
with a greater sternal contact (double arrows) and a more horizontal orientation, of the bulldog’s heart. Source: Medical Imaging Unit, ENVA.

(a)

r ta
Ao

CVC
MPA
aAo

(b)

Figure 16.4 Lateral thoracic radiograph of a normal dog showing
the approximate location of the four cardiac chambers, the
tracheal bifurcation (TB) and the main thoracic vessels. aAo,
ascending aorta; CVC, caudal vena cava; LA, left atrium; LV, left
ventricle; MPA, main pulmonary artery; RA, right atrium; RV, right
ventricle. Source: Medical Imaging Unit, ENVA.

Figure 16.3 Lateral thoracic radiographs of two normal cats, one
young adult cat (a) and one 15‐year‐old cat (b). Compared to the
young adult cat, note the more horizontal orientation of the heart
and the prominent aortic arch (arrow) in the aged cat. Source:
Medical Imaging Unit, ENVA.

dogs than in narrow‐chested and deep‐chested dogs.
The maximum canine heart width is usually less
than 65% of the thorax width at the same level. The
maximum feline heart width is less than one half of
the ­thorax width, with a prominent aortic arch in
aged animals.

129

VetBooks.ir

130

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

T4

Common Abnormal Cardiac Radiographic
Patterns
Congenital and acquired heart diseases can be responsible
for generalized or localized cardiac enlargement associated with changes in the intrathoracic blood vessels. The
main cardiac causes responsible for left, right and global
heart enlargement are presented in Table 16.3 and in
Figures 16.7–16.12.
Left Heart Diseases (Figures 16.7–16.10)
Left Atrial Enlargement

On lateral views, left atrial enlargement is characterized by:
straightening of the dorsocaudal part of the cardiac
silhouette
●● dorsal elevation of the caudal portion of the trachea
and tracheal bifurcation (carina)
●● separation of the normally superimposed caudal main
bronchi owing to a disproportionate dorsal elevation
of the latter (with a more dorsal position of the left
bronchus as compared to the right).
●●

Figure 16.5 Calculation of the vertebral heart score (VHS) from a
thoracic lateral radiograph in a normal mixed‐breed dog. The
cardiac long‐axis dimension (L) represents the combined size of
the left atrium and the left ventricle, and is measured from the
cardiac apex to the base where it intersects the tracheal
bifurcation. The cardiac short‐axis dimension (S) is perpendicular
to L, and is measured at the point of maximum cardiac width,
which usually corresponds to the point at which the cardiac
silhouette intersects the ventral border of the caudal vena cava
(as shown here). S therefore includes left and right cardiac
chambers in the region of the coronary groove. L and S cardiac
dimensions are then transposed on the vertebral column and
recorded as the corresponding number of vertebrae (v), as
measured caudally from the cranial edge of the fourth thoracic
vertebra (T4). These values are summed to calculate the VHS. As
in the present case, L is equal to 5 v and S to 3.9 v, the VHS value
is 8.9 v, which is within normal ranges (8.5–10.6 v according to
Buchanan et al., J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995; 206: 194–9). Source:
Medical Imaging Unit, ENVA.

A clock face analogy can be used to approximately
localize the normal cardiovascular structures responsible
for the cardiac silhouette (Figure 16.6). This clock face
analogy can help in identifying the origin of bulges and
deformations of the cardiac silhouette associated with
heart diseases.
The VHS can also be calculated on the dorsoventral
view as follows: sum of cardiac long‐axis (distance
from cardiac apex to base) and short‐axis dimensions
(perpendicular to the long‐axis measurement at the
maximum cardiac width) assessed in vertebrae beginning with the cranial edge of the fourth vertebra on
the lateral radiograph. The feline VHS on the dorsoventral view is 8.1 ± 0.45 vertebrae. Also in the cat,
the maximum short‐axis cardiac dimension on the
dorsoventral view, ­compared with the thoracic spine
beginning at the cranial edge of the fourth vertebra on
the lateral chest radiograph, is usually less than four
vertebrae.

On the dorsoventral view, left atrial enlargement is characterized by:
bulging of the cardiac silhouette in the 2–3 o’clock
position (Figures 16.7b and 16.9b) owing to the
enlargement of the left auricular appendage (dog and
cat) and the left atrium (cat)
●● the presence of a round soft tissue opacity covering the
caudal part of the cardiac silhouette, with lateral displacement of the mainstem bronchi in the case of marked
left atrial dilation in the dog (Figures 16.7b and 16.8c).
●●

Similar abnormal patterns are detected on the ventrodorsal view.
Left Ventricular Enlargement

On lateral views, left ventricular enlargement is characterized (Figures 16.7a, 16.7c, 16.8a, 16.10a) by:
a “taller” heart with straightening of the caudal part of
the cardiac silhouette
●● dorsal elevation of the trachea, carina, and mainstem
bronchi.
●●

On the dorsoventral view, left ventricular enlargement is
characterized by:
elongation and enlargement at the 3–6 o’clock position
of the cardiac silhouette (Figure 16.8c)
●● broadening and rounding with a possible shift to the
right of the cardiac apex.
●●

Similar abnormal patterns are detected on the ventrodorsal view.

VetBooks.ir

16 Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease

Table 16.2 Examples of vertebral heart score (VHS) values assessed on lateral thoracic radiographs in normal dogs. For calculation of VHS,
see Figure 16.5. SD, standard deviation.

Animals

VHS value (mean
± SD vertebrae)

All breed dogs (n = 100)

9.7 ± 0.5

Boston terrier (n = 19)

11.7 ± 1.4

VHS assessed on right lateral views − 74% of dogs had
a VHS >2SD above the VHS of reference #1 (9.7 ± 0.5)

2. Jepsen‐Grant K, et al. Vet
Radiol Ultrasound 2013;54:3–8

Bulldog (n = 30)

12.7 ± 1.7

VHS assessed on right lateral views except for 1 dog
− 93% of dogs had a VHS >2SD above the VHS of
reference #1 (9.7 ± 0.5)

2. Jepsen‐Grant K, et al. Vet
Radiol Ultrasound 2013;54:3–8

Dachshund (n = 29)

9.7 ± 0.5

VHS assessed on right lateral views − 7% of dogs had
a VHS >2SD above the VHS of reference #1 (9.7 ± 0.5)

2. Jepsen‐Grant K, et al. Vet
Radiol Ultrasound 2013;54:3–8

Lhasa apso (n = 18)

9.6 ± 0.8

VHS assessed on right lateral views − 6% of dogs had
a VHS >2SD above the VHS of reference #1 (9.7 ± 0.5)

2. Jepsen‐Grant K, et al. Vet
Radiol Ultrasound 2013;54:3–8

Pomeranian (n = 18)

10.5 ± 0.9

VHS assessed on right lateral views except for 1 dog
− 50% of dogs had a VHS >2SD above the VHS of
reference #1 (9.7 ± 0.5)

2. Jepsen‐Grant K, et al. Vet
Radiol Ultrasound 2013;54:3–8

Pug (n = 30)

10.7 ± 0.9

VHS assessed on right lateral views − 43% of dogs had
a VHS >2SD above the VHS of reference #1 (9.7 ± 0.5)

2. Jepsen‐Grant K, et al. Vet
Radiol Ultrasound 2013;54:3–8

Shih tzu (n = 30)

9.5 ± 0.6

VHS assessed on right lateral views − 0% of dogs had
a VHS >2SD above the VHS of reference #1 (9.7 ± 0.5)

2. Jepsen‐Grant K, et al. Vet
Radiol Ultrasound 2013;54:3–8

Yorkshire terrier (n = 30)

9.9 ± 0.6

VHS assessed on right lateral views − 13% of dogs had
a VHS >2SD above the VHS of reference #1 (9.7 ± 0.5)

2. Jepsen‐Grant K, et al. Vet
Radiol Ultrasound 2013;54:3–8

All breed dogs (n = 63)
Right lateral recumbency
Left lateral recumbency

9.8 ± 0.6
9.5 ± 0.8

VHS was significantly larger in right than in left
lateral recumbency

3. Greco A, et al. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 2008;49:454–5

Beagle (n = 19)
Right lateral recumbency
Left lateral recumbency

10.5 ± 0.4
10.2 ± 0.4

VHS was significantly larger in right than in left
lateral recumbency

4. Kraetschmer S, et al. J Small
Anim Pract 2008;49:240–3

Boxer (n = 20)

11.6 ± 0.8

Right lateral thoracic radiographs

5. Lamb CR, et al. Vet Record
2001;148:707–11

Doberman (n = 20)

10.0 ± 0.6

Right lateral thoracic radiographs

5. Lamb CR, et al. Vet Record
2001;148:707–11

Cavalier King Charles
(n = 20)

10.6 ± 0.5

Right lateral thoracic radiographs

5. Lamb CR, et al. Vet Record
2001;148:707–11

German Shepherd dog
(n = 20)

9.7 ± 0.7

Right lateral thoracic radiographs

5. Lamb CR, et al. Vet Record
2001;148:707–11

Rottweiler (n = 38)

9.8 ± 0.1

Greyhound (n = 42)

10.5 ± 0.1

Comments

References

1. Buchanan JW, et al. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 1995;206:194–9

6. Marin L, et al. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 2007;48:332–4
VHS was significantly higher in greyhounds than in
rottweilers

Left‐Sided Congestive Heart Failure

In the case of left‐sided congestive heart failure, prominent pulmonary veins owing to venous congestion are
seen, particularly in the hilar area (as they enter the left
atrium) on lateral views. The pulmonary vein diameter
appears greater than that of the corresponding arteries.
This asymmetry is easiest to detect for cranial vessels on

6. Marin L, et al. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 2007;48:332–4

lateral views (where the pulmonary veins are ventral to
the accompanying arteries), and for caudal vessels on the
dorsoventral view (where the pulmonary veins are medial
to the accompanying arteries).
Radiographic signs of left‐sided congestive heart
failure also include visualization of mild to severe
­
inter­stitial, peribronchial to alveolar pulmonary opacity

131

VetBooks.ir

132

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease
(a)

Figure 16.6 Clock face analogy (a) applied
to the canine cardiac silhouette (b) on the
dorsoventral view. The aortic arch (AoA)
approximately extends from 11 o’clock to
1 o’clock, the main pulmonary artery
(MPA) from 1 o’clock to 2 o’clock, the left
ventricle (LV) from 3 o’clock to 6 o’clock,
and the right ventricle (RV) from 6–7
o’clock to 11 o’clock (with a
superimposition with the RA between
9 and 11 o’clock). In cats and dogs,
enlargement of the left auricular
appendage (Laur) contributes to a
deformation of the cardiac silhouette
between 2 and 3 o’clock. In the cat, the
body of the left atrium (LA) also extends
from 2 to 3 o’clock, whereas in the dog the
LA is rather superimposed over the caudal
part of the cardiac silhouette (b). Source:
Medical Imaging Unit, ENVA.

(b)

AoA

MPA
RA

LAur

LA

RV

LV

(Figures 16.7c, 16.10a and 16.10b) due to pulmonary
edema. Cardiogenic pulmonary edema is typically more
pronounced in the dorsal perihilar area on lateral views in
the dog, with a bilateral distribution on the dorsoventral
view in both species. In some instances, it can be asymmetric in the dog, with the right lung fields more severely
affected than the left. In the case of alveolar edema, the
alveolar spaces are filled with fluid. The margins of the
pulmonary vessels are therefore totally obscured and air
bronchograms (corresponding to black air‐filled bronchi
surrounded by white radiopaque lung tissue) are detected.
Right Heart Diseases
Right Atrial Enlargement

On lateral views, right atrial enlargement is characterized by:
enlargement of the dorsocranial part of the cardiac
s­ ilhouette (Figure 16.11a)
●● dorsal elevation of the trachea over the cranial portion
of the heart (less commonly).
●●

On the dorsoventral view, right atrial enlargement is
characterized by bulging of the cardiac silhouette in the
9–11 o’clock position.
Right Ventricular Enlargement

On lateral views, right ventricular enlargement is characterized (Figures 16.7c and 16.11a) by:
increased sternal contact, with widening and increased
convexity of the cranioventral heart margins
●● elevation of the apex from the sternum and, in the case
of severe enlargement, dorsal elevation of the caudal
vena cava as well.
●●

On the dorsoventral view, right ventricular enlargement is characterized (Figure 16.11b) by:
broadening and rounding of the cardiac silhouette at
the 6–7 to 9–11 o’clock position with a reverse‐D
appearance
●● a shift to the left of the cardiac apex in the case of
severe enlargement.
●●

Similar abnormal patterns are detected on the ventrodorsal view.
Right‐Sided Congestive Heart Failure

Thoracic radiographic signs of right‐sided congestive
heart failure include visualization of right heart
enlargement associated with widening of the caudal
vena cava (whose normal diameter is usually approximately that of the descending thoracic aorta) and interlobar pleural fissures secondary to pleural effusion
(with lung collapse and rounded pulmonary borders in
severe cases).
Extrathoracic radiographic signs include hepatomegaly (extension of the liver caudally to the last rib with
abnormally round margins and caudal displacement of
the stomach) and ascites, which is characterized by
abdominal distension and increased fluid opacity with
loss of intraabdominal details.
Specific Radiographic Signs Associated with Heart
Diseases

The main specific radiographic signs associated with
heart diseases are presented in Table 16.3 and in
Figures 16.7 to 16.12.

VetBooks.ir

16 Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease

Table 16.3 Generalized or localized heart enlargement on thoracic radiographs: main cardiac causes, associated radiographic signs,
differential diagnosis
Type of heart
enlargement

Main causes

Potential associated radiographic signs Differential diagnosis

Left heart enlargement

Left atrial and/
or ventricular
enlargement

Congenital heart diseases: mitral dysplasia with
mitral valve regurgitation, significant left‐to‐
right shunting due to VSD and PDA, subaortic
stenosis and/or aortic insufficiency
Acquired heart diseases: hypertrophic and
restrictive cardiomyopathy (cat), degenerative
mitral valve disease (dog), mitral or aortic valve
endocarditis, dilated cardiomyopathy,
cardiomyopathy secondary to systemic arterial
hypertension and hyperthyroidism (cat)

Isolated left
atrial
enlargement

Congenital heart diseases: mitral valve stenosis

Enlargement of the aortic arch in
the case of PDA, subaortic stenosis
and systemic arterial hypertension
Increased pulmonary artery
prominence and increased
pulmonary vessels (veins and
arteries) in the case of VSD and
PDA with significant left‐to‐right
shunting
Increased pulmonary veins in cases
with left‐sided congestive heart
failure (see text)

Pulmonary mass
and/or adenopathy
in the hilar area (left
atrial enlargement)

Increased caudal vena cava on
lateral views in cases of
right‐sided congestive heart failure
(see text)
Enlargement of the main
pulmonary artery (post‐stenotic
dilation) with decreased pulmonary
vasculature in the case of pulmonic
stenosis
Enlargement of the main
pulmonary artery, abnormal
pulmonary arteries (tortuous,
larger than their accompanying
veins) in the case of pulmonary
hypertension
Pulmonary infiltrates in the case of
dirofilariosis, pulmonary embolism,
respiratory diseases, etc.

Tracheobronchial
adenopathy
and
cranial mediastinal
mass
(including heart base
tumor)

Right heart enlargement

Right atrial and/ Congenital heart diseases: tricuspid dysplasia
with tricuspid regurgitation, significant left‐to‐
or ventricular
right shunting due to ASD, pulmonic stenosis
enlargement
and/or pulmonic insufficiency (rare), tetralogy of
Fallot
Acquired heart diseases: degenerative tricuspid
valve disease, arrhythmogenic right ventricular
cardiomyopathy, pulmonary arterial hypertension
(main causes: dirofilariosis, angiostrongylosis,
respiratory diseases, pulmonary embolism,
reversed‐shunting congenital defects, etc.)

Isolated right
atrial
enlargement

Congenital heart disease: tricuspid stenosis
Acquired heart disease: right atrial neoplasia
(hemangiosarcoma)

Generalized
heart
enlargement

Severe left and/or right heart diseases
Pericardial effusion, peritoneal‐pericardial
hernia
Intracardiac mass (tumor)
“Athletic heart”

Globoid cardiac silhouette in the case
of pericardial diseases, with gas‐
containing structures within the
pericardial sac and loss of outline
between the ventral diaphragmatic
surface and the caudal ventral cardiac
silhouette in the case of peritoneal‐
pericardial hernia

ASD, atrial septal defect; DV, dorsoventral; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; VD, ventrodorsal; VSD, ventricular septal defect.

133

VetBooks.ir

134

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

(a)
LA

Carina

(b)

(c)
LB
Trachea

Figure 16.7 Thoracic radiographs of three different dogs with compensated (a,b) and decompensated (c) degenerative mitral valve
disease. (a) A marked left atrial enlargement (LA) is seen on this lateral radiograph. Note the tracheal and carina dorsal elevation as well as
the straightening of the caudal part of the cardiac silhouette, suggesting left ventricular dilation as well. (b) On this dorsoventral view,
enlargement of the left auricular appendage produces a bulge (large arrow) at the 2–3 o’clock position. Additionally, the dilated LA body
(thin arrows) creates a “mass effect” in the dorsocaudal region of the cardiac silhouette. (c) This lateral radiograph shows diffuse
cardiogenic pulmonary edema that is more severe in the caudodorsal perihilar area (arrow). Left heart enlargement is responsible for
dorsal elevation of the intrathoracic trachea, carina, and left main bronchus (LB). Note also the abnormal increased sternal contact of the
heart, suggesting right ventricular enlargement (which was further confirmed to result from pulmonary arterial hypertension). Source:
Medical Imaging Unit, ENVA.

­Conventional Echocardiography
Over the last 30 years, standard transthoracic echocardiography has become a major imaging tool for the diagnosis, management, and follow‐up of canine and feline
heart diseases, allowing noninvasive assessment of heart
morphology (ventricles, atria, cardiac valves, auricular
appendages) and function, as well as examination of the
anatomy of the proximal great vessels.
General Principles and Technique
Conventional echocardiography combines 2D and M‐
mode imaging. M‐mode echocardiography provides
one‐dimensional views of the heart, while 2D echocardiography displays cross‐sectional or 2D cardiac images
(in transverse and longitudinal planes) moving in real

time. M‐mode echocardiograms display motion over
time of the various tissue interfaces crossed by the linear M‐mode ultrasound beam. Currently, the 2D mode
is always used to guide accurate placement of the
M‐mode cursor, which appears as a vertical line on
2D echocardiograms. M‐mode echocardiography has a
much higher spatial and temporal resolution than 2D
echocardiography, and therefore allows recording of
the motion of subtle cardiac structures.
Transthoracic 2D and M‐mode echocardiography
can be performed on animals in lateral recumbency or
in standing position, as the measurements obtained in
both positions show similar variability. Some animals
may not tolerate a recumbent position because of discomfort or dyspnea, making the standing position easier and more suitable. Placing the patient in lateral
recumbency decreases lung interference but, on the
other hand, may increase stress in nervous animals.

VetBooks.ir

16 Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease

(a)
LB
Trachea

(c)

1

(b)

2
3

ACDO

Figure 16.8 Thoracic radiographs of two dogs with patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). (a,b) Lateral radiographs of the same dog (German
shepherd) respectively before and 24 hours after surgery (placement of an Amplatz canine duct occluder, ACDO). Note the marked
generalized heart enlargement on (a), with dorsal elevation of the intrathoracic trachea, carina, and left main bronchus (LB), associated
with vascular congestion (arrows) due to overcirculation of the lung field, and interstitial edema in caudal lungs. After ACDO placement
(b), heart size (width and height) has decreased and vascular congestion disappeared. (c) Dorsoventral radiograph of a Cavalier King
Charles spaniel with PDA before surgical closure. Note the elongated cardiac silhouette (double arrow), the heart base enlargement
(including 1: descending aorta, 2: main pulmonary artery, 3: left auricular appendage), and the increased opacity caudally to the
tracheal bifurcation, corresponding to the dilated left atrium (LA) superimposed over the caudal cardiac silhouette. Source: Medical
Imaging Unit, ENVA.

When patients are echoed in a recumbent position, a
special scanning table with a cutout is needed, and
images are obtained from beneath the table through the
table hole. The standing position does not require a
specific scanning table, as the animal is gently restrained
against an assistant to keep its position stable. For both
animal positions, the transducer is placed on the thoracic wall in an intercostal space over the precordial
impulse area, close to the ­sternum, to obtain parasternal views. However, subcostal (or subxiphoid) views
may sometimes be used for Doppler assessment of the
aortic outflow (as they may provide a better Doppler
beam alignment than parasternal views).
In most cases where manual restraint is sufficient,
sedation is avoided as it can alter systolic function and
may affect cardiac dimensions.

Most animals do not require clipping of hair over the
area of contact on the thoracic wall (more than 90% of
the patients at our unit are not clipped for conventional
echocardiographic examinations or for advanced ultrasound techniques, such as tissue Doppler imaging).
Acoustic gel helps to provide an optimal air‐free contact
between the probe and the thoracic wall.
High‐frequency transducers are characterized by low
penetrating power but high resolution. Conversely, low‐
frequency transducers are characterized by high penetrating power but low resolution. In canine and feline
cardiology, transducer frequencies are usually between
2.5 and 12 MHz. Transducer frequencies are commonly
adjusted during a single echocardiographic examination, depending on the location and size of the cardiovascular structures tested. As most commercially

135

VetBooks.ir

136

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

(a)

right and left parasternal positions. Transverse views,
also called short‐axis views, are obtained with the 2D
ultrasound plane perpendicular to the long axis of the
heart. Conversely, sagittal views, also called long‐axis
views, are obtained from short‐axis views by rotating
the transducer 90° counterclockwise, so that the 2D
ultrasound plane becomes parallel to the long axis of
the heart.
Main Parasternal Short‐Axis Views

(b)

Figure 16.9 Thoracic radiographs of a cat with left‐sided
congestive heart failure secondary to hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Note on the lateral view the mild convexity of the
caudal heart border and the increased cranial–caudal diameter
associated with mild but diffuse interstitial pulmonary edema (a).
On the dorsoventral view (b), the dilated left atrium (arrow)
associated with the pointed appearance of the left apex (owing to
concentric left ventricular hypertrophy) creates a “Valentine‐
shaped” heart silhouette. Source: Medical Imaging Unit, ENVA.

available transducers have a wide frequency bandwidth,
frequencies can be changed while using the same probe.
If possible, the ultrasound machine’s ECG should be
connected to the patient during the echocardiographic
examination, in order to detect potential arrhythmias
and study the correlation between electrical and mechanical events.
Standard 2D Echocardiographic Views
and Measurements
A variety of standardized 2D transverse and sagittal
echocardiographic views have been defined from the

The three most commonly used 2D transverse echocardiographic views are the right parasternal transventricular short‐axis view (Figure 16.13), the right
parasternal transmitral short‐axis view (Figure 16.14),
and the right parasternal transaortic short‐axis view
(Figure 16.15).
The right parasternal transventricular short‐axis view
(Figure 16.13a) provides transverse visualization of the
two ventricular cavities, and is therefore used to assess
left (Figures 16.13b and 16.13c) and right (Figure 16.13d)
ventricular changes in size and shape. This view is also
commonly used to obtain M‐mode echocardiograms at
the ventricular level.
The right parasternal transmitral short‐axis view
(Figure 16.14) allows visualization of the mitral valve
leaflets within the left ventricular cavity, and is therefore
commonly used to obtain M‐mode echocardiograms at
the mitral valve level.
The right parasternal transaortic short‐axis view
(Figure 16.15a) provides transverse visualization of the
heart base, with the ascending aorta visible as a circle
in the middle of the sector image. This view is commonly used to calculate the left atrium/aorta ratio, and
to therefore allow detection of left atrial dilation
(Figure 16.15b, Tables 16.4 and 16.5). This view is also
used to evaluate the right ventricular outflow tract as
well as the pulmonary cusps (Figure 16.15c). A slight
rotation of the transducer provides a short‐axis view of
the heart base optimized for the pulmonary arteries,
which is useful for observing heartworms or blood
clots within the pulmonary arteries (Figure 16.15d)
and for detecting indirect signs of pulmonary arterial
hypertension (Figure 16.15e). A similar view can be
obtained from the left parasternal position.
Main Parasternal Long‐Axis Views

Two 2D sagittal echocardiographic views can be
obtained from the right side of the thorax – the right
parasternal long‐axis four‐ and five‐chamber views
(Figures 16.16 and 16.17, respectively). The right parasternal long‐axis four‐chamber view provides clear
visualization of the atrial septum and the atrioventricular valves, and is therefore useful for the diagnosis of

VetBooks.ir

16 Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease

Figure 16.10 Thoracic radiographs of a
Doberman with acute left‐sided
congestive heart failure secondary to
dilated cardiomyopathy. Note the tracheal
and carina dorsal elevation as well as the
straightening of the caudal part of the
cardiac silhouette, suggesting left heart
enlargement on the lateral view (a). Diffuse
patchy interstitial and alveolar opacities
consistent with cardiogenic pulmonary
edema are also present. They are
symmetrically distributed in the right and
left lung fields on the dorsoventral view
(b). Source: Medical Imaging Unit, ENVA.

(a)

atrial septal defects (Figure 16.16b) and mitral valve
lesions (Figure 16.16c).
The right parasternal long‐axis five‐chamber view is
commonly used to examine the left ventricular outflow
tract, the mitral valve leaflets, and the junction between
the interventricular septum and the anterior aortic wall
in order to respectively diagnose left ventricular outflow tract obstruction (Figure 16.17b), mitral valve
lesions (Figure 16.17c), and ventricular septal defects
(Figure 16.17d).
Long‐axis four‐ and five‐chamber views can also be
obtained from the left parasternal position (2D left apical
or caudal four‐ and five‐chamber views; Figure 16.18).
The left apical four‐chamber view provides good visualization of the ventricular inflow tracts and is therefore
used to assess mitral and tricuspid diastolic inflows. It
may also be used to calculate end‐diastolic and end‐systolic left ventricular volumes (Box 16.1).
The end‐diastolic left ventricular length can also be
measured from the left apical four‐chamber view and the
index of sphericity can then be calculated (this index is
defined as the end‐diastolic left ventricular length / left
ventricular diameter assessed by M‐mode at end‐diastole; normal values are usually >1.65). The main use of the
left apical five‐chamber view is for the Doppler assessment of systolic aortic outflow.
Standard M‐Mode Views and Measurements
The two most commonly used M‐mode echocardiograms are obtained at the ventricular level and the mitral
valve level (Figure 16.19). The M‐mode echocardiogram
obtained at the ventricular level is used to measure left
ventricular end‐diastolic and end‐systolic diameters,
left ventricular free wall thickness and interventricular

(b)

septal thickness at end‐diastole and at end‐systole
(which correspond to the onset of qRs and end of T‐
wave, respectively, on concomitant ECG tracing), in
order to detect and quantify left ventricular alterations
(Figure 16.20a and 16.20b). The left ventricular fractional shortening can then be calculated to indirectly
assess the transverse systolic myocardial function
(Figure 16.19a; see also Tables 16.4 and 16.5). The M‐
mode echocardiogram obtained at the ventricular level
can also be used to measure right ventricular dimensions (end‐diastolic diameter and end‐systolic myocardial wall thickness).
E point to septal separation (up to 5–8 mm in the dog,
depending on the size of the animal) can be measured
from M‐mode echocardiograms obtained at the mitral
valve level. This distance increases in the case of severely
reduced systolic left ventricular function. The same M‐
mode view may be used to detect systolic anterior motion
of the mitral valve, which is commonly associated with
obstructive forms of feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
(Figure 16.20c).

­Conventional Doppler
Echocardiography
Conventional Doppler echocardiography allows detection
and analysis of blood flows within the cardiovas­cular
system. The conventional Doppler examination consists
of locating blood flows within the cardiac chambers and
vessels, as well as assessing their direction, velocity, and
duration. This technique is also used to differentiate
normal laminar flows from abnormal nonlaminar (or
turbulent) flows. Additionally, flow ­volumes and pressure

137

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

mation, and has now supplanted invasive techniques
such as cardiac catheterization for the diagnosis of most
human and animal heart diseases. Advanced ultrasound
imaging techniques beyond the scope of this chapter are
summarized in Box 16.2.

(a)

VetBooks.ir

138

Basic Principles

(b)
(c)

Rib 9

Rib 9

Figure 16.11 Thoracic radiographs of two dogs with marked
right heart enlargement resulting from severe pulmonic stenosis
(a) and pulmonary arterial hypertension secondary to a large
reversed ventricular septal defect (b,c). (a) Note on this lateral
view the increased sternal contact of the cranial cardiac margin
(small arrows) consistent with right ventricular enlargement, as
well as protrusion of the dorsal cranial margin of the cardiac
silhouette (large arrow) owing to both right atrial dilation and
enlargement of the main pulmonary artery. The pulmonary
vasculature is also slightly diminished. (b) On this dorsoventral
view, right ventricular enlargement is characterized by a rounded
right heart border bulging to the right (approximately between 6
and 9 o’clock; arrows) and a leftward shift of the cardiac apex,
leading to a reverse‐D appearance. Note also the marked
prominence of the main pulmonary artery (MPA) between 1 and
2 o’clock and the enlarged peripheral pulmonary arteries (PA),
compared with the pulmonary veins (V, see details on (c)), which
indicates pulmonary arterial hypertension. Width of peripheral
pulmonary arteries should be similar to that of the corresponding
pulmonary veins and should not be larger than the ninth rib
diameter at the crossing point between the two. Source: Medical
Imaging Unit, ENVA.

gradients across valves or between cardiac chambers can
be estimated from velocity Doppler data using specific
equations. Conventional Doppler echocardiography
complements 2D and M‐mode echocardiography by
providing accurate cardiovascular hemodynamic infor-

Conventional Doppler echocardiography is based on
the Doppler principle, discovered by Christian Doppler
in the 19th century, which states that a moving structure (e.g., blood cells) reflects the incident ultrasound
beam back to the transducer with a higher or lower
frequency than the original transmitted frequency
­
depending on whether the structure is, respectively,
moving toward or away from the transducer. This difference between transmitted and received frequencies,
also called the Doppler shift or frequency shift, is
directly related to the velocity of the reflecting moving
structures, which can thus be deduced from the frequency shift analysis.
The recorded frequency shift (and therefore the calculated flow velocity) also depends on the cosine of the intercept angle (θ) between the ultrasound beam and blood
flow path. Therefore, whichever Doppler mode is used,
the incident ultrasound beam must be perfectly parallel to
the blood flow path (θ = 0°), otherwise the blood flow
velocity will not be assessed correctly, that is, it will be
underestimated as compared to the actual velocity.
As frequency shift values are usually within the hearing range of the human ear, an audible signal can be
simultaneously associated with spectral Doppler tracings of flow velocities. Listening to this Doppler audio
signal is particularly useful in practice to help in aligning the ultrasound beam parallel to blood flow: the
louder the audible signal, the higher the Doppler shift,
the smaller the intercept angle θ, the better the alignment between blood flow and the ultrasound beam.
Standard Doppler Modes
Standard Doppler echocardiography includes different complementary modes, spectral Doppler modes
and color‐flow Doppler mode (see examples on
Figures 16.21–16.23). Each mode has specific advantages and limitations, of which the observer must be
perfectly aware in order to avoid misinterpretation of
the recorded Doppler signals.
Spectral Modes: Pulsed‐Wave and Continuous‐
Wave Doppler Modes

The two main spectral Doppler modes are pulsed‐wave
(PW) and continuous‐wave (CW) Doppler modes.

VetBooks.ir

16 Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease

Figure 16.12 Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal
(b) thoracic radiographs of a dog with a
peritoneal‐pericardial diaphragmatic
hernia. Note the marked enlargement and
the globoid shape of the heart on both
views, overlap of the diaphragmatic and
caudal heart borders (arrow), associated
with a small liver and gas‐filled intestinal
loops (stars), that are superimposed on the
cardiac silhouette because of their
pericardial location. Source: Medical
Imaging Unit, ENVA.

(a)

With these spectral Doppler modes, blood flow velocities (expressed in m/s) are displayed over time in a
region of interest, that is, either all along a linear axis
(or cursor line) for the CW Doppler mode or in a specific site, also called a sample gate or sample volume,
for the PW Doppler mode. The position of the CW
Doppler cursor as well as the location and size of the
PW sample volume are carefully selected by the
observer on 2D echocardiographic views. Whichever
spectral Doppler mode is selected, the velocity profiles
are displayed as positive (i.e., above the baseline) or
negative (i.e., below the baseline), when blood cells
respectively move toward or away from the transducer.
The CW mode uses two transducer elements, one
continuously emitting and the other continuously
receiving ultrasound waves. Because this emission–
reception process is continuous, there is no loss of blood
flow information and therefore no maximum limit for
velocity measurements. Velocities higher than 8 m/s can
thus be measured. Conversely, the PW mode uses only
one transducer element which discontinuously emits
short bursts of ultrasound waves at a given frequency
(pulse repetition frequency, PRF = number of pulses per
second), and receives reflected ones only at a given time
and for a limited duration. This pulsed emission–reception process explains why the main limitation of the PW
Doppler mode is its inability to measure high velocities:
there is a maximum value for PW velocity recording,
also called the Nyquist limit. When blood flow velocities
exceed the Nyquist limit, an aliasing artifact occurs,
characterized by a reversal of the velocities (Figure 16.24).
The maximum velocity that can be recorded without
aliasing is usually around 1.5–2.5 m/s. Its value depends
on both the transducer frequency and the sample gate
depth: the lower the transducer frequency and the lower
the sample gate depth, the higher the maximal velocity
that can be recorded.

(b)

Nevertheless, the advantage of the PW Doppler
mode is that blood flows can be analyzed at very
specific locations, whereas with the CW Doppler
­
mode it is impossible to determine the accurate
­location of recorded blood flow velocities on the line
of interrogation.
Color Flow Doppler Mode

The color flow Doppler mode provides a color‐coded
map of the velocity and direction of blood flows,
which is superimposed in real time on black‐and‐
white 2D‐mode images. Blood flow velocities towards
the transducer are coded in red whereas those away
from the transducer are coded in blue (Blue Away, Red
Toward or “BART”), with lighter colors for higher
velocities. Many ultrasound s­ ystems also use variance
color maps, adding green to the above‐mentioned
colors when the tested flow is turbulent.
As color flow imaging provides numerous color sites of
flow information, it may be considered as a form of PW
Doppler mode with numerous sample gates located on
many scan lines. It therefore suffers from the same limitation, the aliasing artifact, which occurs when blood flow
velocities exceed the Nyquist limit. This artifact is characterized by a color reversal (blue instead of red, red instead of
blue). The maximum value for color‐coded velocity without
aliasing is dependent on blood flow depth and transducer
frequency, as with the PW Doppler mode.
Normal Transvalvular Flows
General Characteristics

Transvalvular flows include two arterial flows (pulmonary
and aortic flows) and two atrioventricular flows (mitral
and tricuspid flows). These four flows are typically laminar,
which means that all blood cells are moving in the same

139

VetBooks.ir

140

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

direction and at approximately the same velocity throughout the entire cardiac cycle. Normal PW Doppler transvalvular flow profiles therefore appear as hollow
(Figures 16.21c, 16.21d, 16.22b, 16.22c, 16.23c), because

the blood flow velocities in the selected sample gate are
very similar. Conversely, normal CW Doppler flow profiles
appear as completely filled because of the various velocities
recorded all along the CW scan line (Figure 16.21b).

(a)
Right parasternal
transventricular short-axis view

Figure 16.13 Two‐dimensional right parasternal transventricular short‐axis view in a normal dog (a) and in three dogs with heart
diseases (b–d). (a) The top image shows spatial orientation of the ultrasound beam, with the transducer placed on the right side of the
thorax. As shown on the middle image, the ultrasound plane goes first through the right ventricle (RV) and then the left ventricle (LV).
Therefore, the real‐time two‐dimensional right parasternal transventricular short‐axis view shows the crescent‐shaped RV at the top of
the sector image and the mushroom‐shaped LV below, with the curved interventricular septum (IVS) between the two. Note the two
symmetric papillary muscles (Pm) within the LV cavity and the left ventricular free wall (LVFW) at the bottom of the image. Source:
Tessier-Vetzel D and Chetboul. In Chetboul et al. 2005. (b) In this dog with dilated cardiomyopathy, the right parasternal transventricular
short‐axis view taken in early systole shows an abnormal dilated and rounded (instead of mushroom‐shaped) LV with thin myocardial
walls and atrophied left Pm. (c) Unlike (b), in this dog with lipid storage myopathy and associated hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, note
the reduced LV cavity, the hypertrophied myocardial walls and left Pm, associated with hyperechoic focal lesions (arrows) due to
myocardial fibrotic remodeling. (d) In this dog with pulmonic stenosis, the IVS and the RV myocardial wall (RVW) are severely thickened.
Note also the hypertrophied right Pm, the flattened IVS, and the reduced LV cavity.

VetBooks.ir

16 Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 16.13 (Continued)

Normal Pulmonary and Aortic Systolic Flows

Pulmonary flow is assessed from the right or left parasternal transaortic short‐axis views, whereas the left
apical five‐chamber view and the subcostal view are
commonly used to analyze aortic flow. The subcostal
view sometimes provides a better alignment than
the left apical five‐chamber view for imaging aortic
outflow.
Both arterial flows are systolic (starting from the qRs
complex and lasting until the end of the T‐wave) and
move away from the transducer. Pulmonary and aortic
systolic flows are therefore encoded in blue with color
flow Doppler mode, and the corresponding CW and PW
systolic flow profiles are negative, with a symmetric

or asymmetric appearance, respectively (Figures 16.21
and 16.22).
Peak arterial flow velocities are usually less than 2 m/s
(Tables 16.4 and 16.5). Nevertheless, owing to left
­ventricular outflow tract morphology or high sympathetic tone, the laminar aortic flow profiles of some
­normal dogs may show higher peak values (between 2
and 2.5 m/s).
Normal Mitral and Tricuspid Diastolic Inflows

Mitral and tricuspid inflows are both assessed from
left parasternal views (the left parasternal apical, or
caudal, four‐chamber view and the left parasternal
cranial view optimized for right cavities, respectively).

141

VetBooks.ir

142

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

Right parasternal
transmitral short-axis view

Figure 16.14 Two‐dimensional right parasternal transmitral short‐axis view. The top image shows spatial orientation of the ultrasound
beam, with the transducer placed on the right side of the thorax. As shown on the middle image, the ultrasound plane goes first through
the right ventricle (RV) and then the left ventricle (LV) at the mitral valve level. Therefore, the real‐time two‐dimensional right parasternal
transmitral short‐axis view shows the crescent‐shaped RV at the top of the sector image and the rounded LV below, with the curved
interventricular septum (IVS) between the two, and the two mitral valve leaflets within the LV cavity. amvl and pmvl: anterior and posterior
mitral valve leaflets, respectively. Source: Tessier-Vetzel D and Chetboul. In Chetboul et al. 2005.

Unlike the above‐described arterial flows, mitral and
tricuspid flows are both diastolic (starting from the
end of the T‐wave and ending at the beginning of the
qRs complex) and move toward the transducer. They
are therefore encoded in red using the color flow
Doppler mode, and the corresponding CW and PW
diastolic flow profiles are positive, with a similar
biphasic appearance (Figure 16.23) owing to an early

rapid ventricular filling wave (E) and a late filling wave
(A) resulting from atrial contraction. Peak early and
late diastolic flow velocities are usually less than
1.5 m/s in dogs and cats (Tables 16.4 and 16.5), with an
E/A ratio >1 except for healthy aged animals (as E/A
ratio decreases with age). If the heart rate increases, E
and A waves can fuse in a single summated signal, and
this is commonly observed in the feline species.

VetBooks.ir

16 Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease

(a)
Right parasternal
transaortic short-axis view

Figure 16.15 Two‐dimensional right parasternal transaortic short‐axis view in a normal dog (a) and in four dogs with heart diseases (b–e).
(a) The right parasternal transaortic short‐axis view is a transverse view of the heart base. The top image shows spatial orientation of the
ultrasound beam, with the transducer placed on the right side of the thorax. As shown on the middle image, the ultrasound plane goes
first through the right cavities including the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) and the right atrium (RA), then the aorta (Ao), and lastly
the left atrium (LA). Therefore, the real‐time two‐dimensional right parasternal transaortic short‐axis view shows the RVOT at the top of
the sector image with the RA on the left, the circular‐shaped Ao including the more or less visible aortic cusps at the center (appearing
like the Mercedes car insignia), and the LA with the left auricle (Laur) at the bottom of the image. Note also the pulmonary trunk (PT) at
the bottom right of the image. Measurements of the Ao and LA diameters can be obtained from this view, as follows: the internal short‐
axis Ao diameter is measured along the commissure between the noncoronary and left coronary aortic valve cusps, and the LA is
measured in a line extending from and parallel to the commissure between the noncoronary and left coronary aortic valve cusps (double
arrows). The LA/Ao ratio is then calculated (see Tables 16.4 and 16.5). Source: Tessier-Vetzel D and Chetboul. In Chetboul et al. 2005. (b) In
this dog with end‐stage degenerative mitral valve disease, the right parasternal transaortic short‐axis view shows severe dilation of the LA
and a markedly enlarged Laur (arrow). (c) In this dog with valvular pulmonic stenosis, the right parasternal transaortic short‐axis view
taken in systole shows thickened immobile pulmonic cusps (arrow) remaining in the center of the PT (instead of being “pushed” against
the PT walls). (d) In this dog with severe heartworm infestation, the right parasternal transaortic short‐axis view optimized for the
pulmonary arteries shows several worms within the PT as well as the right and left pulmonary arteries (RPA and LPA, respectively).
Heartworms appear as linear echoes (arrow) including two parallel lines separated by a thin hypoechoic line. (e) (same view as (d), taken in
diastole) In this dog with severe pulmonary arterial hypertension associated with a right‐to‐left PDA, note the severe RPA, LPA and PT
dilation (compared with the Ao) and the abnormal doming of the pulmonic cusps (arrow).

143

VetBooks.ir

144

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 16.15 (Continued)

Physiologic Regurgitations

Many healthy dogs display trivial to mild physiologic
regurgitations of the pulmonary and tricuspid valves.
Physiologic systolic tricuspid regurgitation is also common in cats. Such physiologic regurgitations are commonly used to noninvasively assess pulmonary arterial
pressure, and thus diagnose pulmonary arterial hypertension (see example in Figure 16.25). High regurgitant
jet velocities of the tricuspid valve (>2.5 m/s in the
absence of pulmonic stenosis) and the pulmonary valve
(>2.0 m/s at end-diastole), detected by CW Doppler
mode, are usually considered diagnostic for systolic and
diastolic pulmonary arterial hypertension, respectively.

Standard Quantitative Doppler Echocardiographic
Measurements

Conventional Doppler echocardiography using spectral
Doppler modes provides accurate assessment of the direction and peak velocity (m/s) of blood flows. These velocity
measurements can be used to estimate the maximum pressure gradients (∆P in mmHg) across valves or between cardiac chambers with the modified Bernoulli equation:
P 4 V2
where V is the peak velocity (m/s) of blood flow distal
to the orifice assessed by spectral Doppler modes.

VetBooks.ir

16 Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease

Table 16.4 Standard echocardiographic and pulsed‐wave
Doppler data obtained from 100 healthy dogs of various breeds
Variable

Mean ± SD

Range

Heart rate (beats/min)

109 ± 20

70–171

Fractional shortening (%)

36.2 ± 3.5

30.1–49.0

Left atrium/aorta ratio at end‐diastole
(2D method)

0.90 ± 0.11 0.52–1.13

Table 16.5 Standard echocardiographic and pulsed‐wave
Doppler echocardiographic data obtained from 100 healthy cats
of various breeds
Variable

Systolic peak aortic flow velocity (m/s) 1.29 ± 0.22 0.92–1.88
Systolic peak pulmonary flow velocity
(m/s)

1.05 ± 0.19 0.50–1.50

Mitral E wave velocity (m/s)

0.87 ± 0.13 0.58–1.17

Mitral A wave velocity (m/s)

0.61 ± 0.12 0.39–0.86

Mitral E/A ratio

1.46 ± 0.35 0.92–2.72

Tricuspid E wave velocity (m/s)

0.72 ± 0.11 0.50–0.98

Tricuspid A wave velocity (m/s)

0.43 ± 0.09 0.29–0.70

Tricuspid E/A ratio

1.75 ± 0.34 1.09–2.80

Source: Chetboul V, Carlos Sampedrano C, et al. Use of quantitative
two‐dimensional color tissue Doppler imaging for assessment of left
ventricular radial and longitudinal myocardial velocities in dogs. Am
J Vet Res 2005; 66: 953–61.

Mean ± SD

Range

Left atrium/aorta ratio at
end‐diastole (2D method)

0.9±0.1

0.5–1.2

Left ventricular end-diastolic
diameter (mm)

15.9±2.3

9.7–21.2

Left ventricular end-systolic
diameter (mm)

8.1±1.8

4.1–12.7

Left ventricular end-diastolic
free wall (mm)

4.3±0.7

2.4–5.8

Left ventricular end-systolic
free wall (mm)

7.5±1.1

4.2–10.3

Interventricular end-diastolic
septum (mm)

4.6±0.6

2.9–5.9

Interventricular end-systolic
septum (mm)

7.4±1.3

4.6–12.1

Interventricular subaortic
septum in end-diastole (mm)

4.1±0.8

2.3–5.7

49±7

33–66

Systolic peak aortic flow
velocity (m/s)

1.1±0.2

0.8–1.9

Systolic peak pulmonary
flow velocity (m/s)

0.9±0.2

0.5–1.6

Morphologic parameters

Systolic functional parameter

Fractional shortening (%)

Several indices of diastolic function can also be
­calculated. These include the mitral E/A ratio, E wave
deceleration time, and the isovolumic relaxation time
(time interval between end of aortic flow velocity and
onset of transmitral flow), which is an index of active
myocardial relaxation (Figure 16.23e).
Lastly, the volume of blood flowing through an orifice can be estimated by multiplying the area under
the spectral Doppler curve (velocity time integral) by
the cross‐sectional orifice area assessed on 2D echocardiographic images.

Common Abnormal Flow Patterns
Abnormal Pulmonary Flow Patterns
Alterations in Systolic Pulmonary Flow

The most common causes of abnormal systolic pulmonary flow patterns are pulmonary arterial hypertension
and congenital pulmonic stenosis.
Elevated pulmonary arterial pressures may induce an
abnormal asymmetric PW Doppler pulmonary velocity
profile with a short acceleration time and a delayed
deceleration time, similar to the normal aortic flow profile. A midsystolic notch (Figure 16.26a) may also be
seen, most commonly in the case of severe pulmonary
arterial hypertension (prevalence of notched pulmonary velocity profiles of 38% for systolic pulmonary arte-

Systolic maximal ejection velocities

Diastolic Doppler parameters
in cats with distinct mitral E
and A waves

(n = 89)

Mitral E wave (m/s)

0.7±0.1

0.5–1.1

Mitral A wave (m/s)

0.5±0.1

0.3–0.9

Mitral E/A ratio

1.5±0.3

1.1–2.9

Isovolumic relaxation
time (ms)

43±9

34–56

Heart rate (beats/min)

184±33

100–261

Time parameters

Source: Chetboul V, Carlos Sampedrano C, et al. Quantitative
assessment of velocities of the annulus of the left atrioventricular valve
and left ventricular free wall in healthy cats by use of two-dimensional
color tissue Doppler imaging. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67: 250–8.

rial pressures >40 mmHg). Peak systolic flow velocity
may also be diminished.
Pulmonic stenosis is responsible for an increase in
systolic pulmonary flow velocity (Figures 16.26b
and 16.26c), which can be assessed without aliasing
artifact using the CW Doppler mode (Figure 16.26c).

145

VetBooks.ir

146

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

When the PW Doppler mode is used, the velocity spectrum is broadened, as the flow is turbulent (instead of
laminar). Measurement of peak velocity using the CW
Doppler mode and subsequent calculation of the maximum systolic pressure gradient across the stenotic
lesion provides an accurate and noninvasive estimate of

lesion severity (Figure 16.26c). Pulmonic stenosis is
considered as severe when the pressure gradient across
the stenotic orifice exceeds 80–100 mmHg. Color flow
Doppler mode shows narrowing of the color‐coded systolic pulmonary flow map, and is therefore useful to
accurately localize the stenotic lesion (Figure 16.26b).

(a)
Right parasternal
long-axis
4-chamber view

Figure 16.16 Two‐dimensional right parasternal long‐axis four‐chamber view in a normal dog (a) and in two dogs with heart
diseases (b,c). (a) The top image on the left shows spatial orientation of the ultrasound beam, with the transducer placed on the right
side of the thorax. As shown on the top image on the right, the ultrasound plane goes first through the two right cavities, i.e., the
right ventricle (RV) and the right atrium (RA), then the two left cavities, i.e., the left ventricle (LV) and the left atrium (LA). Therefore,
the real‐time two‐dimensional right parasternal long‐axis four‐chamber view shows the RV and the RA separated by the tricuspid
valve at the top of the sector image, and the LV and the LA separated by the mitral valve below. The interventricular septum (IVS) and
interatrial septum (IAS) are also clearly seen. Source: Tessier-Vetzel D and Chetboul. In Chetboul et al. 2005. (b) In this dog presenting
with exercise intolerance, a large defect (arrow) is located in the middle of the IAS ( ostium secundum type atrial septal defect). (c)
Two‐dimensional right parasternal long‐axis four‐chamber view obtained in systole from a dog with degenerative mitral valve
disease and chordae tendinae rupture. A portion of the ruptured chordae tendinae (arrow) still attached to the prolapsed anterior
mitral valve leaflet is seen within the severely enlarged LA.

VetBooks.ir

16 Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease

(b)

cardiomyopathy, respectively. Whatever the cause,
aortic stenosis produces an accelerated turbulent systolic aortic flow, with similar spectral and color flow
Doppler characteristics to those described for pulmonic stenosis (Figure 16.27).
Aortic Insufficiency

(c)

Common causes of aortic insufficiency include infectious endocarditis, congenital abnormal aortic valve
(most often in association with subaortic stenosis),
and degenerative valvular disease. Color flow Doppler
mode criteria indicating severe aortic regurgitation
are large insufficiency jet size, compared to the left
ventricular outflow tract, and high extension of the
diastolic jet within the left ventricle, that is, beyond
the mitral leaflets tips. Severe aortic insufficiency also
causes a rapid deceleration of the diastolic Doppler
CW signal, owing to the marked decrease in the diastolic pressure gradient across the abnormal aortic
valve over time. Examples of mild and severe aortic
regurgitation jets are presented in Figures 16.27c
and 16.28.
Abnormal Mitral Flow Patterns
Alteration in Diastolic Transmitral Inflow

Figure 16.16 (Continued)

Nonphysiologic Pulmonary Regurgitations

Pulmonary regurgitation is often associated with congenital pulmonic stenosis, because of the abnormally thic­
kened and irregular pulmonary leaflets (Figure 16.26c).
Its severity may be mildly to moderately increased in
patients with pulmonary stenosis that have undergone
balloon valvuloplasty. In contrast, pulmonary regur­
gitation caused by infectious endocarditis is a very rare
condition.
Physiologic diastolic pulmonary regurgitation becomes
turbulent as well as of increased velocity, duration and
extension in the case of diastolic pulmonary hypertension (see Figure 16.25 and above paragraph).
Abnormal Aortic Flow Patterns
Alterations in Systolic Aortic Flow

Aortic stenosis may result from infectious endocarditis. However, the two most common causes of systolic
aortic flow obstruction in the dog and cat are cong­
enital aortic stenosis and obstructive hypertrophic

Alteration in left ventricular diastolic function may
induce transmitral inflow changes, including delayed
relaxation and restrictive transmitral flow patterns
(Figures 16.29a and 16.29b). Impaired relaxation may
cause lower E wave velocity and higher A wave velocity
(E/A <1), as well as prolonged isovolumic relaxation
time, reduced flow acceleration time, and prolonged
deceleration time (Figure 16.29a). However, in the case
of delayed relaxation associated with increased left
atrial pressure and left ventricular stiffness, the transmitral inflow may be normal (also called the “pseudonormal” transmitral flow pattern). The restrictive
filling pattern is characterized by a shortened isovolumic relaxation time, a tall narrow mitral E wave, and a
small A wave (Figure 16.29b).
Diastolic transmitral inflow is also altered in the case
of congenital or acquired (endocarditis) mitral stenosis
(Figures 16.29c and 16.29d).
In dogs with degenerative mitral valve disease, a high‐
velocity E wave (>1.5 m/s) suggests elevated left atrial
pressure and therefore severe mitral regurgitation.
Mitral Regurgitation

One of the methods commonly used to assess mitral
regurgitation severity in dogs with mitral valve dysplasia
or degenerative mitral valve disease consists of

147

VetBooks.ir

148

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

­c alculating the maximal ratio of the regurgitant jet area
signal to left atrium area (ARJ/LAA ratio) using color
flow Doppler mode (Figure 16.30). The major advantage
of this color Doppler mapping method is the rapidity
and ease of data acquisition. Nevertheless, this technique
presents several limitations: the maximal value for the
ARJ/LAA ratio is 100%, which precludes accurate discrimination between dogs with “significant” mitral

regurgitation. Additionally, the ARJ/LAA ratio may be
influenced by several factors including systemic arterial
blood pressure, left atrial pressure, and spatial orientation of the regurgitant jet. Note that it may also be possible to quantify (rather than “semi‐quantify”) mitral
valve regurgitation (in mL) using another Doppler technique, called the Proximal Isovelocity Surface Area
(PISA) or flow convergence method.

(a)

Right parasternal
long-axis
5-chamber view

Figure 16.17 Two‐dimensional right parasternal long‐axis five‐chamber view in a normal dog (a) and in three dogs with heart diseases
(b–d). (a) The top image on the left shows spatial orientation of the ultrasound beam, with the transducer placed on the right side of the
thorax. As shown on the top image on the right, the ultrasound plane goes first through the two right cavities, i.e., the right ventricle
(RV) and the right atrium (RA), then the aorta (Ao), and the two left cavities, i.e., the left ventricle (LV) and the left atrium (LA). Therefore,
the real‐time two‐dimensional right parasternal long‐axis five‐chamber view shows the RV and the RA separated by the tricuspid valve
at the top of the sector image, the LV and the LA separated by the mitral valve below, and a long‐axis image of the Ao too. The
interventricular septum (IVS) is continuous with the anterior aortic wall. Source: Tessier-Vetzel D and Chetboul. In Chetboul et al. 2005. (b)
A muscular bulge of the IVS into the LV outflow tract (arrow) creating outflow obstruction is clearly visible in this boxer dog with
subvalvular aortic stenosis. (c) In this dog suffering from bacterial endocarditis, large vegetative lesions (arrow) are visible on the mitral
valve leaflets. (d) In this dog presenting with exercise intolerance, a large ventricular septal defect (arrow) is seen just below the aortic
valve. Note also the markedly enlarged right pulmonary artery (RPA).

VetBooks.ir

16 Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 16.17 (Continued)

Abnormal Tricuspid Flow Patterns

Abnormal tricuspid flow patterns are similar to those
described above for mitral inflow. In the case of s­ ystolic
pulmonary hypertension, tricuspid regurgitation demonstrates increased velocity, duration, and extension.
The CW Doppler recording of this high peak s­ ystolic
tricuspid regurgitant velocity can be used to calculate
the systolic right ventricle‐to‐right atrium pressure
gradient across the tricuspid valve by applying the
modified Bernoulli equation. The systolic pulmonary
arterial pressure (equivalent to the systolic right ventricular pressure in the absence of pulmonic stenosis)
is then calculated by adding the estimated right atrial
pressure (5, 10 or 15 mmHg in patients with a normal

sized right atrium, a dilated right atrium, or right‐sided
congestive heart failure, respectively) to the systolic
right ventricle‐to‐right atrium pressure gradient.
Nonvalvular Abnormal Flows
Patent Ductus Arteriosus

Color flow Doppler shows the turbulent jet flowing
from the ductus into the pulmonary trunk throughout
the cardiac cycle (Figure 16.31a). Continuous‐wave
Doppler mode confirms continuous systolic and
­diastolic turbulent flows of high velocity into the pulmonary artery (>5 m/s in systole, around 4 m/s in diastole),
and allows estimation of the aorta–pulmonary artery
pressure gradient (Figure 16.31b). When the pulmonary

149

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

VetBooks.ir

150

Left apical (or caudal)
4-chamber view

Slight rotation
to the left

Slight rotation
to the left

Left apical (or caudal)
5-chamber view

Figure 16.18 Two‐dimensional left apical (or caudal) four‐ and five‐chamber views. The top image on the left shows spatial orientation
of the ultrasound beam, with the transducer placed on the left side of the thorax, to obtain the left apical four‐chamber view. As
shown in the top image on the right, the ultrasound plane goes first through the apex, then the right (RV) and left (LV) ventricles, and
lastly the left and right atrial cavities (LA and RA, respectively). Therefore, the real‐time two‐dimensional left apical four‐chamber view
shows the apex and the two ventricles at the top of the sector image, and the two atrial cavities below, with the mitral valve opened
during diastole and closed from end‐diastole to end‐systole (middle and right bottom images, respectively). The left apical four‐
chamber view can be used to measure maximum end‐systolic and end‐diastolic LV length as well as LV volumes. An example of
calculation of end‐diastolic LV volume using the Simpson’s derived method of discs is provided on the bottom right image. The
endocardial border has been traced and closed around the mitral annulus, thus delimiting the end‐diastolic LV area. The end‐diastolic
LV volume, considered as the summation of parallel cylinders, whose diameters are derived from endocardial border tracing, is then
automatically calculated using a specific software (62 mL). Another method, also called the length‐area method, relies on the following
simple formula: LV volume = 0.85A2/L, where A is the LV area, and L is the LV length measured on the same view. From the left apical
four‐chamber view, a slight rotation of the transducer to the left allows visualization of the left ventricular outflow tract and a long‐axis
image of the aorta (Ao), thus defining the left apical five‐chamber view (bottom image on the left). See also Figures 16.22 and 16.27 as
examples for use of the latter view. Source: Tessier-Vetzel D and Chetboul. In Chetboul et al. 2005.

Box 16.1 Measurement of ventricular volumes
Echocardiography can be used to measure ventricular
volume using a variety of methods, including the
Simpson’s derived method of discs or length‐area
method (see explanation in the legend of Figure 16.18).
The left ventricular ejection fraction (expressed as a percentage) can then be calculated according to the

following formula: 100*(EDV‐ESV)/EDV, with EDV and
­
ESV corresponding to the end‐diastolic and end‐systolic
left ventricular volumes. The end‐systolic volume index,
defined as the end‐systolic left ventricular volume
divided by the body surface area, may be used as an
index of systolic myocardial function.

VetBooks.ir

16 Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease

(a)

(a)

(b)

(b)

(c)

Figure 16.19 M‐mode echocardiograms obtained from two
normal dogs at the ventricular level (from the right parasternal
transventricular short‐axis view, (a)) and the mitral valve level
(from the right parasternal transmitral short‐axis view, (b)). (a)
This ventricular M‐mode echocardiogram displays the right
ventricular myocardial wall (RVW) and the right ventricular
cavity (RV) at the top of the image, the left ventricle (LV) and the
LV free wall (LVFW) below, with the interventricular septum (IVS)
between the two ventricular cavities. The M‐mode cursor is
placed perpendicular to the IVS and the LVFW between the two
left papillary muscles. The LV end‐diastolic (LVd) and end‐systolic
(LVs) diameters can be measured (double arrows), and the left
ventricular fractional shortening (expressed in percentage and
defined as the difference between the LVd and LVs divided by
LVd) can then be calculated. (b) This M‐mode echocardiogram at
the mitral valve level shows the M‐shaped motion of the anterior
mitral valve leaflet during diastole. The E point and the smaller A
point represent the maximum valve opening during the rapid
ventricular filling phase and the atrial contraction, respectively.
Closure of the mitral valve occurs after atrial contraction, at
end‐diastole.

vascular resistance increases, lower velocities are
­
recorded across the ductus.
Septal Defects (Figures 16.31c and 16.31d)

Color flow Doppler echocardiography associated with
spectral Doppler modes may identify small defects that
cannot be visualized on 2D mode images. High‐velocity

Figure 16.20 Abnormal M‐mode echocardiograms obtained
from three cats with heart diseases at the ventricular level (a,b)
and the mitral valve level (c). (a) In this cat with taurine
deficiency‐induced dilated cardiomyopathy, the ventricular
M‐mode echocardiogram shows marked dilation of the left
ventricular cavity (LV) with almost no difference between the
end‐diastolic and end‐systolic LV diameters. (b) This ventricular
M‐mode echocardiogram in a Maine Coon cat with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy shows severe symmetric
hypertrophy (end‐diastolic interventricular septum and LV free
wall >6 mm, double arrows). (c) This M‐mode echocardiogram
obtained at the mitral valve level in a cat with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy shows a significant systolic anterior motion of
the mitral valve (arrows), which is characterized by an
abnormal mitral valve septal contact during diastole, leading
to LV outflow tract obstruction. IVS, interventricular septum;
LVFW, left ventricular free wall.

flow across the ventricular septal defect (>5 m/s)
­associated with normal peak systolic pulmonary flow
­velocity is indicative of “restrictive” ventricular septal
shunt, that is, hemodynamically not significant, with
conservation of the left ventricle–right ventricle pressure gradient (at least 100 mmHg). Flow velocities
across the atrial septal defect are typically low (<1 m/s),
as the left atrium–right atrium pressure gradient is only
several mmHg (Figure 16.31d).

151

VetBooks.ir

152

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

Box 16.2 Advanced ultrasound techniques
Tissue Doppler imaging
Tissue Doppler imaging (TDI) is a relatively recently
developed ultrasound technique which allows the quantification of regional myocardial function from measurements of myocardial velocities in real time (Figure 16.32).
The 2D color TDI has been shown to be repeatable and
reproducible in the awake cat and dog, and is more sensitive than 2D and M‐mode echocardiography in detecting myocardial dysfunction of different etiologies in
these species, even when overt myocardial changes are
absent. This technique may therefore be used for the
early detection of systolic and diastolic myocardial alterations associated with dilated or hypertrophic cardiomyopathies, and may be particularly useful in the case of
equivocal 2D and M‐mode results.
Strain and strain rate imaging
Strain and strain rate imaging are two quantitative TDI‐
derived imaging techniques, allowing measurement of
myocardial segmental deformation (contraction or
stretching) and rate of deformation, respectively (see
Figure 16.32). Myocardial strain represents the deformation of a myocardial segment over time, and is expressed
as the % change from its original dimension. Myocardial
strain rate (expressed in s−1) is the temporal derivative of
strain, and therefore describes the rate of myocardial
deformation. Strain and strain rate imaging therefore offer
a direct evaluation of regional intrinsic active myocardial
function.
Speckle tracking echocardiography
Two‐dimensional speckle tracking echocardiography is
the most recently developed ultrasound technique
allowing quantitative assessment of regional myocardial
function (Figure 16.33). This non‐Doppler technique is
based on identification and frame‐by‐frame tracking of

speckle patterns created within the myocardium on
­routine 2D gray‐scale echocardiographic images and subsequent assessment of myocardial motion (myocardial
tissue velocity, strain and strain rate, and also LV rotation).
One of its major advantages, compared to Doppler‐based
techniques (TDI or TDI‐derived techniques), is its independence of both cardiac translation and the insonation
angle.
Other ultrasound techniques
Three‐dimensional (3D) echocardiography allows 3D visualization of the heart. Good‐quality real‐time or live 3D
imaging of the beating heart can now be obtained thanks
to advancements in computer technology and the development of fully sampled matrix‐array transducers. One of
the major advantages of 3D echocardiography over 2D
imaging is its greater accuracy for the evaluation of cardiac chamber volumes (thus avoiding conventional echocardiographic geometric modeling). Another application
of 3D imaging is to acquire realistic views of cardiac valves
and assess complex or equivocal congenital abnormalities
(e.g., shunts), which can be particularly useful when planning a surgical correction.
Transesophageal echocardiography uses a transducer
mounted at the tip of a flexible endoscope and allows
imaging of the heart from the esophagus (instead of
through the chest wall, as for transthoracic echocardiography). The advantage of transesophageal echocardiography is the acquisition of high‐quality images, as it
avoids the anatomic structures (skin, subcutaneous tissue,
ribs, lungs), which may affect the quality of conventional
transthoracic echocardiography. Potential indications
for transesophageal echocardiography in veterinary
medicine include analysis of specific cardiovascular
abnormalities (thrombosis, aneurysm, cardiac tumors),
cardiac monitoring during anesthesia or catheterization,
and evaluation of surgical procedures such as ductus
arteriosus closure.

VetBooks.ir

16 Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease

Figure 16.21 Doppler evaluation of systolic pulmonary flow in
normal dogs using color flow (a), continuous‐wave (b), and pulsed‐
wave (c,d) Doppler modes from the right parasternal transaortic
short‐axis view optimized for the right ventricular outflow tract
(RVOT). The pulmonary flow is coded in blue (a), as it goes away from
the transducer during systole. The spectral Doppler waveform (b–d) is
typically negative and symmetric, with acceleration (AT) two times
lower than the total ejection time (ET), as peak velocity is reached at
midsystole. Using the pulsed‐wave Doppler mode, the sample gate is
placed in the main pulmonary artery just beyond the pulmonary
valve, and the displayed flow profile is hollow as the flow is laminar.
Using the continuous‐wave Doppler mode, there is a filling in of the
systolic pulmonary flow profile as numerous velocities are recorded
all along the Doppler scan line. Some diastolic signals (corresponding
to right ventricular inflows and physiologic pulmonary insufficiency)
are also recorded. Ao, aorta.

Figure 16.22 Doppler evaluation of systolic aortic flow in normal
dogs using color flow (a) and pulsed‐wave (b,c) Doppler modes
from the left parasternal apical (or caudal) five‐chamber view. The
aortic flow is coded in blue (a), as it goes away from the transducer
during systole. The spectral Doppler waveform (b,c) is typically
negative and asymmetric, with acceleration (AT) much shorter than
the half of the total ejection time (ET), as peak velocity is reached
during the first third of systole. Using the pulsed‐wave Doppler
mode, the sample gate is placed just in the aorta beyond the aortic
valve, and the flow profile is hollow as the flow is laminar. Ao, aorta;
LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle.

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

(a)

(b)

(c)

153

VetBooks.ir

154

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 16.23 Doppler evaluation of diastolic mitral (a–c,e) and
tricuspid (d) inflows in a normal dog, from the left parasternal apical
and cranial four‐chamber views, respectively, using color flow (a,d)
and pulsed‐wave (b,c,e) Doppler modes. Both flows are coded in
red, as they go toward the transducer during diastole (a,d). For
mitral inflow analysis using the pulsed‐wave Doppler mode, the
sample gate is placed at the tip of the mitral leaflets (b). The
transmitral inflow pattern (c) is hollow (as the mitral inflow is
laminar) and typically biphasic, including an early rapid positive
filling wave (E) and a late positive filling wave (A) of lower velocity
resulting from atrial contraction. The calculation of isovolumic
relaxation time (IVRT) is shown in (e): IVRT represents the time
between aortic valve closure (1) and mitral valve opening (2) and is
an index of diastolic function. LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA,
right atrium; RV, right ventricle.

(e)

Figure 16.24 Aliasing artifact associated with the pulsed‐wave
Doppler mode. When blood flow velocities exceed the Nyquist limit
(here 0.4 m/s for the pulmonary flow), the aliasing artifact occurs:
the flow profile wraps around the image and becomes inverted (in
this example positive instead of negative, arrows). The deeper the
recorded blood flow, the lower the Nyquist limit.

VetBooks.ir

16 Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease

Pulmonary
regurgitation

(a): healthy dog

(b): dog with PAH

Pulmonary regurgitation

(c): dog with PAH
3.2 m/s

Figure 16.25 Use of pulmonary regurgitation for the diagnosis of diastolic pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). In the normal dog (a),
color flow Doppler examination of the right ventricular outflow tract (obtained from the right parasternal transaortic short‐axis view
optimized for the pulmonary valve) allows the detection of a diastolic laminar mild pulmonary insufficiency. This physiologic regurgitation
is encoded in red and does not extend above the most rightward level of the aortic valve. Conversely, in the dog with diastolic PAH (b,c),
the color flow Doppler examination obtained from the same view shows a turbulent aliased diastolic pulmonary regurgitation going
deeply into the body of the right ventricle. The maximum end‐diastolic pulmonary regurgitant flow velocity measured by continuous‐
wave Doppler mode is high (3.2 m/s; c). According to the modified Bernoulli equation (∆P = 4 × velocity2), the end‐diastolic pressure
gradient (∆P) across the pulmonary valve between the pulmonary trunk and the right ventricle is therefore 41 mmHg. This means that the
diastolic pulmonary arterial pressure is at least 41 mmHg, which is indicative of diastolic Doppler‐derived evidence of PAH (as the normal
diastolic pulmonary arterial pressure is usually between 5 and 10 mmHg). Ao, aorta; LA, left atrium; PT, pulmonary trunk; RVOT, right
ventricular outflow tract.

155

VetBooks.ir

156

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

(a): Dog with PAH

(b): Dog with pulmonic stenosis

Notch

(c): Dog with pulmonic stenosis

Figure 16.26 Examples of abnormal pulmonary flow patterns assessed by pulsed‐wave, color flow and continuous‐wave Doppler modes
(a, b and c, respectively). (a) This pulsed‐wave Doppler pulmonary flow velocity profile shows characteristic changes associated with
pulmonary arterial hypertension, i.e., rapid acceleration time, delayed deceleration time with a midsystolic notch (arrow). (b,c) (dog with
pulmonic stenosis) Color flow Doppler from the left cranial transaortic short axis view (b) shows blood flow acceleration proximal to the
pulmonary valve and turbulences distally, with a marked narrowing of the systolic color flow map at the pulmonary valve orifice level
(arrow), thus confirming valvular location of the pulmonic stenosis. Continuous‐wave Doppler tracing of the pulmonary flow velocity
confirms a severe pulmonic valve stenosis (peak diastolic flow velocity of 5.5 m/s; pressure gradient across the pulmonary valve of
121 mmHg according to the modified Bernoulli equation). Pulmonary regurgitant flow is also seen above the baseline in diastole (arrows).
Ao, aorta; LA, left atrium; RA, right atrium; RVOT, right ventricular outflow tract.

16 Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease

VetBooks.ir

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 16.27 Examples of abnormal aortic flow patterns associated with subaortic stenosis assessed by color flow (a,c) and continuous‐
wave Doppler modes (b). (a) Color flow Doppler from the left apical five‐chamber view shows blood flow acceleration proximal to the
subaortic area, with a narrowing of the systolic color flow map (arrow), thus confirming subvalvular location of the aortic stenosis. (b)
Continuous‐wave Doppler peak systolic flow velocity (4 m/s) across the stenotic lesion from the same view is indicative of moderate aortic
stenosis (pressure gradient across the pulmonary valve of 64 mmHg according to the modified Bernoulli equation). (c) Using the left apical
five‐chamber view (diastolic frame) a mild aortic insufficiency (arrow) is also detected just on the left ventricular side of the valvular
coaptation point (beneath the aortic cusps). Ao, aorta; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle.

157

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

(a)

VetBooks.ir

158

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 16.28 Evaluation of aortic insufficiency severity using color‐coded M‐mode (a,d), color flow (c) and continuous‐wave Doppler
modes (b). The color‐coded M‐mode from the right parasternal five‐chamber view may be used to measure the height (or cross‐sectional
area) of the regurgitant aortic jet (blue arrows) relative to the height (cross‐sectional area) of the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT)
(double arrows, a and d). (a) shows a mild aortic insufficiency as the jet height /LVOT height is only 8% (<25%). Conversely, the aortic
insufficiency in (d) is considered as severe, as the jet height/LVOT height is high (i.e., 84%; >65%). In contrast to Figure 16.27c, a severe
aortic insufficiency extending nearly to the apex (blue arrow) is also shown in (c). Continuous‐wave Doppler mode confirms an aortic
insufficiency signal above the baseline in (b). The aortic insufficiency velocity remains stable throughout the diastolic time (white arrows).
This means that, despite the regurgitation, the pressure gradient across the aortic valve remains unchanged during diastole (no decrease
in aortic diastolic pressure), which confirms that the regurgitation is mild. Ao, aorta; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV,
right ventricle.

VetBooks.ir

16 Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 16.29 Examples of abnormal diastolic transmitral inflows obtained from left parasternal apical four‐chamber views. (a) Delayed
relaxation transmitral flow pattern in a cat, which is characterized by a delayed and prolonged early diastolic E wave (with an inverted E/A
ratio). (b) Restrictive transmitral flow pattern, with a high early diastolic E wave (owing to high left atrial pressure) and a diminished A
wave (owing to decreased left ventricular compliance) in a cat with restrictive cardiomyopathy. Doppler echocardiograms of two dogs
with congenital mitral valve stenosis are presented in (c) and (d). (c) Color flow Doppler mode across the stenotic mitral valve shows a
narrow aliased turbulent signal during diastole. (d) Spectral Doppler of the mitral inflow (continuous‐wave Doppler mode) reveals a high
peak diastolic E‐wave velocity (1.9 m/s, reference range: 0.58–1.17 m/s; see Table 16.4) and a high peak diastolic A‐wave velocity (2.1 m/s,
reference range: 0.39–0.86 m/s; see Table 16.4). The pressure half time for the E wave, which is defined as the time needed for the peak
transvalvular pressure gradient to fall to its half value, may be calculated automatically by tracing (white arrow) the deceleration slope of
the E wave. In this case, the pressure half time is markedly prolonged (290 ms, reference range: <50 ms), thus confirming a severe mitral
valve stenosis. LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle.

159

VetBooks.ir

160

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

(a)

(b)

Figure 16.30 Semi‐quantitative assessment of mitral insufficiency
using the color flow Doppler mapping method in two dogs
suffering from degenerative mitral valve disease of various grades
(left parasternal apical four‐chamber views). In (a), the color flow
jet of mitral insufficiency (arrow) involves less than 20% of the left
atrial chamber, which is consistent with mild valvular regurgitation.
Conversely, in (b), the color flow aliased turbulent jet of mitral
insufficiency (arrow) fills 100% of the left atrial chamber, which is
consistent with severe valvular regurgitation. LA, left atrium; LV, left
ventricle; RA, right atrium; PV, pulmonary vein.

VetBooks.ir

16 Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease

(a)

Width = 15 mm

Length = 35 mm
(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 16.31 Assessment of left‐to‐right congenital shunts in dogs using Doppler echocardiography (a,b: patent ductus arteriosus; c:
ventricular septal defect; d: atrial septal defect). (a) Image obtained from the left parasternal cranial transaortic short‐axis view showing
the aliased turbulent color flow jet coming from the large ductus arteriosus (DA) into the dilated pulmonary trunk (PT) during systole.
Note that the DA diameter decreases abruptly at the point of insertion in the PT. (b) (same dog as in a) Continuous‐wave Doppler mode
confirms a continuous turbulent positive flow into the pulmonary artery of high velocity ( 5.3 m/s and 3.8 m/s during systole and diastole,
respectively), which is consistent with a normal aortic‐to‐pulmonary artery pressure gradient ( 112 mmHg and 58 mmHg, respectively,
according to the modified Bernoulli equation). (c) Color flow Doppler obtained from the right parasternal five‐chamber view shows an
abnormal aliased turbulent flow (arrow) from the left ventricle entering the right ventricle just below the septal tricuspid leaflet, through a
moderate sized perimembranous ventricular septal defect. (d) Color flow Doppler obtained from the right parasternal four‐chamber view
shows a laminar flow (arrow) from the left atrium to the right atrium through a small ostium secundumtype atrial septal defect. Ao, aorta;
IVS, interventricular septum; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium. RV, right ventricle.

161

VetBooks.ir

162

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

Tissue Doppler Imaging
(myocardial velocity, m/s)

Longitudinal motion

Radial motion

Strain rate Imaging

(velocity of myocardial deformation, s–1)

Strain Imaging

(myocardial deformation, %)

Figure 16.32 Tissue Doppler imaging (TDI) and TDI‐derived techniques. Using the two‐dimensional (2D) color TDI mode, myocardial
velocities are superimposed in color on 2D mode images. Velocities toward the transducer are colored in red, whereas those away from
the transducer are colored in blue on the right parasternal transventricular short‐axis view (left upper panel) and the left apical four‐
chamber view (right upper panel) to analyze radial and longitudinal myocardial motions, respectively. A specific software is then used to
quantify the myocardial velocities (m/s) in one or several segments. Strain rate imaging and strain imaging are two TDI‐derived techniques
that use the previously described velocity data to calculate deformation velocity (s−1) and deformation (%) per myocardial segment
length, respectively. As with 2D color TDI, the color display of strain rate and strain can be superimposed on 2D mode images using the
same views (left and right middle panels, left lower panel). These variables can also be quantified over time by using a specific software. A
normal radial strain profile of a left ventricular free wall segment in a dog is presented in the right lower panel: the radial strain (expressed
in %) is positive and maximal in end‐systole (white arrow), and then decreases during diastole, thus confirming regional systolic expansion
(i.e., thickening) and diastolic compression (i.e., shortening), respectively.AVC, aortic valve closure; AVO, aortic valve opening; LA, left
atrium; LV, left ventricle.

VetBooks.ir

16 Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease

Figure 16.33 Longitudinal myocardial deformation (strain) assessed by
speckle tracking echocardiography (STE). (a) The myocardial region of
interest, including the interventricular septum (IVS) and the left
ventricular free wall (LVFW), is automatically divided into six segments
(segments #1 to #3 for the LVFW, and #4 to #6 for the IVS) using the left
apical four‐chamber view. (b) Example of normal two‐dimensional (2D)
color‐coded strain obtained by STE in a healthy dog (same animal as in
a). All six segments are colored in red, which means a negative strain for
all six segments, thus confirming a homogeneous longitudinal
shortening during systole. LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle.

(a)

(b)

163

VetBooks.ir

164

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

­Further Reading
Bonagura JD, Miller MW, Darke PG. Doppler
echocardiography. I. Pulsed‐wave and continuous‐wave
examinations. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
1998; 28: 1325–59.
Boon JA. Veterinary Echocardiography, 2nd edn. Baltimore,
MD: Wiley‐Blackwell, 2011.
Chetboul V. Advanced techniques in echocardiography in
small animals. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2010; 40: 529–43.
Chetboul V, Pouchelon JL, Tessier‐Vetzel D, et al.
Echographie et Doppler du chien et du chat: thorax,
abdomen, œil et système nerveux – Atlas en couleur.
Paris: Masson, 2005a.
Chetboul V, Carlos Sampedrano C, Concordet D, et al. Use
of quantitative two‐dimensional color tissue Doppler

imaging for assessment of left ventricular radial and
longitudinal myocardial velocities in dogs. Am J Vet Res
2005b; 66: 953–61.
Gouni V, Serres F, Pouchelon JL, et al. Quantification of
mitral valve regurgitation in dogs with degenerative
mitral valve disease by use of the proximal isovelocity
surface area method. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007; 231:
399–406.
Tidholm A, Westling AB, Höglund K, Ljungvall I,
Häggström J. Comparisons of 3‐, 2‐dimensional, and
M‐mode echocardiographical methods for estimation
of left chamber volumes in dogs with and without
acquired heart disease. J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24:
1414–20.

VetBooks.ir

165

17
Electrocardiography
Anna R.M. Gelzer, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Cardiology), DECVIM-CA (Cardiology)
and Marc S. Kraus, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM, Cardiology), DECVIM-CA (Cardiology)
Department of Clinical Sciences & Advanced Medicine‐Philadelphia, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA

Cardiac arrhythmias are defined as variations of the cardiac rhythm from normal sinus rhythm. Some cardiac
arrhythmias are benign and clinically insignificant and
require no specific therapy whereas others can manifest
with a variety of clinical signs, such as episodic weakness or collapse (syncope), exercise intolerance or inappropriate panting/restlessness or sudden death (i.e.,
ventricular fibrillation). In order to diagnose the nature
of an arrhythmia and determine therapeutic strategies,
it is imperative to acquire an electrocardiogram (ECG).

­Indications for ECG Recordings
Document arrhythmias detected by auscultation.
●● Evaluate a patient presenting for syncope (fainting) or
episodic weakness.
●● Heart rate and rhythm monitoring during anesthesia.
●● Heart rate and rhythm monitoring in critically ill patients.
●● Monitoring changes in rate and rhythm following drug
administration.
●● Assessing changes in ECG morphology and heart rate
due to electrolyte imbalances associated with extracardiac disease or drug toxicities.
●● Detection of pericardial disease.
●● Identifying conduction disturbances or axis shifts
associated with myocardial hypertrophy or dilation.
●● Ambulatory ECG recording (Holter) for long‐term
monitoring of intermittent arrhythmias.

using electrodes attached to standardized locations on
the limbs and chest wall. The electrical signals are amplified by the electrocardiograph machine and displayed on
special graph paper in voltage and time. The limb leads
are defined as RA = right arm, LA = left arm, and LL =
left leg. The output from each electrode pair (differential
recording) is referred to as a lead and numbered with
the Roman numerals I, II, and III. The limb leads form
the points of what is known as Einthoven’s triangle
(Figure 17.1). An imaginary line connecting the two electrodes is the lead axis. Each lead looks at the heart from
a different angle within the animal’s frontal plane.
The Six Limb Leads

●●

­ECG Lead Terminology
and Acquisition Technique
Electrocardiography is used to record electric potentials
generated by the heart muscle during each cardiac cycle.
These potentials are detected on the surface of the body

There are six limb leads which depict the cardiac depolarization in the frontal plane. Leads I, II, and III are
called bipolar limb leads because they record the electrical activity between two limb electrodes (Table 17.1).
Using the same electrodes as leads I, II, and III, the unipolar limb leads also measure the electrical activity
between two terminals, but the recording electrode is
always positive and the negative terminal (called Wilson’s
central terminal) is made up of the sum of the electrodes
attached to the right arm, left arm, and left leg. These unipolar limb leads view the heart from different angles (or
vectors) than the bipolar leads, because the negative electrode is zeroed out, allowing the positive electrode to
become the “exploring” electrode. The unipolar limb leads
generate a very low voltage signal, so need to be amplified
by the ECG machine (augmented). These limb leads are
named after their positive electrode, located on the Left
arm (aVL), the Right arm (aVR), and the left Foot (aVF),
where the “aV” stands for augmented voltage (Figure 17.2).
Together with leads I, II, and III, augmented limb leads
aVR, aVL, and aVF form the basis of the hexaxial reference system (see Figure 17.7) which is used to calculate

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

RA

LA

RA

LA

+

aVR
–

+
– LA

RA –

II

II
+

+
LA

I

aVFaVF

0

0

aVL

+

+

–

0
III

I

–

III

VetBooks.ir

166

+
LL
LL

RL

RL

Figure 17.1 The standardized positions of the electrodes on the
body are defined as RA = right arm, LA = left arm, and LL = left leg.
The output from each electrode pair is referred to as a lead and
numbered with the Roman numerals I, II, and III. The limb leads (I,
II, III) form the Einthoven’s triangle. The limb leads display the
cardiac depolarization in the frontal plane.

Table 17.1 The positive and negative terminals of the six limb
leads
Augmented
unipolar
limb leads

Bipolar
limb leads

I

R arm (−) to
L arm (+)

aVR

R arm (+) to common
terminal (−)

II

R arm (−)
to L foot (+)

aVL

L arm (+) to common
terminal (−)

III

L arm (−) to
L foot (+)

aVF

L foot (+) to common
terminal (−)

the heart’s electrical axis (mean electrical axis) in the
frontal plane. The positive and negative terminals of the
six limb leads are listed in Table 17.1.
The Precordial or Chest Leads (V Leads)
The chest leads view the heart’s electrical activity in the
transverse plane. This complements the information
regarding the electrical fields gained from the frontal
plane (limb leads). The chest leads are termed V (voltage) leads. They are unipolar with the positive exploring electrode placed on the chest (precordium) coupled
with Wilson’s central terminal used for the negative
electrode. The electrodes for the chest leads are placed
directly on the chest. V1 is placed in the fifth right
intercostal space just to the right of the sternum, V6 is

LL

Figure 17.2 The augmented (unipolar) limb leads use the same
electrodes as leads I, II, and III but the recording electrode is
always positive and the negative terminal is made up of the sum
of the electrodes attached to the right arm, left arm, and left leg.
The augmented limb leads are named after their positive
electrode, located on the Left arm (aVL), the Right arm (aVR),
and the left Foot (aVF), where the “a” stands for augmented and
“V” for vector.

placed in the left sixth intercostal space at the costochondral junction, while V2 to V5 are spaced equally
between V1 and V6 in the sixth intercostal space on the
left side. Because of their close proximity to the heart,
they do not require augmentation. Left chest leads may
be more sensitive than the limb leads for detection of
right ventricular enlargement or allow better identification of P‐waves.
Some ECG machines record one lead at a time but others can record all six or 12 simultaneous leads. The ECG
signals are normally in the range of ±2 mV and require a
recording bandwidth of 0.05–150 Hz. The ECG machine
provides filters to reduce artifacts, such as 50 Hz cycle
from inappropriate grounding (electrical interference).
In cats, typically only the 150 Hz filter is used in order to
include high‐frequency components of the R‐ and S‐
wave. The ECG reference ground is provided through a
separate electrode, either incorporated into one of the
three limb leads or as a separate wire.
For ECG acquisition, the animal is positioned on its
right side with the limbs perpendicular to the body and
the alligator clips or patch electrodes are attached to the
skin. Alcohol or a gel with a high ionic concentration is
applied to the clips, acting as the transducer at the tissue–electrode interface. The size of the ECG waveform
deflections depends on the distance between the heart
and the electrode position. In dogs and cats, the limb
leads are attached to the elbows and stifles, and color
coded to identify their position. Table 17.2 lists the electrode positions.

VetBooks.ir

17 Electrocardiography

Table 17.2 Electrode position for ECG recording in dogs and cats

QRS
complex

ECG electrode

Position

Black

Left front leg at elbow

White

Right font leg at elbow

Red

Left back leg at stifle

Green

Right back leg at stifle

R

ST

Genesis of the ECG Deflections
The ECG waveforms are generated by the spread of electrical activation through the specialized conduction system of the heart. Multiple activation wavefronts
depolarize in various directions of the heart. The sum of
all wavefront vectors at a point in time determines the
overall magnitude and direction of the deflection in a
particular surface ECG lead. The six‐ or 12‐lead ECG
provides information about the magnitude of the electrical activity of the heart and the direction of the moving
depolarization wavefront in multiple orientations. A
wavefront traveling towards the positive terminal of a
lead results in a positive deflection of the ECG in that
lead. When a wavefront travels away from the positive
electrode, a negative deflection occurs.

PR
Interval

The first electrical signal of each cardiac cycle is initiated
in the sinus node. It is called the P‐wave and represents
the activation of the atria (Figure 17.3).
The P‐wave is a small, upright wave in leads I, II, II,I
and aVF, while it appears as a negative deflection in aVR
and aVL. The P‐wave amplitude is most prominent in
lead II, because the average vector of the atrial depolarization is traveling towards the positive terminal of lead II
(see Figure 17.3). Increased P‐wave amplitude or duration
is associated with either right or left atrial enlargement.
Normal P‐wave values for the dog and cat are shown in
Table 17.3. Absence of P‐waves is noted in instances of
atrial fibrillation, atrial standstill, and sinus arrest. P‐
waves without corresponding QRS complexes (blocked
Ps) are observed in cases of second‐ and third‐degree
atrioventricular (AV) node block. Negative P‐waves may
occur in conjunction with junctional or atrial premature
and escape beats, indicating alternative conduction pathways or retrograde conduction across the atria.
The PR Interval
The PR interval measured from the beginning of the P‐
wave to the beginning of the QRS complex (see
Figure 17.3) represents the time it takes for the electrical

Q
S
QT
Interval

Figure 17.3 Major deflections and intervals of the ECG (lead II).
See text for details.

Table 17.3 Normal ECG amplitudes and durations in the dog
and cat

­Waveform Morphology and Intervals
The P‐wave

T

segment

P

Heart rate

Dog

Cat

Puppy: 70–220  bpm

120–240  bpm

Adult: 70–180  bpm
Rhythm

Sinus rhythm

Sinus rhythm

Sinus arrhythmia
P‐wave
Amplitude

≤0.4  mV

≤0.2  mV

Duration

≤0.04  s

≤0.04  s

PR interval

0.06–0.13  s

0.05–0.09  s

≤2.5  mV, small breeds

≤0.9  mV

QRS
Amplitude

≤3.0  mV, large breeds
Duration

≤0.06  s

≤0.04  s

ST segment

No elevation or
depression by
>0.2  mV

No elevation or
depression

T‐wave

Positive, negative or
biphasic, but ≤25%
height of R‐wave

Isoelectric or positive

QT interval

0.15–0.25  s (varies
inversely with heart
rate)

0.12–0.18  s (varies
inversely with heart rate)

Mean
electrical
axis

+40° to +100°

0° to +160°

Source: Adapted from Tilley and Smith (2008).

167

VetBooks.ir

168

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

impulse to conduct from the sinus node through the
atria and the AV node and bundle of His. Conduction in
the AV node is markedly slower, allowing time between
the mechanical contraction of the atria and the ventricles. On the surface ECG, this conduction delay produces a short isoelectric segment following the P‐wave,
contributing to the PR interval. The normal PR interval
in dogs and cats is shown in Table 17.3. Increased duration of the PR interval indicates abnormally slow conduction in the AV node, called first‐degree AV block.
Intrinsic AV node disease as well as certain drugs, if
overdosed (beta‐blockers or Ca channel blockers), may
result in first degree AV block. Varying PR intervals are
noted in cases of sinus arrhythmia or certain forms of
second‐degree AV block. Abnormally short PR intervals
are rare and encountered in instances of accessory pathway‐mediated arrhythmias.
The QRS Complex
When the electrical impulse emerges from the AV node,
it enters the ventricles rapidly via the bundle of His, the
right and left bundle branches and Purkinje network,
producing the QRS complex on the surface ECG. The
QRS complex thus represents ventricular depolarization. Standard nomenclature describes the first negative
deflection as the Q‐wave, the first positive deflection as
the R‐wave, and the first negative deflection following
the first positive deflection as the S‐wave (see Figure 17.3).
Note that normal QRS complexes do not necessarily
contain all three waveforms, and in dogs, a high degree
of individual variability is seen. The normal sequence of
ventricular depolarization results in a QRS complex of
relatively short duration and with a net positive polarity
in leads II, III, and aVF. The normal duration and amplitude of the QRS complex in the dog and cat are shown in
Table 17.3.
A key component of ECG analysis is inspection of the
QRS morphology in lead II, which can provide clues to
the beat’s origin, its conduction through the ventricle,
and the potential presence of ventricular hypertrophy.
QRS complexes generated by a beat of supraventricular
origin (sinus node or supraventricular foci such as the
atria or AV nodal junction) are typically narrow and positive in lead II, while those that originate from ventricular foci are wider (increased duration) and “bizarre” in
their appearance compared to normal sinus beats.
Conduction disturbances within the ventricles can also
alter the morphology of the QRS complexes. For instance,
the presence of a right or left bundle branch block slows
conduction through the ventricular tissue in the respective side. This results in a QRS complex of longer duration (wide) despite the fact that the beat may have
originated from a supraventricular focus or the sinus

node (see Figures 17.10 and 17.12). Finally, ventricular
hypertrophy can increase the amplitude and duration of
the QRS complex (albeit to a lesser degree than a bundle
branch block) or change the mean electrical axis (as in
the case of right heart enlargement).
The T‐wave
Following the QRS complex is another short, relatively
isoelectric segment, the ST segment, followed by the T‐
wave, representing the ventricular repolarization. The
ST segment connects the QRS complex and the T‐wave
(see Figure 17.3). However, since it is usually difficult to
determine exactly where the ST segment ends and the
T‐wave begins, the relationship between the QT interval
and T‐wave should be examined together. In general, the
ST segment should not be either elevated or depressed
compared to baseline by more than 0.2 mV. In dogs and
cats, ST segment abnormalities are occasionally detected
in cases of myocardial disease (dilated cardiomyopathy),
congenital heart disease (subaortic stenosis), electrolyte
imbalances, acute hypoxia (anesthesia) or suspected
myocardial infarction (rare).
The T‐wave represents ventricular repolarization. The
normal T‐wave in both dogs and cats demonstrates a
high degree of variability and can be positive, negative,
biphasic, or of very low amplitude; however, the T‐wave
should be consistent from beat to beat during normal
rhythm. The normal characteristics of the T‐wave in
dogs and cats are shown in Table 17.3. Compared to
human patients, T‐wave changes in the dog and cat are
relatively nonspecific and poorly characterized. T‐wave
abnormalities can be seen in instances of electrolyte
abnormalities, hypoxia, conduction abnormalities, or
drug toxicity (i.e., digoxin).
The QT interval is a measure of the time between the
start of the Q‐wave (or R‐wave if there is no Q) and the
end of the T‐wave and represents the entire depolarization and repolarization of the left and right ventricles. If
abnormally prolonged or shortened, there is a risk of
developing ventricular arrhythmias. Prolongation of the
QT interval may be due to an adverse drug reaction (i.e.,
quinidine toxicity). Some antiarrhythmic drugs, like
amiodarone or sotalol, work by creating a pharmacologic
QT prolongation. A shortened QT can be associated
with hypercalcemia (Box 17.1).

­Evaluation of the ECG
Important features of the ECG that require analysis
include heart rate, rhythm, mean electrical axis (MEA),
waveform morphology, and criteria for heart enlarge-

The P‐wave represents atrial depolarization
The Q‐wave is the first negative deflection representing ventricular septal depolarization
●● The R‐wave is the first positive deflection representing
early ventricular depolarization
●● The S‐wave is the next negative deflection representing late ventricular depolarization
●● The
ST segment/T‐wave represents ventricular
repolarization

ECG sensitivity refers to the amplitude of the waveforms based on electrical voltage. At standard sensitivity,
an impulse of 1 millivolt (mV) will inscribe a waveform
amplitude that is 10 mm tall. In cases where the ECG
voltages are normally low (i.e., in cats), sensitivity can be
increased (doubled) so that an impulse of 0.5 mV will
create a waveform of 10 mm amplitude, thereby increasing the ability to visually inspect the individual ECG
waveforms. Conversely, in animals with severe heart
enlargement, sensitivity can be decreased (halved) so
that waveforms do not extend past the borders of the
recording paper.

ment. In order to assess these characteristics, one must
understand how paper speed and sensitivity settings
affect ECG interpretation.

Heart Rate

Box 17.1 Summary of ECG waveforms
●●
●●

ECG Paper, Sensitivity, and Speed of Recording
ECG paper has a background pattern of small 1 mm
squares and bold division lines every 5 mm in both horizontal and vertical directions, which form larger squares
on the ECG paper (Figure 17.4). The ECG is typically
recorded at one of two different paper speeds, either
25 mm/s or 50 mm/s. Paper speed denotes the speed at
which the waveforms are being recorded. At 25 mm/s, each
1 mm square (little box, thin lined) represents 0.04 seconds and each 5 mm square (bold lined) represents 0.2 seconds, while at 50 mm/s, each 1 mm square represents 0.02
seconds and each 5 mm square represents 0.1 seconds.

If the heart rhythm is regular, an “instantaneous” heart
rate is easy to calculate: count the number of 1 mm
squares (little boxes) between two heart beats (RR interval) and divide this number into 3000 if the paper speed
is 50 mm/s (3000 is the equivalent of 1 min because 60
seconds × 50 = 3000) or into 1500 if the paper speed is
25 mm/s (Figure 17.5). This method is also useful if the
animal has intermittent short runs of abnormal beats
(i.e., ventricular tachycardia) and the rate of that rhythm
has to be calculated.
If the heart rhythm is irregular, calculation of the average heart rate over a prescribed period of time is performed. It is useful to realize that 30 large squares (bold
lined) or 150 mm represent 3 seconds at 50 mm/s or 6
seconds at 25 mm/s. Thus, heart rate is determined by

Figure 17.4 Calibration of ECG paper
speed and sensitivity. See text for details.

0.2 sec
0.1 sec
0.04 sec
0.02 sec

Paper speed:
25 mm/sec

1 mV

50 mm/sec

Sensitivity:
10 mm/mV

0.1 mV
Amplitude

VetBooks.ir

17 Electrocardiography

Time

169

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

25 mm/sec
1 min = 1500 little squares (@ 25 mm/sec paper speed) 10 mm/mV

VetBooks.ir

170

12 mm

Instantaneous heart rate: 1500/12 = 125 bpm
Figure 17.5 Calculation of instantaneous heart rate between two beats is used when the rhythm is regular or if the heart rate of a short
run of abnormal beats needs to be calculated. At a paper speed of 25 mm/s, the number of mm (little boxes) between two beats is divided
into 1500 to calculate the heart rate per minute. At a paper speed of 50 mm/s, the number of mm between two beats is divided into 3000.
See text for additional details.

150 mm (30 large squares) = 3 sec

50 mm/sec
10 mm/mV

Average heart rate: 3 beats (RR intervals) in 3s = 3 × 20 = 60 bpm
Figure 17.6 Calculation of average heart rate, used when rhythm is irregular. At a paper speed of 25 mm/s, the number of beats over a
150 mm segment of the ECG is multiplied by 10 to achieve number of heart beats per minute. At a paper speed of 50 mm/s, the number of
beats over a 150 mm segment of the ECG is multiplied by 20 to achieve number of heart beats per minute.

counting the number of beats over 30 large squares and
multiplying this number by 20 if the paper speed is
50 mm/s (Figure 17.6) or multiplying by 10 if the paper
speed is 25 mm/s.
A commonly used shortcut takes advantage of the fact
that most standard ballpoint pens are 150 mm in length.
Thus, they can be placed on the ECG paper to denote a
‐3 or 6‐second interval and the number of beats that are
demarcated by the length of the pen can be quickly
counted.
Rhythm
The heart rhythm describes the pattern of heart beats
and sequence of the P‐QRS‐T‐wave forms. When determining the heart rhythm, the following characteristics
should be examined.
The regularity of the heart beats: are the RR intervals
regular or irregular?
●● The relationship of the P‐wave and QRS complexes: (a)
is there a P‐wave in front of every QRS complex and
(b) is there a QRS complex following every P‐wave?
●● The origin of the heart beats: (a) sinus node or (b)
ectopic (i.e., atrial, junctional, or ventricular).
●● The heart rate.
●●

In some instances, the heart rhythm changes or is composed of multiple different rhythms that each requires a
separate description (Box 17.2).

Box 17.2 Rhythm analysis: important questions to ask
Is the rate fast or slow (tachcardia vs bradycardia)?
Is the rhythm regular or irregular? If irregular, is the
rate slow, fast, or are there premature beats? A regular
rhythm usually has less than 10% variation in the RR
intervals.
●● Are there P‐waves? Are they normal (upright in lead II,
i.e., is the rhythm sinus or not sinus)?
●● Is there a P‐wave for every QRS, is there a QRS for every
P‐wave? Normally there is a nearly fixed PR interval
between the P‐waves and the QRS complexes.
●● Are the QRS complexes normal or abnormal (normal
or abnormal conduction)?
●●
●●

Mean Electrical Axis
The mean electrical axis (MEA) describes the net direction of cardiac depolarization across the animal’s frontal
plane. The conventional six‐lead ECG system divides
the frontal plane into 12 segments, similar to the slices
of a pie (Figure 17.7). By doing so, the six‐lead ECG
examination records the electrical activity of the heart
from six different vantage points along the frontal plane
in 30° increments.
The MEA normally points towards the caudal half of
the animal. In the dog, the normal MEA is between
+40° and +100° and in the cat, the normal MEA is

VetBooks.ir

17 Electrocardiography

between 0° and +160°. Calculation of the MEA can be
done in several ways. One way is to examine the polarity of the QRS complexes from each of the six limb
leads and identify the ECG lead in which the QRS comaVF –
–90°

II –
–180°
aVR +
–150°

RA

III –
–60°

LA

–30°

aVL +

0° I+

I– +/–180°

aVL –

plex is isoelectric (Figure 17.8, step 1), that is, the lead
in which the net polarity of the QRS complex is closest
to zero. (i.e., the positive and negative deflections of the
QRS waves cancel each other out). In some instances,
this will be the lead in which the QRS waves are the
smallest and in other instances the lead in which the
amplitude of the positive R‐wave is the same as the sum
of the negative deflections (Q‐ and S‐wave, i.e., net
polarity of the QRS).
Then identify the limb lead that is perpendicular to
the isoelectric lead on the hexaxial lead system
(Figure 17.8, step 2). The MEA will exist in a direction
either towards the positive or negative pole of the perpendicular lead, depending on the polarity of the QRS
complex in that lead (Figure 17.8, step 3). The net polarity of the QRS complex in lead II is positive in the ECG
example in Figure 17.8, so the MEA points to +60°
(Figure 17.8, step 4). This is considered a normal MEA
for a canine.
To obtain a general direction of the MEA, a quick
approach called the “pie method” may be useful
(Figure 17.9). First, determine the net polarity of the QRS
complex in lead I and aVF. These are the two leads which
divide the heart into two perpendicular halves and create
four equal pieces (quarters) of a pie.
With a normal MEA of depolarization, both lead I and
aVF have a net positive polarity, and the overlapping

+30°

+150°
RL

LL

aVR –

+60°

+120°
III +

+90°

II +

aVF +

Figure 17.7 The hexaxial or six‐lead ECG system divides the
frontal plane into 12 segments, similar to the slices of a pie. By
doing so, the six‐lead ECG examination records the electrical
activity of the heart from six different vantage points along the
frontal plane in 30° increments.

I

aVF –
–90°

II –
–180°

II

III –
–60°

3.
aVR +
–150°

III

RA

–30°

LA

0° I+

I– +/–180°

aVR

aVL +

2.

aVL

aVF

1.

aVL –

RL

aVR –

+60°

+120°
III +

+30°

4.
LL

+150°

+90°

II +

aVF +

Figure 17.8 Calculation of the MEA is performed by first examining the polarity of the QRS complexes from each of the six limb leads and
identifying the ECG lead in which the QRS complex is isoelectric, that is, the lead in which the net polarity of the QRS complex is closest to
zero (i.e., the positive and negative deflections of the QRS waves almost cancel each other out) (step 1). Next, identify the limb lead that is
perpendicular to the isoelectric lead on the hexaxial lead system (step 2). The MEA will point towards either the positive or negative pole
of the perpendicular lead, depending on the polarity of the QRS complex in that lead (step 3). The net polarity of the QRS complex in lead
II is positive, so the MEA points to +60° (step 4). This is considered a normal MEA for a dog.

171

VetBooks.ir

172

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

I

1.

aVF –
II –

–60°

–180°

II

4.

aVR +

III

–150°

aVR

III –

–90°

5.

RA

–30°

LA

aVL +

0° I+

I– +/–180°
3.

aVL
aVL –

aVF

2.

+30°

+150°
RL
+120°
III +

LL

aVR –

+60°
+90°

II +

aVF +

Figure 17.9 Calculation of the mean electrical axis using the “pie method.” First, determine the net polarity of the QRS complex in
lead I (step 1) and aVF (step 2). These two leads divide the heart into two perpendicular halves and create four equal pieces (quarters)
of a pie. If the QRS in lead I is positive, the “half pie” pointing to the positive pole of lead I is shaded (step 3, blue half ). If the QRS is
negative in aVF, the “half pie” pointing to the negative pole of lead aVF is shaded (step 4, red half ). The overlapping quarter (step 5,
purple half ) contains the MEA. Thus, if lead I is positive and aVF is negative, the overlapping section is 0° to –90°, indicating a left
axis shift.

section thus is the pie piece (quarter) between 0° to 90°.
If lead I is positive and aVF is negative, the overlapping
section is 0° to –90° (see Figure 17.9) which indicates a
left axis shift; if both lead I and aVF are negative, the
overlapping section is 180° to –90° indicating a right
axis shift.
The MEA can be within the normal range or to the
right or left of the normal range. Common causes of
right axis deviations include right ventricular hypertrophy (right axis shift with normal QRS duration) or right
bundle branch block right axis shift with prolonged QRS
duration) (Figure 17.10).
Common causes of left‐axis deviations include partial left bundle branch block and left anterior fascicular
block as seen in some cats with cardiomyopathies (see
Figure 17.9). Note that left ventricular hypertrophy
does not usually result in the left‐axis shift as the normal MEA is already pointing in the direction of the left
ventricular apex. Less commonly, mechanical displacement of the heart to either side of the thorax by space‐
occupying lesions or lung lobe atelectesis can change
the MEA.

­Criteria for Heart Enlargement
The criteria for heart enlargement in the dog and cat are
shown in Table 17.4. In brief, atrial enlargement is manifest as P‐wave of increased duration (P mitrale) or
increased amplitude (P pulmonale) (Figure 17.11) or
both.
Left ventricular enlargement can cause an increased
R‐wave amplitude and QRS duration whereas right ventricular enlargement can manifest as a right MEA shift
and prominent S‐waves.

­Conduction Abnormalities or Bundle
Branch Block
The bundle of His is specialized conduction tissue that
forms the distal portion of the AV node, and divides
into two main bundle branches that course left and
right into the ventricular muscle. Right (RBBB) or left
(LBBB) bundle branch block occurs when the impulse

17 Electrocardiography

VetBooks.ir

Table 17.4 ECG criteria for heart enlargement in the dog and cat
Dog

Cat

>0.4  mV, >0.04  s

>0.04  s

Left atrial enlargement

II

P‐wave

Notched
Right atrial enlargement
P‐wave

>0.4  mV

>0.2  mV

>2.5  mV in lead
II, aVF

>0.9  mV in
lead II

Left ventricular enlargement

III

R‐wave

>3.0  mV in
large‐breed dogs
>1.5  mV in lead I
QRS duration*

aVR

aVL

>0.06  s

>0.04  s

>0.35  mV in
lead II

S‐wave in
leads I, II,

>0.05  mV in
lead I

III and aVF
(>0.5  mV)

Right ventricular enlargement
S‐wave

S‐wave in leads
I, II III and aVF
Electrical axis

Right shift
(>+100°)

Right shift
(>+160°)

Source: Adapted from Tilley and Smith 2008.
* QRS duration >0.08 s in the dog and >0.06 s in the cat can be associated
with left or right bundle branch blocks. See text for more detail.

aVF

Figure 17.10 Six‐lead ECG example of a right axis shift
and right bundle branch block in a cat with right ventricular
cardiomyopathy. The leads are I, II, III, aVL, aVR, aVF from top
to bottom. The conduction disturbance is identified by the
prolongation of the QRS complex (0.07 s, red bar) and a right
axis deviation. The right axis shift is denoted by deep S‐waves
in leads I, II, III, and aVF (blue arrows) (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV).

is blocked or slowed within either of the branches and
block results in characteristic QRS waveform changes.
In order to diagnose a bundle branch block, the MEA
has to be determined, which requires a six‐lead ECG

recording. RBBB (see Figure 17.10) is characterized by
a right shift of the MEA and markedly prolonged QRS
duration (>0.08 s in the dog and >0.06 s in the cat),
while LBBB (Figure 17.12) is characterized by a normal
MEA and markedly prolonged QRS duration (>0.08 s
in the dog and >0.06 s in the cat) (normal values listed
in Table 17.3).
The QRS morphology with bundle branch block
patterns may be confused with a ventricular rhythm.
Impulse origin in most cases of bundle branch block is
the sinus node, hence the rhythm is supraventricular,
despite the marked change in QRS waveform morphology, and there is a P‐wave associated with each
QRS complex. RBBB may be a benign finding in both
dogs and cats, or associated with right ventricular cardiomyopathy whereas LBBB is usually associated with
significant underlying heart disease, such as dilated
cardiomyopathy.

173

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

VetBooks.ir

174

Figure 17.11 Atrial enlargement is manifest as a P‐wave of
increased amplitude in a poodle with degenerative AV valve
disease and atrial enlargement. The blue arrow shows the tall P‐
wave (amplitude 0.6 mV) (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV).

Figure 17.12 ECG example of a left bundle branch block in a
rottweiler with dilated cardiomyopathy. The conduction
disturbance is identified by the prolongation of the QRS complex
(0.08 s; blue bar) but a normal MEA (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV).

­Further Reading
Fogoros RN. The electrophysiology study in the evaluation of
supraventricular tachyarrhythmias. In: Electrophysiologic
Testing, 3rd edn. Oxford: Blackwell Science, 1998.
Kraus MS, Moise NS, Rishniw M. Morphology of
ventricular tachycardia in the boxer and pace mapping
comparison. J Vet Intern Med 2002; 16: 153.
Meurs KM. Boxer dog cardiomyopathy: an update. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2004; 34: 1235.
Meurs KM, Spier AW, Wright NA, et al. Comparison of
the effects of four antiarrhythmic treatments for familial
ventricular arrhythmias in Boxers. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2002; 221(4): 522.
Moise NS. Diagnosis and management of canine
arrhythmias. In: Fox PR, Sisson D, Moise NS, eds.

Textbook of Canine and Feline Cardiology, 2nd edn.
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 1999.
Moise NS, Gilmour RF Jr, Riccio ML, et al. Diagnosis
of inherited ventricular tachycardia in German
shepherd dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997;
210(3): 403.
Oyama MA, Kraus MS, Gelzer AR, eds. Evaluation of the
electrocardiogram. In: Rapid Review of ECG
Interpretation in Small Animal Practice. Oxford: Taylor
and Francis Group, 2014.
Tilley LP, Smith WK. Electrocardiography. In: Tilley LP,
Smith WK, Oyama MA, Sleeper MM, eds. Manual of
Canine and Feline Cardiology, 4th edn. St Louis, MO:
Saunders Elsevier, 2008.

VetBooks.ir

175

18
Pathophysiology of Heart Failure
Barret J. Bulmer, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Cardiology)
Tufts Veterinary Emergency Treatment & Specialties, Walpole, MA, USA

Heart failure represents a potential sequela of nearly all
congenital and acquired cardiac diseases in dogs and
cats. Without an appropriate understanding of the
pathophysiologic alterations that produce heart failure,
and the knowledge of which therapies can successfully
mitigate their consequences, veterinarians will be unable
to treat this life‐impairing and often life‐threatening
condition. Therefore, the goals of this chapter are to
highlight the classification schemes for heart failure, discuss normal cardiovascular physiology along with the
mechanisms that contribute to the maladaptive hemodynamic and neurohormonal alterations precipitating
heart failure, and outline how understanding of these
mechanisms leads to targeted medical therapy.

­Components of the Circulatory System
The circulatory system is composed of the heart and its
associated arteries, capillaries, and veins. Appropriate
function of the circulatory system further requires all of
the constituents of normal circulating blood. The heart,
blood vessels, and blood carry essential substances to
metabolizing tissues and effectively remove unneeded
by‐products of metabolism. Additional functions of the
circulatory system include regulation of body temperature, humoral communication, and appropriate adjustments of blood delivery depending on the underlying
physiologic condition.

­Determinants of Normal Cardiac
Function
Mechanical function of the heart requires coordinated
filling of the cardiac chambers (diastolic function)
­followed by an effective contraction (systolic function)

to propel blood from the right and left heart to the
pulmonary and systemic circulations, respectively.
­
Impaired mechanical function may occur with disorders of the myocardium, cardiac valves, or pericardium.
Effective filling and emptying, along with an appropriate increase or decrease in the rate of contraction,
­further rely on coordinated activity driven by pacemaker cells within the sinoatrial (SA) node and the
heart’s conduction system. Therefore, perturbed
­systolic or diastolic function produced by alterations
in myocardial function, valvular integrity, pericardial
confinement, volume loading, increased resistance to
ejection or electrical instability may all produce cardiac
dysfunction with subsequent development of heart
­failure (Box 18.1).
Origin of Ventricular Contraction
The electrical impulse that produces ventricular systole
begins within the SA node and propagates along the
specialized conduction system and cell walls to produce
atrial and ventricular myocyte depolarization. Calcium
influx through the L‐type calcium channels within the
sarcolemma along the T‐tubules contributes to a larger
calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (so‐
called calcium‐induced calcium release). The rise in
cytosolic calcium enhances binding to troponin‐C and
enables configurational changes in the actin and myosin molecules so that cross‐bridge cycling (and hence
myocardial contraction during systole) can occur.
Diastole (myocardial relaxation) occurs as calcium
influx through the L‐type calcium channel and release
from the sarcoplasmic reticulum terminate, and calcium is resequestered by the sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum calcium ATPase (SERCA) into the sarcoplasmic
reticulum. The fall in cytosolic calcium concentration
during diastole results in inhibition of the interaction of

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

176

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

Box 18.1 Disease conditions that may produce heart failure
Impaired cardiac filling

Increased resistance to ejection

Pericardial disease

●●

Pericardial effusion with tamponade
Constrictive pericarditis
●● Uncommon forms of congenital pericardial disease
(e.g., pericardial cysts)
●●
●●

Inflow obstructions
Tricuspid/mitral valve stenosis
●● Uncommon forms of congenital heart disease (e.g., cor
triatriatum, supravalvular mitral stenosis)
●● Neoplasia (e.g., obstructive heart base tumors)

Pulmonic/aortic valve stenosis
Pulmonary/aortic thromboembolism or obstruction
(e.g., tumors)
●● Pulmonary hypertension
●●

Volume overload
Altered blood flow resulting in volume overload

●●

Myocardial disease that has a primary component of diastolic dysfunction
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
●● Restrictive cardiomyopathy
●●

Valvular insufficiencies (congenital dysplasia, degenerative or infective)
●● Left to right shunting (e.g., patent ductus arteriosis, ventricular septal defect, atrial septal defect, arteriovenous
fistulas)
●●

Disease conditions associated with chronically elevated
cardiac output
●●

Anemia
Hyperthryoidism

Impaired cardiac ejection

●●

Myocardial disease that has a primary component of systolic dysfunction

Disorders of impulse formation or conduction

Dilated cardiomyopathy (idiopathic)
Ischemic, nutritional (e.g., taurine deficiency), toxic (e.g.,
adriamycin), or infectious (e.g., Chagas disease) myocardial disorders
●● Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy

Sustained tachyarrhythmias (e.g., supraventricular tachycardia, atrial fibrillation)
Sustained bradyarrhythmias (e.g., high‐grade AV block,
sinus bradycardia)
Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome

actin molecules and myosin heads that is required for
contraction to occur.

systolic performance in cardiac muscle. An alternative
mechanism, termed length‐dependent activation, seems
to account for augmented ventricular systolic function
with diastolic stretch. The exact mechanisms behind
length‐dependent activation remain controversial but
the basic premise is that up to a maximum length, the
myofilaments become sensitized to calcium as sarcomere
length increases.
The force, tension or stress experienced by the ventricular myocytes during contraction is termed the
afterload. Afterload is the degree of interference to ventricular ejection and is determined primarily by the systemic (or pulmonary) vascular resistance with a
contribution from aortic (or pulmonary arterial) impedance. Impedance is dependent on the physical properties of the vascular wall and the blood (e.g., blood
density and viscosity, arterial wall diameter, and viscoelasticity) and represents the ratio of aortic pressure to
flow. The Anrep effect dictates that an acute increase in
afterload enhances ventricular function via stimulation
of sarcolemmal stretch receptors and increased cytosolic calcium levels.

●●
●●

Determinants of Ventricular Systolic Function
The primary determinants of ventricular systolic function are preload, afterload, and contractility. Heart rate
and ventricular synchrony are additional factors that
influence systolic function.
It has long been recognized that increased cardiac filling enhances systolic performance. In the normal heart,
increased preload, which represents the end‐diastolic
distending force of the ventricular wall, produces this
enhanced performance as defined by Starling’s law of the
heart. Surrogates for preload include the end‐diastolic
volume, diameter, or end‐diastolic pressure. Therefore,
preload is dependent on venous return, total blood volume, and distribution of the blood volume within the
vascular system. The recognition that the ascending limb
of the Starling curve in skeletal muscle is dictated by the
extent and “optimization” of actin‐myosin filament overlap does not appear to be solely responsible for enhanced

VetBooks.ir

18 Pathophysiology of Heart Failure

Contractility is the inherent ability of the cardiac
­myocytes to shorten and generate force independent of
preload, afterload, or heart rate. Increased contractility
represents either increased calcium movement or sensitization of the contractile proteins at a given level of
cytosolic calcium. Although criticisms of this concept
include the lack of noninvasive measures of isolated contractility and the impossibility of separating the molecular mechanisms of enhanced function from preload and
afterload from contractility, this concept is still useful as
we discuss the pathophysiology of heart failure.
The Bowditch staircase effect (also known as the
Treppe effect or the positive force‐frequency relationship) defines that increased heart rate not only increases
cardiac output via more frequent contractions, it also
enhances the force of ventricular contraction. It is
hypothesized that an increased rate of depolarization and
the subsequent increased sodium and calcium current
across the sarcolemma produce overload of the sodium–
potassium pump. The activity of the sodium–calcium
exchanger is therefore augmented in the “reverse” mode,
extruding sodium from the cell in exchange for increased
calcium into the cell. Cross‐bridge cycling is supported
by the higher cytosolic calcium level.
A final determinant of ventricular systolic function is
the coordinated activation (and hence contraction) of the
ventricular walls, termed ventricular synchrony. An
altered activation sequence and the lack of coordinated
mechanical contraction, as witnessed with ventricular
arrhythmias, right ventricular apical pacing, or in humans
with markedly prolonged QRS durations, can contribute
to functional and clinical deterioration. Cardiac (pacemaker) resynchronization therapy has been shown to offset some of these negative consequences in people.

or when the heart can do so only with an elevated
filling pressure. The heart’s inability to pump a sufficient amount of blood to meet the needs of the
body tissues may be due to insufficient or defective
cardiac filling and/or impaired contraction and
emptying. Compensatory mechanisms increase
blood volume and raise cardiac filling pressures,
heart rate, and cardiac muscle mass to maintain
the heart’s pumping function and cause redistribution of blood flow. Eventually, however, despite
these compensatory mechanisms, the ability of the
heart to contract and relax declines progressively,
and the heart failure worsens.
Although common long‐standing cardiac conditions
typically contribute to volume overload and development of pulmonary (left‐sided) or systemic (right‐sided)
congestion, there are conditions (e.g., cardiac tamponade, acute pulmonary thromboembolism, acute severe
valvular insufficiency) that may severely impair the ability to provide vital organs with their necessary cardiac
output without fluid accumulation. Therefore, the term
heart failure is often preferred over congestive heart
failure.
Classification of Heart Failure
The American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine
(ACVIM), for animals, and the ACCF/AHA, for humans,
recognize a functional classification scheme, and a separate, complementary classification system that emphasizes the risk, development, and progression of heart
disease. The modified New York Heart Association
(NYHA) functional classification is defined as follows.
Class I describes patients with asymptomatic heart
disease (e.g., heart disease is present but there are no
clinical signs even with exercise).
●● Class II describes patients with heart disease that
causes clinical signs only during strenuous exercise.
●● Class III describes patients with heart disease that
causes clinical signs with routine daily activities or
mild exercise.
●● Class IV describes patients with heart disease that
causes severe clinical signs even at rest.
●●

­The Failing Heart
Definition of Heart Failure
The 2013 American College of Cardiology Foundation and
American Heart Association (ACCF/AHA) guideline for
the management of heart failure defines heart failure broadly
as “a complex clinical syndrome that results from structural
or functional impairment of ventricular filling or ejection of
blood.” The biochemical mechanisms behind this complex
syndrome continue to be elucidated but the macroscopic
view and description of heart failure has not varied significantly from the conclusion of a panel of the National Heart,
Lung and Blood Institute in 1994. They stated:
Heart failure occurs when an abnormality of
­cardiac function causes the heart to fail to pump
blood at a rate required by the metabolizing tissues

A newer veterinary system outlined in the ACVIM
Consensus Statement detailing canine valvular heart
disease highlights four basic stages of heart disease and
failure. Because this system was devised for valvular
heart disease, it is not always easily incorporated into
discussion of other forms of congenital and acquired
heart disease in dogs and cats, but nonetheless it is still
useful for discussion of heart failure. The stages of this
classification scheme are defined as follows.

177

VetBooks.ir

178

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

Stage A identifies patients at high risk for developing
heart disease but that currently have no identifiable
structural disorder of the heart (e.g., every Cavalier
King Charles spaniel without a heart murmur, boxers
without evidence of arrhythmia or myocardial
dysfunction).
●● Stage B identifies patients with structural heart disease
but that have never developed clinical signs caused by
heart failure. This stage is further subdivided.
–– Stage B1 refers to asymptomatic patients that have
no radiographic or echocardiographic evidence of
c­ ardiac remodeling.
–– Stage B2 refers to asymptomatic patients that have
hemodynamically significant cardiac disease as evidenced by radiographic or echocardiographic findings of heart enlargement.
●● Stage C denotes patients with past or current clinical
signs of heart failure associated with structural heart
disease.
●● Stage D refers to patients with end‐stage disease with
clinical signs that are refractory to “standard therapy.”
●●

The ABCD system is useful because it enables veterinarians to educate owners that their animal is at risk for
developing heart disease even in the absence of an audible murmur, gallop or arrhythmia. This system is also
useful because treatment and subsequent resolution of
signs attributable to heart failure alters patient classification with the modified NYHA model whereas animals
that have previously displayed heart failure always
remain a Stage C or D with the newer system.
Phases of Heart Failure
Discussion of heart failure can center around three distinct phases. Phase 1 constitutes the initial cardiac injury
and in most veterinary patients, this phase passes silently,
without detectable clinical signs, because the disease is
mild and slowly progressive (e.g., valvular disease, feline
cardiomyopathies). However, some conditions (e.g.,
development of cardiac tamponade subsequent to bleeding of right atrial hemangiosarcoma or pulmonary thromboembolism) can produce severe life‐threatening signs
commensurate with the initial cardiac injury. Phase 2 is
the stage wherein short‐term and ultimately long‐term
compensatory mechanisms are activated for stabilization
of cardiac output and normalization of afterload.
Unfortunately, cardiac disease is often progressive and
the heart’s ability to hypertrophy may ultimately be
­overwhelmed. A heart murmur, gallop rhythm, cardiac
arrhythmia, or cardiomegaly is more likely to be identified in this second phase despite the absence of significant or activity‐limiting clinical signs. The hallmarks of
phase 3 of heart failure are the emergence of clinical signs

(e.g., exercise intolerance, lethargy, coughing, tachypnea)
at rest or with minimal activity.
Phase 1 – Initial Insult

Cardiovascular disease is encountered commonly in
daily veterinary practice. Patent ductus arteriosus, subaortic stenosis, and pulmonic valve stenosis are common
congenital conditions in dogs while ventricular septal
defect and atrioventricular valve dysplasia are more
common in cats. Chronic degenerative valvular disease
(CDVD) and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) are the
most common acquired cardiac diseases in dogs while
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common acquired cardiac disease in cats. Although identification of disease at its exact onset is next to impossible,
it is useful to highlight some of the available data on disease prevalence.
Congenital cardiac malformations are uncommon,
with data from several veterinary schools suggesting a
prevalence of 0.46–0.85%. Feline congenital heart disease is even less common with a reported prevalence of
0.2%. Although these data are several decades old, they
still highlight that even at large referral centers, the prevalence of congenital heart disease is low.
However, identification of acquired cardiovascular disease is much more common and represents the majority
of dogs and cats that ultimately develop heart failure.
Dilated cardiomyopathy is encountered most often in
large‐ and giant‐breed dogs with a reported prevalence
of 0.16–1.1%, depending on the study cited and the population investigated. In some breeds and age groups, the
prevalence of DCM is much higher. For example, a study
of Doberman pinschers in Europe found that only 3.3%
of Dobermans 1 to <2 years of age were affected while
43.6% aged 6 to <8 years of age were affected. The prevalence of CDVD is also dependent on the breed and age of
the dog, but it also varies based on the method of disease
detection (e.g., auscultation, echocardiography, necropsy). While these variables cloud clear documentation
of disease prevalence, there is little debate that CDVD is
the most common acquired cardiac condition in dogs
and represents the most common etiology for development of heart failure. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is
the most common myocardial disease in cats although
various other forms of cardiomyopathy (CM), including
restrictive CM, arrhythmogenic right ventricular CM,
dilated CM, and unclassified CM, may also contribute to
heart failure.
Primary cardiomyopathies are a diagnosis of exclusion
and true disease confirmation would require necropsy.
Because of this limitation, echocardiography is most
often considered the gold standard for diagnosis of CM in
cats. A study in an apparently healthy, nonreferred population of 103 cats found echocardiographic alterations

VetBooks.ir

18 Pathophysiology of Heart Failure

consistent with CM in 16 cats (15.5%). Eleven of the 16
cats with cardiomyopathy did not have an auscultable
murmur. None of the 16 cats exhibited left atrial enlargement, and hence their risk of cardiac‐related complications was presumably low. But this study highlights that
many asymptomatic animals have underlying heart disease and may have active maladaptive compensatory
mechanisms and cardiac remodeling even in the absence
of clinical signs.
Phase 2 – Compensatory Phase

With a reduction in cardiac output, the body depends on
a number of short‐ and long‐term compensatory mechanisms to maintain perfusion pressure to vital organs. The
principal short‐term compensatory mechanisms, activated within seconds to minutes, include activation of
several neurohormonal systems and subsequent utilization of the Frank–Starling mechanism. These short‐term
mechanisms promote the long‐term adaptive response
which is myocardial remodeling/hypertrophy. Each of
these mechanisms has inherent limitations and as the
disease progresses, their once beneficial properties
become detrimental.
Short‐Term Adaptive Responses
Sympathetic Nervous System

Baroreceptors in the
carotid sinus and aortic arch, along with cardiopulmonary baroreceptors, cardiovascular low‐threshold polymodal receptors, and peripheral chemoreceptors,
are responsible for the sympathetic nervous system
(SNS) outflow to the heart and peripheral circulation.
Hypotension, whether related to dehydration, blood loss
or cardiovascular disease, will enhance release of norepinephrine from terminal neurons to the sinoatrial and
atrioventricular nodes and cardiomyocytes, and increase
release of epinephrine and norepinephrine into the
­circulation from the adrenal gland. The catecholamines
bind to cardiac beta‐receptors and increase cytosolic
cAMP levels via G‐protein coupling to increase contractility, heart rate, the rate of ventricular relaxation, and
the speed of impulse conduction through the heart.
Beta‐receptor stimulation also produces hyperpolarization of the pacemaker cells (possibly via increased
­activity of the sodium–potassium pump), reducing the
membrane potential into the range of funny current (If )
activation. Increased conductance of sodium through
the funny channels further enhances the heart rate
response to sympathetic activation.
The release of norepinephrine from the terminal
neurons of the systemic vasculature results in vasoconstriction via activation of postsynaptic alpha‐1
receptors. Occupancy of the receptor promotes breakdown of phosphatidylinositol, via phospholipase C, to
inositol triphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG).

IP3 transiently increases smooth muscle cytosolic
­calcium, thereby initiating the contractile cycle while
DAG activates protein kinase C and is thought to
induce sustained vascular contraction. The subsequent increased vascular tone promotes arterial vasoconstriction to maintain systemic blood pressure and
enhanced venoconstriction to promote increased
venous return. Augmented preload contributes to
enhanced length‐dependent activation and cardiac
output via the previously described Starling’s law of
the heart.
Renin‐Angiotensin‐Aldosterone System Decreased renal
perfusion pressure also stimulates the renin‐angiotensin‐
aldosterone system (RAAS). The RAAS is complementary
to the SNS wherein it provides a hemostatic mechanism
for blood pressure through maintenance of sodium balance and intravascular volume. Additional stimuli for the
RAAS include reduced sodium delivery to the macula
densa and increased adrenergic activity.
Renin, released from the juxtaglomerular apparatus,
cleaves angiotensinogen to the decapeptide angiotensin I.
Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) cleaves the C‐terminal dipeptide from angiotensin I, forming the potent
vasoconstrictor angiotensin II (AT II). Similar to alpha‐1
receptors, AT II promotes vascular smooth muscle contraction and maintenance of blood pressure via IP3 and
DAG. ACE is also capable of cleaving the C‐terminal
dipeptide from the vasodilatory substance bradykinin,
hence making it inactive. Therefore, ACE appears to be a
regulator between vasoconstrictive/sodium retaining and
vasodilatory/natriuretic mechanisms. Although all their
roles have not been elucidated, four receptors for AT II
have been identified and classified as AT1, AT2, AT3, and
AT4 receptor subtypes. Critical activities of AT II beyond
potent vasoconstriction include stimulation of aldosterone release, potentiation of presynaptic norepinephrine
release, stimulation of antidiuretic hormone release,
­promotion of renal tubular sodium resorption, and cardiomyocyte necrosis, apoptosis, and ventricular fibrosis.
Understanding of the RAAS continues to evolve with
identification of a new homolog of ACE, called ACE 2,
and additional biologically active metabolites of AT II,
including the angiotensin‐(1‐7) peptide. Additional enzymatic pathways, including chymase, cathepsin G, elastase,
tonin, and tissue plasminogen activator, have been
­identified although their role in maintenance of blood
pressure and the pathophysiologic alterations that contribute to heart failure is uncertain. In addition to the
conventional circulating RAAS, all its constituents are
also found in a variety of tissues, including the brain,
myocardium, vasculature, kidney, and adipose tissue.
The importance of tissue RAAS is likely organ, species,
and disease dependent although there is growing

179

VetBooks.ir

180

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

evidence that locally produced AT II plays a role in
­
­cardiac remodeling under certain conditions.
While AT II directly increases systemic vascular resistance to maintain blood pressure, it is also the primary
stimulus for aldosterone synthesis and release from the
adrenal glands. Aldosterone binds to mineralocorticoid
receptors in the cytoplasm, followed by migration of the
complex into the nucleus. Within the nucleus, the aldosterone–mineralocorticoid receptor complex promotes
gene activation, transcription, and protein synthesis of
Na+/K+ exchangers along the luminal surface of the distal tubule and collecting ducts to promote sodium and
water retention in exchange for potassium excretion.
Similar to the venoconstrictive effects of the sympathetic
nervous system, aldosterone‐mediated water retention
increases preload and enhances cardiac output via the
Starling mechanism. Additional rapidly acting, nongenomically mediated actions of aldosterone continue to
be investigated, including cellular ion regulation, altered
cellular volume, negative inotropy, and cardiac hypertrophy, fibrosis and remodeling. Increased potassium levels,
corticotropin, catecholamines, endothelin‐1, arginine
vasopressin, and reduced hepatic clearance are additional mechanisms that contribute to increased aldosterone activity.
Additional Compensatory Mechanisms The mechanisms
that maintain blood pressure and enhance preload
extend beyond the SNS and RAAS. Arginine vasopressin (AVP), also called antidiuretic hormone, is released
from the pituitary in response to increased plasma
osmolality or hypovolemia. The SNS and RAAS also
promote release of AVP. Vasoconstriction and weak inotropic actions of AVP are mediated via adherence to V1A
receptors. Solute free water resorption is accomplished
via binding of AVP and V2A receptors. Receptor activation triggers insertion of aquaporin‐2 channels into the
luminal surface of the epithelial cells lining the distal
tubule and collecting ducts, thereby providing enhanced
water retention. Endothelin‐1 is another modulator of
systemic arteriolar tone that acts via either ETA receptors, to promote vasoconstriction and positive inotropic
effects, or ETB receptors, to produce endothelial‐
dependent vasodilation.
Long‐Term Adaptive Responses

While augmentation of preload and afterload via the
­previously described mechanisms is able to maintain
cardiac output and perfusion pressure in the short term,
myocardial hypertrophy serves as the body’s long‐term
compensatory mechanism for cardiac dysfunction.
The concept of the afterload experienced by working
myocytes is more readily understood in terms of wall
stress as described by Laplace’s law:

Wall stress

pressure radius
2 wall thickness

Normalization of wall stress serves as an adaptive
response to reduce myocardial oxygen consumption
while maintaining cardiac performance. Hence, if cardiac hypertrophy is capable of normalizing cardiac output, the previously activated short‐term compensatory
responses may be able to return to basal levels.
Changes in myocardial workload produce rapid and
dramatic responses from the molecular mechanisms that
regulate protein synthesis. The isolated heart shows
increased RNA and protein synthesis within two hours
of a loading stimulus while the intact heart displays similar increases within 24 hours. This tight regulation
between hemodynamic function and cardiac growth has
at least three signaling mechanisms: stretch-activated
signals, agonists, such as AT II, catecholamines and
endothelin‐1, that link to protein kinase C, and growth
factors, including insulin‐like growth factor‐1, transforming growth factor‐beta, and platelet‐derived growth
factor, that are linked to receptor tyrosine kinases. The
mechanisms behind translation of these signals to cardiac hypertrophy are complex and continue to be elucidated, but seem linked to the family of mitogen‐activated
protein kinases.
Increased systolic wall stress, such as systemic hypertension or severe subaortic stenosis, necessitates increased
pressure generation by the left ventricle to overcome the
forces opposing ejection. Laplace’s law dictates that normalization of wall stress is achieved via increased left ventricular wall thickness, termed concentric hypertrophy,
with sarcomeres replicating in parallel. The ventricular
radius remains normal or may actually decline secondary
to encroachment of the thickened left ventricular walls.
Increased diastolic wall stress, as observed with volume
overload secondary to mitral valve insufficiency, instead
promotes eccentric hypertrophy. This pattern of hypertrophy is characterized by sarcomeres replicating in series,
producing a larger diameter and more spherical left
­ventricular chamber. The wall thickness increases only
modestly to try and maintain normal wall stress.
Phases of the hypertrophic response have been detailed
for decades and include:
the initial stage of developing hypertrophy where
workload exceeds the output that is normal for the initial mass of the heart
●● compensatory
hypertrophy where work‐induced
growth of the myocardium normalizes wall stress
●● an exhaustion phase characterized by cardiomyocyte
death, myocardial fibrosis, and ventricular dilation
with decreasing work output per unit of cardiac mass
leading to heart failure.
●●

Progression between these phases seems most dependent
on the magnitude and type of overload wherein acute pressure overload triggers the earliest onset and fastest rate of
hypertrophy. It has been postulated that while hypertrophy
prevents acute cardiac insufficiency, the unbalanced
“growth” at the level of the organ, tissue, cell, and intracellular organelles ultimately becomes the cause of chronic
cardiac insufficiency of the hypertrophied heart.
Phase 3 – Transition to Heart Failure (Figure 18.1)

Hypertrophy may be unable to maintain cardiac output
in the face of chronic and progressive cardiovascular disease and the previously beneficial short‐ and long‐term
compensatory mechanisms ultimately prove detrimental. The transition from compensated hypertrophy to the
exhaustion phase is mediated by molecular mechanisms
that produce:
myocyte growth
reexpression of fetal myocyte phenotype with a reduction in the expression of the adult phenotype
●● alteration in the expression and/or function of the
­proteins involved in excitation‐contraction coupling
●● necrosis and apoptosis of cardiomyocytes
●● changes within the extracellular matrix
●●
●●

Congestion

3
Ventricular
Performance

VetBooks.ir

18 Pathophysiology of Heart Failure

1

2

Increased Afterload

Low Output
Preload

Figure 18.1 A family of Frank–Starling curves highlighting the
progression to heart failure. (1) Ventricular performance declines
following a cardiac insult. (2) The short‐term and long‐term
compensatory mechanisms are activated and ultimately return
ventricular performance to normal, albeit at a higher filling
pressure. (3) The underlying disease progresses, myocardial
remodeling becomes maladaptive and the previously beneficial
compensatory mechanisms become detrimental. Further preload
expansion no longer enhances ventricular performance on the flat
portion of the Frank–Starling curve and instead congestion
develops. Increases in afterload depress ventricular performance
even further down the Frank–Starling curves.

●●

alterations in myocardial energetics. These alterations
reduce the number of viable myocytes and/or decrease
the intrinsic contractility of individual myocytes,
thereby impairing cardiac performance.

The previously beneficial augmentation of preload and
afterload now only serves to promote development of
congestion or amplify contractility‐afterload mismatch.
This cycle of disease progression continues as venous
pressures continue to rise, cardiac output declines, congestion develops, and clinical signs of heart failure begin
to emerge.
Myocyte Loss

A reduction in the number of viable myocytes or dysfunction of the viable myocytes may account for a component of reduced myocardial contractile function.
Cardiomyocyte death appears to occur via necrosis,
apoptosis, and autophagy although it is uncertain if all
three are distinctive events or a continuum of overlapping processes. Exposure of norepinephrine to cultured
mammalian cardiomyocytes produces a concentration‐
dependent decrease in viability and pathophysiologic
levels of AT II also promote myocytolysis. Therefore, it
seems that myocyte loss can occur via mechanisms
beyond ischemia and many of these mechanisms, including catecholamines, AT II, reactive oxygen species, nitric
oxide, inflammatory cytokines and mechanical strain,
are increased in the failing myocardium.
Reexpression of Fetal and Neonatal Genes and Altered
Contractile Proteins

Heart failure seems to alter both quantitative and qualitative protein expression, which may impair cardiac contractility. Isoforms of contractile proteins that are present
during fetal and neonatal life, when protein synthesis is
rapid, have been identified in some animal models of hypertrophy and myocardial failure. Pressure overload hypertrophy in rats produces a shift from the rapid myosin heavy
chain (MHC) isoform (V1) to the slow MHC isoform (V3),
enabling normal tension generation but at a lower energy
cost by reaching the tension more slowly. However, in species with a predominant V3 ventricular MHC isoform,
including dogs, cats, and humans, this change seems less
critical to development of heart failure. Fetal phenotypic
expression of other contractile proteins, including myosin
light chain, troponin‐I and troponin‐C, has been identified
in the myocardium of humans with heart failure and may
contribute to a decrease in cardiac contractile function.
Altered Excitation‐Contraction Coupling

Calcium is a critical ion in regulating myocardial contraction and relaxation. Alterations in calcium conductance
across the sarcolemma, release from the sarcoplasmic

181

VetBooks.ir

182

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

reticulum, or its resequestration into the sarcoplasmic
reticulum may exert profoundly negative consequences
on cardiac performance. Myocytes from humans with
heart failure exhibit a prolonged action potential with a
blunted rise in intracellular Ca2+ during depolarization
and a slowed rate of decline during repolarization. Slower
Ca2+ delivery to the contractile proteins during systole and
excessive cytosolic Ca2+ during diastole may contribute to
both systolic and diastolic dysfunction. The failing myocardium also displays a negative force–frequency relationship. Rather than progressive increases in ventricular
contractility with increasing heart rate, humans with heart
failure have little or no increase in contractility with
increased frequency of stimulation. This alteration is presumably related to impaired Ca2+ cycling between the sarcoplasmic reticulum and the cytosol.
Calcium conductance, release, and resequestration are
critical components of normal cardiac function and
numerous pumps and channels are responsible for coordinating events. Studies in failing human myocardium
have found that mRNA and protein levels of SERCA,
voltage‐dependent Ca2+ channels, and the calcium
release channel on the sarcoplasmic reticulum are
reduced. Alterations in proteins responsible for Ca2+
cycling in dogs have also been identified. Therefore,
altered expression or function of these proteins may negatively impact systolic and diastolic function.
Changes within the Extracellular Matrix

Ventricular remodeling is a key feature of heart failure
regardless of the underlying cardiac disease or underlying phenotype (e.g., volume overload, pressure overload,
primary cardiomyopathy). Changes within the ventricular geometry and function must be viewed as a summation of events occurring at the level of the cardiomyocyte,
the vascular compartment, and within the extracellular
matrix (ECM). Although once only viewed as scaffolding, there is now growing recognition that the ECM
mediates mechanical and biological signals that contribute to the progression of heart failure.
Regulation and turnover of the ECM is a complex process dictated by mechanical stress, neurohormonal activation, inflammation, and oxidative stress. Accelerated
growth of both the myocyte and ECM produced by pressure overload yield left ventricular concentric hypertrophy.
Left ventricular thickening negatively impacts both of
the fundamental processes that dictate diastolic function – active relaxation and passive stiffness. Shifting
­isoforms and phosphorylation sites of cytoskeletal proteins
(e.g., titin) can impair myocyte relaxation and hamper
active relaxation/early cardiac filling. Accumulation of
­collagen within the ECM increases ventricular stiffness,
thus reducing myocardial compliance and impairing
­passive ventricular filling. Volume overload triggers left

ventricular eccentric hypertrophy/remodeling with
increased ECM turnover via an increase in the matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs)/tissue inhibitors of matrix
metalloproteinases (TIMPs) ratio. The MMPs degrade
collagen and other matrix components while the TIMPs
either inhibit or prevent MMP activation. Isoform shifts
from type I to type III collagen further contribute to a net
degradation of collagen with resultant chamber dilation
and progressive wall thinning.
During the compensated phase, the remodeling
­contributes to increased ventricular compliance with preserved systolic function. Ultimately, the progression to
decompensated failure is complex and includes a combination of ECM degradation and profibrotic ­
synthesis
mediated concomitantly at different subcellular locations
and within different regions of the ventricle.
Alterations in Cardiac Metabolism

The heart requires a high rate of adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) hydrolysis because of its continuous mechanical
work and therefore requires a constant supply of oxygen
and fuel. Oxidation of fatty acids (FA) accounts for
approximately 70–90% of ATP production in the fasted
state while glucose utilization increases in the fed state.
Because of the fundamental roles metabolism and ATP
generation have in maintenance of cardiac structure and
function, it is reasonable to hypothesize that alterations
in cardiac metabolism have a role in the pathophysiology
of heart failure. Studies in animal models and humans
with advanced heart failure and systolic dysfunction
have reported a decrease in the phosphocreatine/ATP
ratio, ATP content, and ATP movement through creatine
kinase. It is uncertain whether these alterations serve as
a primary contributor to the progressive nature of heart
failure or are simply an adaptation to decreased ventricular function, but significant mitochondrial changes are
present in various models of cardiac hypertrophy and
failure.
Decreased cardiac energy production may be secondary to impaired substrate use or altered mitochondrial
function. Studies of heart failure with systolic dysfunction have identified reduced mRNA and protein expression of FA transporters with reduced cardiac FA
utilization and ATP production. Studies of glucose oxidation are variable with reports of decreased, unchanged
or increased glucose uptake. Varying results likely
depend on the stage and type of disease, but these results
may also be influenced via the channeling of pyruvate
into anaplerotic pathways. Flux of pyruvate through anaplerotic pathways appears to be a hallmark of metabolic
remodeling and reduces its availability for oxidation and
energy production by pyruvate dehydrogenase.
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)
is also consumed by induction of anaplerotic pathways

VetBooks.ir

18 Pathophysiology of Heart Failure

which may lead to dysregulation of cellular oxidative
stress, thereby contributing to the progressive nature of
heart failure. Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species may
produce mitochondrial damage, activation of mitogen‐
activated protein kinases, cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis, again suggesting that alterations in organelles of
metabolism may contribute to ventricular remodeling.
The reactive oxygen species and mitochondrial damage
are also strong mediators of autophagy in certain settings
and may serve as an additional mechanism for remodeling and progression to heart failure.
Hemodynamics of Heart Failure
and Development of Pulmonary Edema
Progressive disturbances of systolic and diastolic
­function may ultimately lead to development of systemic
or pulmonary venous congestion as a consequence of
elevated venous pressure. Increased plasma volume (via
sodium and water retention) and reduced venous capacitance (via venoconstriction) no longer augment systolic
function in the failing heart and instead merely precipitate clinical signs associated with congestion.
Pulmonary capillary wedge pressures exceeding
25 mmHg are likely to precipitate signs of left‐sided heart
failure, including cough and increased respiratory rate and
effort. Pulmonary edema develops when the movement of
fluid from the blood to the interstitial space, and in some
instances to the alveoli, exceeds the return of fluid from the
interstitial space to the blood and its drainage through the
lymphatics. There is normally a continuous exchange of
fluid, colloid, and solutes from the vasculature into the
interstitial space so a pathologic state exists only when
there is an increase in the net flux of fluid, colloid, and solutes from the vasculature into the interstitial space. The
total microvascular filtration rate can change as a result of
changes in filtration surface area, membrane permeability
to water, hydrostatic and colloidal osmotic pressures, and
membrane permeability to protein. Lymphatic flow will
similarly be dictated by the hydrostatic pressure of the
interstitium, the pumping pressure within the lymphatics,
the systemic venous pressure, and the resistance to flow.
During stage 1 of pulmonary edema development, the
interstitial volume remains normal due to the compensatory
increase in lymphatic flow. In most tissues, the increase in
the hydrostatic interstitial pressure with the development of
interstitial edema would serve to inhibit microvascular filtration and enhance lymph flow. However, the interstitial
pressure rarely reaches high enough values to use this protective mechanism because (a) the increase in the interstitial
compliance allows large volume increases with small pressure increases and (b) alveolar flooding occurs at relatively
low interstitial pressures (2–3 mmHg). The more protective
mechanism in the lung is the decreased resistance to

­lymphatic flow as microvascular filtration increases. The
proposed mechanism is believed to be subsequent to
­“tethering” of the initial lymphatics to surrounding structures which pull the lymph vessels open as the interstitial
volume increases, thus increasing the radius and filtration of
the lymphatics.
Stage 2 occurs when the lymphatics’ capacity to
remove the interstitial fluid is overwhelmed. During
this stage, fluid and colloid accumulate in the interstitial areas around bronchioles, arterioles, and venules.
Fluid ­accumulation occurs within the peribronchial
and perivascular interstitial space (versus adjacent to
the alveolar capillary membrane) because of its more
negative pressure and more compliant properties. The
enlarged lymphatics and free fluid form cuffs around
the bronchioles and pulmonary blood vessels and may
subsequently compress the small airways and blood
vessels. Gas exchange may be relatively unaffected in
the early stages of edema if there is no increase in the
alveolar‐capillary membrane thickness along the thin
side of the interstitial space. But as capillary filtrate
continues to accumulate, the less compliant interstitium around the alveolar‐capillary septa also fills, the
interstitial pressure rises, and alveolar flooding begins
(stage 3). Arterial oxygenation decreases and in severe
cases death may ensue.

­Therapeutic Implications
Understanding of the pathophysiologic mechanisms
of heart failure enables development of therapeutic
strategies to provide symptomatic benefit and slow
the natural history of disease progression. With the
long‐standing recognition that fluid retention and
poor pump function contribute to pulmonary and
systemic venous congestion and low cardiac output,
the initial therapeutic strategies were to reduce
preload and afterload while augmenting contractility.
We continue to use these strategies today via the
administration of diuretics and inodilators to combat
many forms of heart failure. With further advances in
the understanding of cardiac remodeling, agents
capable of blocking critical neurohormonal pathways,
including ACE inhibitors, beta‐blockers, and aldosterone antagonists, were developed to prolong survival without imposing significant alterations in
cardiac loading conditions. And with further advances
in the understanding of myocyte loss, altered gene
expression, dysregulation of excitation‐contraction
coupling, degradation of the extracellular matrix and
deranged cardiac metabolism, new therapeutic agents
will continue to be identified in an effort to one day
halt the inevitable cycle that leads to heart failure.

183

VetBooks.ir

184

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

­Further Reading
Atkins C, Bonagura J, Ettinger S, et al. Guidelines for the
diagnosis and treatment of canine chronic valvular heart
disease. J Vet Intern Med 2009; 23(6): 1142–50.
Burchfield JS, Xie M, Hill JA. Pathological ventricular
remodeling: mechanisms: part 1 of 2. Circulation 2013;
128(4): 388–400.
Colucci WS, Bruanwald E. Pathophysiology of heart
failure. In: Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E,
eds. Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular
Medicine, 7th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders,
2005, pp. 509–38.

Hamlin RL. Normal cardiovascular physiology. In: Fox P,
Sisson DD, Moise NS, eds. Textbook of Canine and
Feline Cardiology, 2nd edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB
Saunders, 1999, pp. 25–37.
Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. ACCF/AHA
Guideline for the Management of Heart Failure: A
Report of the American College of Cardiology
Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on
Practice Guidelines. Circulation 2013; 128(16):
e240–e319.

VetBooks.ir

185

19
Management of Heart Failure
Steven Rosenthal, DVM, DACVIM (Cardiology)1, and Mark A. Oyama, DVM, MSCE, DACVIM (Cardiology)2
1
2

CVCA Cardiac Care for Pets, Towson, MD, USA
Department of Clinical Sciences and Advanced Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA

Successful management of both acute and chronic heart
failure typically involves alleviation of congestion,
improvement in cardiac output and organ perfusion, and
maintenance of normal blood pressure and cardiac
rhythm. Patients with heart failure can be categorized
into those with subtle symptoms such as mild exercise
intolerance or respiratory signs versus patients with
debilitating and life‐threatening clinical signs such as
severe respiratory distress, collapse, syncope, or cardiogenic shock. Congestive heart failure (CHF) specifically
refers to patients with evidence of congestion in the form
of pleural or abdominal effusion, pulmonary edema or,
much less commonly, peripheral edema.
A variety of cardiac medications are used to restore and
maintain adequate cardiac function, along with diet
changes, nutritional supplements, and body cavity centesis.
During therapy of both acute and chronic heart failure,
patient hydration status, electrolytes, renal function, blood
pressure, urine output, respiratory rate and effort, and body
weight are monitored. During this time, patient quality of
life can remain very high in the absence of significant
amounts of congestion or adverse medication side‐effects.
As heart disease progresses, doses and number of cardiac
drugs are increased along with increasing risk of adverse
effects. In this chapter, the therapy of chronic, acute, and
refractory heart failure will be presented.

­Management of Chronic Heart Failure
The major goals of treatment of CHF are to alleviate and
prevent mild clinical signs, reduce likelihood of recurrent episodes of acute life‐threatening heart failure, and
increase longevity.
Management begins with a thorough medical history
and physical examination. Subtle changes in the resting

respiratory rate and/or exercise capacity can be useful
gauges that help clinicians formulate or modify treatment plans. In this capacity, owner education and home
monitoring are essential components of successful therapy. Rarely do canine or feline patient with early CHF
cough nor do they exhibit dramatic changes in activity or
exercise. Thus, daily monitoring of their resting home
respiratory rate is often the most effective monitoring
tool to detect CHF symptoms in their early stages.
Common oral medications for treatment of chronic heart
failure can be divided into the following five main groups:
diuretics, vasodilators, modulators of neurohormonal systems, antiarrhythmic agents, and positive inotropes. Some
medications will have effects in more than one group. In
addition to these conventional therapies, nutritional supplements and dietary modification are often beneficial. In
order to limit adverse reactions to medications, close monitoring of electrolytes, biochemical parameters, hydration
status, and blood pressure along with serial cardiac‐specific
tests (i.e., chest radiographs, electrocardiograms, echocardiograms) aid the practitioner in achieving effective treatment. Each patient responds to medications differently and
therapy is individualized to each cardiac patient.
Treatment of chronic heart failure depends almost
entirely on medical therapy. Exceptions would include
CHF due to bradycardia that is treated with artificial pacing, or CHF due to congenital heart defects such as patent
ductus arteriosus that are treated using surgery or minimally invasive catheter‐based techniques. Advancements
in the surgical management of degenerative valve disease
have been made over the past few years but due to cost
and limited surgical centers that perform the surgery, surgical valve repair or replacement is not a widely available
option for most pet owners. Due to the lack of controlled
clinical trial data, some of the therapy for both chronic
and acute heart failure is based on expert opinion.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

186

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

Drugs for Treatment of Chronic Heart Failure
(Table 19.1)
Diuretics

Diuretics increase production of urine through affecting the kidney’s physiologic handling of water and
electrolytes. Diuretics result in an increased loss of
sodium (natriuresis) that is followed by water and
other electrolytes. Diuretics are the first‐line therapy
in patients with chronic CHF, but despite their efficacy
in resolving and preventing congestion, they are not
typically used as monotherapy due to their activation
of the renin‐angiotensin‐aldosterone system (RAAS).
One instance when diuretics are contraindicated for
the treatment of CHF is in patients with pericardial
effusion and cardiac tamponade. In this group, cardiac
output is markedly dependent on preload, and aggressive diuresis will worsen cardiac output, potentially
leading to cardiogenic shock.
Furosemide

Furosemide is first‐line therapy in the management of
chronic CHF. The goal of therapy is to prescribe the lowest diuretic dose required to control the clinical symptoms of congestion and edema. Compared to treatment
of pulmonary edema, relatively higher diuretic dosages
are often required to help resolve body cavity effusions,
such as pleural or abdominal effusion. In these instances,
routine thoracocentesis or abdominocentesis can aid in
minimizing the dose of furosemide needed.
There is a wide range of doses reported in the veterinary literature. In the authors’ experience, furosemide
doses of 1–4 mg/kg orally every 8–24 hours are utilized
in treating chronic CHF in the dog. The typical starting
dose of oral furosemide for a dog with first‐time CHF is
2–3 mg/kg/day. Cats are particularly sensitive to the
dehydrating effects of furosemide and dosages of 1–2 mg/
kg every 12–48 hours are preferred, with most cats
receiving a total of 1–2 mg/kg/day for first‐time CHF.
Lower doses spread over shorter dosage intervals may
result in less diuretic resistance as high doses can lead to
rebound effects and resistance due to greater stimulation
of the RAAS. Pet owners who become adept at monitoring respiratory rates and effort can often make small
adjustments in furosemide dosing at home to prevent
recurrent CHF symptoms.
Adverse effects of diuretics include electrolyte imbalances such as hypokalemia (often mitigated with the
concurrent use of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEI) or spironolactone), hyponatremia, azotemia,
dehydration, and urinary ­incontinence. Renal function
and serum electrolytes should be routinely monitored.
The frequency of monitoring is based on furosemide
dosage, concurrent medications, previous bloodwork

results, and presence of concomitant conditions such as
renal insufficiency. The authors recommend checking
serum blood profiles within the first 10 days after starting
or changing an existing dose of furosemide, after which
routine rechecks every 3–6 months are performed.
Doses of furosemide might also be adjusted after adding
concomitant agents that can affect renal perfusion (i.e.,
vasodilators, positive inotropes, other diuretics, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents, etc.).
Spironolactone

Spironolactone is a diuretic as well as a neurohormonal
blocking agent due to its inhibition of aldosterone. In
chronic CHF, benefits of spironolactone involve modest
diuresis and antiremodeling effects on the myocardium,
kidneys, and vasculature through its blockade of aldosterone receptors. In humans and experimental animal
models, spironolactone reduces pathologic tissue hypertrophy and fibrosis. In both human and veterinary
patients, spironolactone improves survival times in
patients with chronic CHF. Based on anecdotal experience, one author (SR) recommends considering spironolactone therapy in patients with progressive heart
enlargement that have not yet experienced CHF, as well
as those patients with chronic heart failure. In dogs with
abdominal or pleural effusion, spironolactone is often
co‐administered with furosemide to help slow the recurrence of the effusion. Typical spironolactone dose in
dogs is 2 mg/kg/day. Monitoring of renal function and
electrolytes is recommended in a fashion similar to furosemide. The benefit of spironolactone in cats with CHF
is unknown. Previous study in cats suggests that 1.7–
3.3 mg/kg/day was well tolerated.
In dogs, adverse reactions include anorexia and hypersalivation that may be mitigated by administration with
food or in a gelatin capsule, azotemia, and electrolyte
imbalances. Reformulated and flavored preparations of
spironolactone are difficult to administer due to their
still unpleasant taste. Due to its potassium‐sparing
effects, spironolactone can also predispose to hyperkalemia. This is most common when spironolactone is
used in combination with an ACEI.
Vasodilators

In the late 1980s and early 1990s, the use of vasodilators
became part of the standard CHF treatment in both
human and veterinary medicine. The benefits for the
hemodynamic and, in the case of ACEI, neurohormonal
aspects of heart failure contributed to widespread use
across many different species and many types of heart
disease. ACEI, nitrates, amlodipine, hydralazine, and
sildenafil are the most common agents utilized in veterinary patients. The majority of clinical data in veterinary
medicine involves ACEI for the treatment of chronic

VetBooks.ir

19 Management of Heart Failure

Table 19.1 Commonly used drugs for the treatment of chronic heart failure
Drug

Indications

Dose

Comments/Adverse Effects

Diuretics
Furosemide

Relief of congestion Dog: 1–4 mg/kg q8–24h

Azotemia, dehydration

Typical first‐time CHF:
2–3 mg/kg/day

Electrolyte disturbances

Cat: 1–2 mg/kg q12–24h
Typical first‐time CHF:
1–2 mg/kg/day

Monitor renal function

Spironolactone

Dog: 2 mg/kg/day Cat: 1-2 mg/kg/day
Antialdosterone
Hypokalemia
Relief of congestion

Weak diuretic
Potassium sparing

Hydrochlorothiazide

Relief of congestion Dog/Cat: 2 mg/kg q12h
If used in addition to furosemide: starting at
Refractory heart
0.5 mg/kg SID or 1 mg/kg q48h
failure

Moderate diuretic
Azotemia, dehydration
Often used in refractory CHF
combined with furosemide

Potent diuretic, azotemia
Torsemide (Torasemide) Relief of congestion Dog/Cat: 0.1–0.6 mg/kg SID
Electrolyte disturbances
Typical CHF: 0.1–0.3 mg/kg SID
Dose adjustments in 0.1 mg/kg/day increments Monitor renal function
Vasodilators
Enalapril
Dog/Cat: 0.5 mg/kg q12–24h
Benazepril
Dog/Cat: 0.25–0.5 mg/kg q12–24h
Lisinopril
Dog: 0.25–0.5 mg/kg q24h
Ramipril
Dog: 0.25 mg/kg q24h
Imidipril
Dog: 0.25–0.5mg/kg q24h

Azotemia, hypotension
Monitor renal function

ACE‐inhibitor

Anti‐RAAS
Hypertension

Amlodipine

Hypertension
Dog/Cat: 0.1–0.4 mg/kg q24h
Afterload reduction

Hypotension

Hydralazine

Hypertension
Dog: 0.2–2.0 mg/kg q12h
Afterload reduction

Hypotension
Gastrointestinal signs
Tachycardia

Isosorbide dinitrate/
mononitrate sustained
release

Preload reduction

Dog/Cat: 0.5–2.0 mg/kg q12h

Tolerance develops quickly

Sildenafil

Pulmonary
hypertension

Dog: 1–3 mg/kg q8h

Variably effective
Can be expensive

Pimobendan

Increase
contractility
Arterial
vasodilation

Dog/Cat: 0.25 mg/kg q12h

Contraindicated if outflow
obstruction present

Digoxin

Increase
contractility
Supraventricular
tach

Dog: 0.005–0.0075 mg/kg q12h
Cat: 0.03125 mg/cat q24–48h

Long‐half life
Monitor serum levels
Gastrointestinal signs

HCM
Atrial fibrillation

Bradycardia, hypotension
Cat: 6.25–12.5 mg/cat q12–24h
Dog: Atenolol 0.25–1.0 mg/kg q12h; Carvedilol Titrate doses in dogs with heart
0.1 mg/kg q12h then titrated to 0.5–1.0 mg/kg failure
q12h; Metoprolol 0.2–0.4 mg/kg q12h or
0.4–1.0 mg/kg q24h for sustained release

Positive inotropes

Beta‐adrenergic blockers
Atenolol

(Continued )

187

VetBooks.ir

188

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

Table 19.1 (Continued)
Drug

Indications

Dose

Comments/Adverse Effects

HCM
Atrial fibrillation

Cat: 7.5 mg/cat q8h
Cat: Cardizem CD 10 mg/kg q24h
Cat: Dilacor 30 mg/cat q12h

Bradycardia, hypotension
Gastrointestinal signs

Atrial fibrillation

Dog: 0.5–1.5 mg/kg q8h
Cardizem CD or Dilacor XR
(sustained release) 3 mg/kg BID

HCM

Cat: 1–5 mg/kg q12h

Potent negative inotrope
Titrate over 2–3 weeks

Aspirin

Antiplatelet

Dog: 1–5 mg/kg q24h
Cat: 20–81 mg/cat q72h

Gastrointestinal signs

Clopidogrel

Antiplatelet

Cat: 18.75 mg/cat q24h
Dog: 3–5 mg/kg q24h

Well tolerated

Taurine

Taurine deficiency

Dog: 35 mg/kg q12h

Long‐term supplementation needed

L‐carnitine

L‐carnitine
deficiency

Dog: 50 mg/kg q8h

Unknown efficacy

Calcium channel blockers
Diltiazem

Verapamil
Calcium Channel Blocker

Nutritional supplements

ACE, angiotensin converting enzyme; BID, twice a day (bis in die); CHF, congestive heart failure; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy;
RAAS, renin‐angiotensin‐aldosterone system; SID, once a day (semel in die).

CHF and ACEI are considered the first‐line choice for
vasodilator therapy in dogs and cats with CHF. In humans,
angiotensin receptor blockers can be used if ACEI are not
tolerated (intractable cough is a common side‐effect), but
relatively little is known about the use of angiotensin
receptor blockers in veterinary patients with chronic CHF.
ACE Inhibitors

ACE inhibitors are commonly used, including benazepril
(0.25–0.5 mg/kg PO q12–24h in dogs and cats), enalapril
(0.5 mg/kg PO S‐BID in dogs and cats), lisinopril (0.25–
0.5 mg/kg PO SID in dogs), ramipril (0.25 mg/kg PO SID
in dogs), and imidipril (0.25–0.5 mg/kg PO SID in dogs).
There is no obvious clinical benefit of one ACEI over the
other and their differences lie in their absorption, metabolism, and excretion. Benazepril is activated in the liver to
benazeprilat and, in dogs, is equally excreted by the biliary and renal routes while in cats, benazepril is primarily
excreted by the biliary route. Enalapril is activated in the
liver to its active metabolite, enalaprilat, and excreted by
the kidneys. Lisinopril is absorbed in its active form and
excreted by the kidney while ramipril may have more
effect on tissue‐specific RAAS and is partially excreted in
the urine and feces.
The authors typically use enalapril as the first choice
due to long‐standing clinical experience with this agent
as well as the convenient sizes of commercially available
tablets in the US (2.5, 5, 10, and 20 mg). In instances of

known renal dysfunction, benazepril is often the ACEI of
choice due to its nonrenal excretion, especially in feline
patients. Lisinopril is absorbed in its active form and does
not require hepatic metabolism to be active. Lisinopril is
excreted in the urine, and this drug could be chosen for
patients with concurrent cardiac and hepatic disease.
In general, ACEI are well tolerated. The most common
adverse events are azotemia and hypotension. In the
authors’ experience, initiating full dosing of an ACEI
during concomitant aggressive diuretic treatment of
acute CHF can occasionally lead to hypotension and
severe azotemia. ACEI do not appear essential for the
successful resolution of acute CHF, and the authors usually initiate ACEI therapy only once patients are stable
with only mild or no remaining CHF (see Treatment of
Acute Heart Failure later) and when hydration status and
blood pressure are adequate. ACEI are not particularly
potent arterial vasodilators and their benefits are most
likely due to the long‐term suppression of the RAAS.
The authors recommend checking a baseline renal and
electrolyte profile and within the first 10 days after starting the medication. Owners should be instructed to
monitor for poor appetite, lethargy, vomiting, or changes
in water consumption or urine output.
In instances where underlying renal insufficiency or
volume depletion is present, the authors occasionally
start enalapril at either 0.5 mg/kg q24h or 0.25 mg/kg
BID for the first 3–5 days of treatment and titrating to a

VetBooks.ir

19 Management of Heart Failure

higher dose over the first 7–10 days of treatment. Blood
pressure, renal function, and electrolyte monitoring is
performed every 3–6 months thereafter. In humans, idiosyncratic nocturnal cough is an important adverse
effect, but this has not been reported in dogs, and any
coughing is usually due to concurrent chronic airway
disease.
Other Vasodilators

Other vasodilators used for treatment of chronic CHF
include hydralazine, amlodipine, and nitrates. These
agents are discussed in the section regarding treatment
of refractory heart failure.
Positive Inotropes

Use of positive inotropes for the treatment of heart failure has been a subject of controversy due to a potential
increase in the risk of sudden death due to arrhythmias.
Conventional positive inotropes such as digoxin, dobutamine, and dopamine act by increasing cytosolic calcium that improves cardiac contractility but might also
precipitate cardiac arrhythmias. The objective of positive inotropic therapy is to increase myocardial contractility and improve cardiac output and organ perfusion.
Digoxin and pimobendan are the two most commonly
used agents for the treatment of chronic CHF in the veterinary patient.
Digoxin

Digoxin is one of the oldest cardiac medications known
and has positive inotropic and negative chronotropic
(slowing conduction through the atrioventricular [AV]
node) effects, as well as beneficial effects on the baroreceptors and neurohormonal axis such as the RAAS.
Even though it has been used for over 200 years, its benefits for survival have not been proven. In dogs,
pimobendan has largely supplanted digoxin as the positive inotrope of choice. Digoxin is associated with a high
incidence of adverse reactions including gastrointestinal
upset and cardiac arrhythmias. The recommended
canine dose is 0.005–0.0075 mg/kg q12h. In cats, digoxin
is not commonly used, in part due to the drug’s long half‐
life. The feline dose is ¼ of a 0.125 mg tablet (0.03125 mg)
every other day for smaller cats and once a day for larger
cats. The dosage in patients with renal disease is reduced
since digoxin is excreted by the kidneys. Dosage should
be based on lean body mass and reduced in obese pets or
those with significant ascites. Oral absorption of digoxin
can be altered by the formulation, concurrent medications, or food. The elixir (0.05 mg/mL) is better absorbed
than the tablet formulation although is not palatable to
most cats. As such, slightly lower doses are often prescribed when using the elixir over tablets. Antacid agents
like sucralfate will reduce the absorption of digoxin, as

will diets high in fiber. Certain antibiotics like tetracyclines will alter the bacterial flora and may increase
serum digoxin levels.
The primary indication for digoxin in dogs (and to a
much lesser extent in cats) with heart disease is to slow
AV nodal conduction and ventricular response rate in
patients with atrial fibrillation. Digoxin is indicated for
the treatment of atrial fibrillation, persistent atrial and
sinus tachycardias, and progressive myocardial dysfunction. It may also help reduce syncope in patients with
severe mitral regurgitation due to its pharmacologic
effects, including its effects on baroreceptors.
Contraindications for use include complex ventricular
arrhythmias, renal disease, atrioventricular block, certain types of ventricular preexcitation, and sinus node
dysfunction.
Due to the risk of toxicity, serum digoxin levels are
typically monitored 10–14 days after initiation or any
dose changes. Blood should be drawn 6–8 hours post pill
to assess “trough” concentrations. Traditionally, serum
digoxin levels between 0.8 and 2.0 ng/dL have been considered to be therapeutic. Based on recent data in
humans, the authors commonly target a lower serum
level of 0.6–1.2 ng/dL as lower levels remain beneficial
but with a lower incidence of adverse reactions. In the
authors’ experience, gastrointestinal upset and anorexia
can occur at levels as low as 1.5 ng/dL. Anecdotally, miniature schnauzers and Doberman pinschers are more
sensitive to digoxin and lower starting doses are recommended for these breeds (no greater than 0.125 mg q12h
as a starting dose in Dobermans regardless of their body
weight). Pet owners are recommended to administer the
digoxin along a consistent interval and regimen. Since
certain foods and medications can alter absorption, the
owner should continue the same feeding and dosing regimen once therapeutic serum levels are achieved.
Changes in renal function will affect digoxin excretion,
and digoxin and electrolyte levels are routinely evaluated
every six months or when changes are made in concurrent medications.
Pimobendan

Pimobendan is widely used for the treatment of canine
heart failure secondary to dilated cardiomyopathy
(DCM) and myxomatous mitral valve disease (MMVD).
Recently, studies have shown the benefits of this agent in
the preclinical stage of MMVD once a moderate degree
of radiographic and echocardiographic cardiac enlargement has developed.
Pimobendan is a calcium sensitizer and phosphodiesterase inhibitor and its benefits are a result of the combination of positive inotropic properties along with effects
as a vasodilator. Its dual action is often indicated by the
term “inodilator.” Pimobendan is used as the first‐line

189

VetBooks.ir

190

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

positive inotrope and forms part of standard “quadruple
therapy” for CHF in dogs along with ACEI, furosemide,
and spironolactone. The recommended dose in dogs is
0.5 mg/kg/day divided into two doses given 12 hours
apart. Pimobendan has also been shown to prolong time
to CHF and death in asymptomatic Doberman pinschers
with echocardiographic evidence of reduced systolic
function and ventricular enlargement consistent with
preclinical DCM. In humans, positive inotropes exacerbate cardiac arrhythmias that can lead to increased risk
of sudden death, and use of pimobendan in Doberman
pinschers with preclinical DCM and severe ventricular
arrhythmias has not been specifically evaluated.
In general, pimobendan is well tolerated. The most
common adverse reaction is anorexia and diarrhea that
often resolves at lessened dosage. Pimobendan should be
used with caution in disorders with a ventricular outflow
tract obstruction such as congenital subvalvular aortic
stenosis or hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy.
Pimobendan does not have an approved use in cats
with CHF, but has been occasionally used in cats with
heart failure. Pimobendan is not recommended in the
preclinical stages of feline cardiomyopathy or in cats
with left ventricular outflow tract obstruction.
Pimobendan is most often used in cats with systolic
myocardial dysfunction that is associated with dilated
cardiomyopathy as well as end‐stage hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), restrictive cardiomyopathy
(RCM), and arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy cases. Most reports of pimobendan use in cats
utilize the same dosing protocol that is used in dogs
(0.25 mg/kg BID). The overall safety and efficacy of
pimobendan in cats requires further study.
Beta‐Adrenergic Blockers

Beta‐adrenergic blockers (BB) are part of standard care
in humans with systolic dysfunction. Chronic administration of BB such as carvedilol or metoprolol results in
improved contractility, myocardial protection from circulating catecholamines, and improved survival.
Whether or not BB benefit veterinary patients with heart
disease or failure is unknown as there are relatively limited data compared to ACEI and pimobendan. The three
most common clinical situations for which BB are typically considered are rate control of atrial fibrillation
wherein BB are co‐administered with digoxin, in the preclinical or stable heart failure phase of DCM in dogs, and
in cats with HCM or RCM, with special consideration
for cats with dynamic left ventricular outflow tract
obstruction.
Beta‐adrenergic blockers are often used in conjunction with digoxin to treat persistent supraventricular
arrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation (see Chapter 21).
The BB dose can be gradually up titrated to achieve

target heart rate. Overly aggressive combinations of
­
digoxin, BB, and calcium channel blockers can produce
bradycardia. Some cardiologists recommend BB during
the preclinical phase of DCM in dogs. Successful institution and titration of BB is regarded as easier in the
­preclinical phase as opposed to starting BB after deve­
lopment of CHF. Sudden withdrawal of BB can result
in reflex tachycardia so that dosing should continue
even if CHF eventually occurs. However, the dosage may
require adjustment based on clinical symptoms, blood
pressure, and heart rate. Limited studies in dogs indicate
that titration of BB is relatively well tolerated by patients,
but the long‐term effect on cardiac function and survival is unknown.
In general, BB should only be introduced in patients
free of active CHF as their negative inotropic properties
can acutely reduce cardiac function and exacerbate clinical signs. When used in dogs with DCM, BB are typically
titrated upward over 4–8 weeks. The initial prescribed
dosage of BB is as little as 1/10th of the target dose and
titrated upward based on heart rate and blood pressure.
The authors will often temporarily increase the dose of
concurrent furosemide while introducing BB in patients
with advanced disease. Gradual reduction in the dosage
over several weeks is recommended if a decision is made
to cease treatment with chronic BB. Systemic hypotension can be seen when BB are used concomitantly with
vasodilatory drugs such as ACEI or pimobendan. BB use
in the preclinical phase of MMVD is not recommended.
BB are commonly used to slow heart rate in cats with
HCM or RCM, especially if left ventricular outflow tract
obstruction due to systolic anterior motion of the mitral
valve is present (see Chapter 27). BB are usually not prescribed to cats with active CHF; rather, they are used in
the preclinical or stable heart failure phases. Typically,
BB are titrated to achieve in‐hospital heart rate less than
160 bpm in cats. Monitoring of heart rate, systolic blood
pressure, and severity of left ventricular outflow tract
obstruction is recommended in cats with HCM.
The various BB are classified according to their selectivity for different beta‐receptors. Additionally, there are
differences involving lipophilicity, metabolism, antiarrhythmic effects, and vasodilatory properties amongst
the various BB. The most common BB used in veterinary
cardiology include atenolol, carvedilol, metoprolol, and
sotalol.
Atenolol is a beta‐1‐specific antagonist dosed at
0.25–1 mg/kg BID in dogs and 6.25–12.5 mg/cat q12–
24h in feline patients. Atenolol is commonly used in the
treatment of HCM in cats and congenital subvalvular
aortic stenosis in dogs. Carvedilol is a nonspecific BB,
acting on both beta‐1 and beta‐2 receptors, and has
adjunctive alpha‐1‐adrenergic blocking effects leading to
vasodilation. Carvedilol is metabolized in the liver and

VetBooks.ir

19 Management of Heart Failure

there are rare reports of hepatotoxicity. Initial dosage of
carvedilol is 0.05–0.1 mg/kg BID and is slowly titrated
upward over 4–8 weeks to a final target dose of 0.5–
1.0 mg/kg BID. Metoprolol is a beta‐1‐specific antagonist that is metabolized by the liver. Target dose is
0.2–0.4 mg/kg BID and 0.4–1 mg/kg q24h for the sustained‐release preparation. In humans, studies suggest a
benefit of sustained‐release formulations due to more
stable blood levels. Sotalol is a nonselective BB with
potassium channel‐blocking antiarrhythmic properties.
It is primarily used as an antiarrhythmic agent in dogs
with DCM or arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy and is dosed at 1–3 mg/kg BID in dogs and
2 mg/kg BID in cats (see Chapter 20).
Calcium Channel Blockers

Diltiazem, amlodipine, and rarely verapamil are calcium
channel blockers (CCB) used in the management of
chronic heart failure. Differences in the three agents
center around their propensity for cardiac effects on heart
rate and myocardial contractility versus peripheral effects
of smooth muscle relaxation and peripheral vasodilation.
Among the most commonly used CCB, amlodipine has
the greatest vasodilatory properties, followed by diltiazem
and then verapamil. Conversely, verapamil is a potent
negative cardiac chronotrope and negative inotrope, followed by diltiazem and then amlodipine, the latter of
which has very little effect on cardiac myocardial tissue.
In dogs, the most common indication for diltiazem is
for ventricular rate control in atrial fibrillation and is
dosed at 0.5–1.5 mg/kg q8h (See Chapter 21) Sustained‐
release preparations (Cardizem® CD and Dilacor®) are
dosed at 3 mg/kg BID in dogs. Diltiazem is often prescribed in cats with HCM with or without atrial fibrillation and including cats with left ventricular outflow tract
obstruction. The authors use either diltiazem or atenolol
in cats with severe HCM and echocardiographic evidence of diastolic dysfunction. Diltiazem is typically
added to the treatment regimen once the cat is receiving
furosemide, ACEI, and antithrombotic agents. In cases
of active CHF, the authors often delay initiation of CCB
or BB until after the patient is stable on the aforementioned cardiac drugs to try to reduce the incidence of
adverse reactions, such as bradycardia or hypotension.
In cats, diltiazem is dosed at 7.5 mg/cat q8h. Sustained‐
release diltiazem preparations are available (Cardizem
CD, 10 mg/kg q24h; Dilacor XR 30 mg/cat q12 h).
Canine patients generally tolerate diltiazem while cats
have a higher incidence of gastrointestinal upset, loss of
appetite, and hypersalivation. The authors recommend
administering diltiazem with food or encapsulating the
tablet in a gelatin capsule to hide the adverse taste from
the cat. Diltiazem has some negative inotropic effects
that can exacerbate signs of CHF, although this is less

common than with BB. Diltiazem also has mild vasodilatory properties and monitoring blood pressure and heart
rate is recommended.
Verapamil is rarely used in veterinary patients although
it is commonly used in humans with HCM. One author
(SR) has seen benefit in feline HCM patients with severe
left ventricular hypertrophy and dynamic left ventricular
outflow tract obstruction. Verapamil provides heart rate
control in addition to supposed effects on diastolic function. Gastrointestinal side effects are common when
using verapamil and can be minimized by administering
with food. In cats, verapamil has a starting dose of 1 mg/
kg BID with upward titration based on clinical signs,
heart rate, and blood pressure over 2–3 weeks to a maximal dose of 5 mg/kg BID, with a target heart rate between
120 and 160 bpm. Amlodipine will be discussed under
the refractory treatment of congestive heart failure.
Antithrombotic Therapy
Thromboembolism is a common risk factor in human
patients with chronic heart failure, especially in the presence of atrial fibrillation. In dogs, clinical systemic arterial thrombosis is uncommon while in cats, arterial
thromboembolism is a devastating clinical complication
of cardiomyopathy. The exact mechanism behind arterial thrombosis is complex and the most effective strategy to prevent and treat is unknown.
Chronic oral agents commonly administered to reduce
the risk of thrombosis are aspirin and clopidrogrel. Less
commonly, warfarin or injectable unfractionated or low
molecular weight heparin are used. More recently, the use
of factor Xa inhibitors like rivaroxaban and apixaban has
been recommended for patients with recurrent emboli or
poor tolerance to other antithrombotic agents. In one
study, clopidogrel was more effective than aspirin in preventing reoccurrence of thromboembolism in cats with a
previous history of thrombus. Antithrombotic agents are
also empirically administered in cases with a perceived
increased risk thromboembolism. These risk factors
include the presence of an intracardiac thrombus, spontaneous echocardiographic contrast (“smoke”), severe left
atrial dilation, protein‐losing nephropathies, hypoproteinemia, pulmonary hypertension, immune‐mediated
hemolytic anemia or heartworm disease. For aspirin therapy, the authors utilize 20–81 mg/cat q72h in cats and
1–5 mg/kg q24h in dogs. Clopidrogrel is dosed at ¼ of a
75 mg tablet (18.75 mg) q24h in cats and 3–5 mg/kg q24h
in dogs. Cats, in particular, often do not like the taste of
clopidrogel, which can lead to vomiting, hypersalivation,
anorexia, and difficulties in pill administration.
Antithrombotics agents can lead to adverse reactions
when used with corticosteroids or nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents and might reduce the efficacy of

191

VetBooks.ir

192

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

some cardiac therapies such as diuretics or spironolactone. During administration, renal function is monitored and pet owners are instructed about possible
gastrointestinal side‐effects. Chronic monitoring of
coagulation profiles is not required with aspirin and
clopidrogel and thus they are more commonly used in
veterinary patients than anticoagulant agents such as
warfarin or heparin.
Dietary Modifications
Maintenance of caloric intake is essential in the management of chronic heart failure. Traditionally, restriction of
sodium was regarded as beneficial for the management
of heart disease despite concern that very low sodium
diets may further activate the RAAS. Diets that are mildly
(80–100 mg Na/100 kcal) or moderately (50–80 mg
Na/100 kcal) restricted in sodium should be considered
for patients with chronic CHF. Severely sodium‐restricted
diets (<50 mg Na/100 kcal) are reserved for patients with
advanced heart failure, severe hypertension, or cardiogenic body cavity effusions. Monitoring of blood electrolytes, in particular sodium and potassium, is important if
severely sodium‐restricted diets are fed.
Chronic heart failure is a catabolic state and results in
a progressive loss of body condition and muscle tone.
This “cardiac cachexia” requires adequate caloric and
protein intake. In patients with concurrent renal disease,
protein intake needs to be balanced between these competing conditions. The catabolic state is partly a result of
inflammatory mediators and some evidence suggests the
benefit of fish‐based omega 3 fatty acids to help slow
weight loss. Supplementation with the omega 3 fatty
acids is typically considered in patients with weight loss
and muscle wasting as well as in patients with ventricular
arrhythmias (see Chapter 26). Care should be taken to
avoid the fish oils that are combined with other sources
such as flax seed oil or cod liver oil due to the potential
for vitamin D toxicosis. Fish oil is dosed based on the
amount of beneficial omega 3 fatty acids provided. In
dogs, eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic
acid (DHA) are dosed at 40 mg/kg and 25 mg/kg per day,
respectively.
Taurine deficiency is a known cause of dilated cardiomyopathy in cats, but due to universal supplementation
in commercial cat food, this form of cardiomyopathy is
rarely detected. In rare cases of feline taurine deficiency,
patients are supplemented with taurine at 250 mg PO
BID. Taurine deficiency has also been reported in various breeds of dogs, including Newfoundlands, American
cocker spaniels, and golden retrievers. In these dogs,
taurine‐deficient DCM is treated with 35 mg/kg taurine
BID. A complete diet history and whole blood or plasma
taurine assay are recommended by the authors in any

dog with apparent DCM diagnosed in a breed other than
the “typical” breeds (i.e., Doberman pinscher, Great
Dane, boxer, mastiff, or Irish wolfhound) known for this
disease. L‐carnitine (50 mg/kg PO TID) and coenzyme
Q10 (30–90 mg PO BID) are two additional supplements.
L‐carnitine is most commonly considered in American
cocker spaniels that are taurine deficient. Unlike taurine
deficiency, diagnosis of L‐carnitine deficiency requires
myocardial biopsy, which is rarely performed. In a small
unpublished evaluation of Dalmatians with dilated cardiomyopathy, one of the authors (SR) found improved
survival times when taurine, carnitine, and coenzyme
Q10 were administered along with conventional cardiac
therapy.

­Therapy for Refractory Chronic
Heart Failure
As previously described, conventional treatment of
chronic CHF in dogs consists of “quadruple” therapy
with furosemide, ACEI, pimobendan, and spironolactone. In patients with refractory CHF despite conventional therapy, additional treatments are provided in
order to combat recurrent symptoms of heart failure.
Additional Diuretics
Recurrent CHF necessitates gradual increases in the
doses of diuretics such as furosemide and spironolactone. A common clinical observance is the apparent
reduction of diuretic efficacy as furosemide doses
approach 6–12 mg/kg/day in dogs and 3–4 mg/kg/day in
cats. The reasons for diuretic resistance are varied and
complex. One cause is the reduction of oral bioavailability and resultant decrease in plasma concentration. This,
coupled with poor organ perfusion due to low cardiac
output, reduces the delivery of furosemide to the
nephron. In cases of advanced CHF, and particularly in
cases of recurrent abdominal or pleural effusion, the
authors often consider replacing one or more oral
administrations of furosemide with a daily subcutaneous injection of furosemide. Anecdotal experience indicates that restoration of diuresis can often be achieved
using this strategy. As with insulin injections, owners
can quickly learn to how administer SC injections at
home. Injectable furosemide is light sensitive and owners are instructed to keep the drug out of direct light.
Injectable furosemide is relatively alkaline and may
cause reactions at the injection site that include local
scabbing or plaque formation. In the authors’ experience, these appear less common when using the Salix®
brand of furosemide.

VetBooks.ir

19 Management of Heart Failure

A common strategy in patients with refractory CHF is
to layer additional diuretics onto the existing furosemide
therapy. This strategy of “sequential nephron blockade”
involves adding diuretics that act at sites other than the
loop of Henle. Addition of hydrochlorthiazide (0.5 mg/kg
SID or 1 mg/kg q48 h) or, if not already being administered, spironolactone (2 mg/kg/day) can be considered.
Adverse reactions to high‐dose or multiple diuretics
include severe azotemia, anorexia, dehydration, and
electrolyte abnormalities. This is particularly important
in patients are partially anorexic or eating diets severely
restricted in sodium.
Another option to improve diuresis is to replace furosemide with another diuretic such as torsemide (alternative spelling, torasemide). Torsemide, like furosemide, is
a loop diuretic. In humans, torsemide is characterized by
more reliable gastrointestinal absorption, a longer half‐
life, and adjunctive antialdosterone effects. In dogs, torsemide has a longer half‐life and is well suited for both
resolution and long‐term control of CHF. Torsemide is
markedly more potent than furosemide and the recommended dose range for treatment of CHF in dogs is 0.1–
0.6 mg/kg SID. Dogs with mild CHF typically require
0.1–0.3 mg/kg SID and any increases in dose in response
to reoccurrence of clinical signs are done in 0.1 mg/kg/
day increments. In dogs with CHF refractory to existing
doses of furosemide (typically >6 mg/kg/day), replacement of furosemide involves replacing the total daily
dose of furosemide with 1/10th to 1/20th the dosage of
torsemide. For example, if the existing furosemide dose
was 25 mg BID, the equivalent torsemide dose would be
1/10th to 1/20th of 50 mg or 2.5–5 mg per day. There are
limited reports of use of torsemide in cats. The dose
range in cats is likely similar to that in dogs. Torsemide,
like all diuretics, requires close monitoring of renal function, electrolytes, blood pressure, hydration status, and
body weight.
Clinicians might wish to consult with a specialist to
discuss individualized treatment and monitoring plans
in patients with refractory CHF. In general, the need for
diuretics in addition to or in place of furosemide in
patients with refractory signs of CHF is considered a
poor prognostic sign.
Volume depletion is caused by high dose and potent
diuretics and affects renal excretion of other cardiac
drugs, such as digoxin, and close monitoring of such
drugs is needed.
Thus, the risk for digoxin toxicity increases with worsening hypovolemia. In late stages of CHF, free water
retention by arginine vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone)
can result in severe hyponatremia and hypochloremia.
These electrolyte derangements can be difficult to treat.
Occasionally, cautious addition of sodium chloride or
potassium chloride to the diet, warm sodium chloride

enemas, diuretic reduction, or cautious restriction of
water intake can be performed. Hyponatremia is considered a poor prognostic sign in dogs with chronic CHF.
Additional Vasodilators
Patients with refractory CHF might benefit from vasodilator therapy in addition to standard administration of
ACEI. In these instances, use of arterial vasodilators
such as hydralazine or amlodipine is occasionally considered. Due to the perceived relationship between afterload (which is approximated by the aortic systolic blood
pressure) and degree of mitral regurgitation, arterial
vasodilators are often considered in dogs with refractory
CHF due to MMVD, but their efficacy in reducing the
degree of regurgitation is unknown. The limiting factor
in the administration of additional vasodilators is systemic hypotension, and vasodilators are not prescribed
if the baseline systemic systolic blood pressure is
<100 mmHg. Amlodipine (0.–0.4 mg/kg PO BID in dogs
and cats) is a calcium channel blocker with potent antihypertensive properties. A starting dosage of 0.1 mg/kg
BID and uptitrating over two weeks to the higher dosage
of 0.3–0.4 mg/kg BID is typically well tolerated. Prior to
the widespread use of amlodipine as an antihypertensive
agent in both dogs and cats, hydralazine was often used
in dogs and continues to be an option in refractory cases
of canine MMVD. Hydralazine (0.5–2 mg/kg PO BID) is
a direct‐acting vasodilator with a shorter half‐life and
more rapid onset of action than amlodipine. Thus, acute
hypotension and reflex tachycardia are more common
than with amlodipine. In emergency situations where
acute arterial vasodilation is needed (i.e., acute life‐
threatening CHF or systemic hypertension), hydralazine
is considered. Common adverse effects of hydralazine
include hypotension and gastrointestinal signs.
Oral nitrate compounds such as sustained‐release
isosorbide dinitrate or mononitrate (0.5–2.0 mg/kg PO
BID in dogs and cats) are infrequently used as a venous
vasodilator. Administration is usually performed when
signs of congestion persist despite diuretic usage or further increases in diuretic usage are hindered by concomitant azotemia or arterial hypotension. Due to rapid
development of tolerance, oral nitrates are typically
administered in two doses eight hours apart with a 16‐
hour drug‐free interval. In humans who are intolerant of
ACEI, hydralazine or amlodipine along with an oral
nitrate is administered, albeit with less clinical benefit
than ACEI.
Pulmonary hypertension (PHT) (see Chapter 23) is a
common complication in patients with advanced heart
failure, especially those with MMVD. Signs of PHT
include right‐sided heart failure, syncope, and persistent
tachypnea in the absence of pulmonary edema.

193

VetBooks.ir

194

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

Echocardiography can help confirm the diagnosis.
Phosphodiesterase V inhibitors, such as sildenafil
(1–3 mg/kg PO TID) or tadalafil (1 mg/kg PO SID) are
variably effective. In the authors’ experience, sildenafil
seems to be more effective than tadalafil. Both drugs can
be very expensive, especially in large‐breed dogs. Both
agents are well tolerated in dogs. Rarely, inguinal flushing
and gastrointestinal upset are noted. Systemic hypotension is rare. Monitoring of the clinical symptoms as well
as pulmonary and systemic pressures is recommended.
Positive Inotropes
In cases of refractory heart failure due to DCM or
MMVD, off‐label dosages of pimobendan are often utilized. The authors will increase frequency of dosing from
0.25 mg/kg BID to TID followed by a slow titration to
0.5 mg/kg TID as needed. Additional pimobendan can
also be effective in cases of biventricular heart failure as
well as in patients with PHT. Cats with DCM or other
forms of systolic dysfunction also appear to tolerate
doses of pimobendan greater than 0.25 mg/kg BID. On
rare occasions, three days of dobutamine infusion in the
hospital at 2.5–10 μg/kg/min can be considered as there
might be some residual positive inotropic benefit for
some time after the hospitalization. Oral digoxin can be
added to the existing treatment regimen, especially if
tachyarrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation are present.
Care should be taken to monitor serum digoxin levels to
avoid toxicity.
Cough Suppression
Many canine patients with chronic heart failure develop a
cough secondary to bronchial compression as a result of
bronchomalacia and severe atrial dilation. In the absence
of CHF, a variable amount of cough suppression is
achieved with hydrocodone (0.22–0.44 mg/kg PO B‐QID)
or butorphanol (0.55 mg/kg PO B‐QID). Bronchodilators,
such as aminophylline or theophylline, are typically
ineffective.

­Therapy of Acute Life‐Threatening
Heart Failure
Therapy for acute‐life threatening heart failure is based
on many of the same principles that guide therapy for
chronic heart failure, namely diuresis to alleviate congestion, vasodilators to reduce preload and afterload, and
positive inotropes to improve myocardial contractility
(Table 19.2). In acute heart failure, hemodynamic abnormalities such as congestion and low cardiac output predominate and therapy is targeted towards resolution of

congestion, such as pulmonary edema, pleural effusion,
or ascites, and improvement of forward cardiac output
and tissue perfusion. In general, more attention is given
to stabilization of hemodynamics versus interruption of
neurohormonal systems, such as the RAAS or sympathetic nervous systems that are so critical to treatment of
chronic heart failure.
Diuretics
Diuretics are a mainstay of treatment of acute CHF.
Treatment induces potent and rapid diuresis. Parameters
commonly monitored during diuresis include respiratory rate and effort, body weight, urine production, electrolytes, renal function, and blood pressure. Furosemide
is the most commonly used diuretic for the treatment of
acute CHF. When given by IV, IM, or SC routes, diuresis
begins within 5–10 minutes and reaches a peak at 30–60
minutes with duration of action between two and three
hours. A typical initial dose is 2–4 mg/kg IV/IM/SC in
dogs and 1–2 mg/kg IV/IM/SC in cats. Because of its
relatively short duration of action, repeated bolus injections of furosemide are needed if respiratory rate and
other clinical signs are not improved within 2–4 hours
after initial dose. During administration, patients should
produce large quantities of dilute urine, and failure to
induce diuresis should alert clinicians to the possibility
of underlying renal dysfunction, poor forward cardiac
output, and/or reduced renal perfusion. In patients with
left‐sided CHF such as pulmonary edema, the simplest
way to monitor response to diuretics is to monitor
­respiratory rate and effort. Most patients with severe
pulmonary edema will exhibit respiratory rates at presentation >45 breaths/min with increased abdominal
effort and orthopnea. As diuretics resolve pulmonary
edema, the respiratory rate and effort should begin to
decrease, signaling an ability to reduce frequency of diuretic injections to q6–8h. Continued improvement in
respiratory rate and effort over the subsequent 12–24
hours leads to replacement of parenteral furosemide
with oral furosemide.
Diuretic therapy for treatment of acute CHF should be
personalized for individual patients depending on the
severity of clinical signs, current or previous therapy
with oral diuretics, co‐administration of other heart failure medications, hydration status, renal function, and
blood pressure. In general, patients with extreme respiratory distress or those already receiving oral diuretics
will require higher initial starting doses and more frequent repeated boluses, while those with preexisting
renal dysfunction, dehydration, or low blood pressure
will require more conservative dosing. Renal and electrolyte bloodwork as well as blood pressure measurement are typically performed as soon as practicable after

VetBooks.ir

19 Management of Heart Failure

Table 19.2 Commonly used drugs for the treatment of acute heart failure
Drug

Indications

Dose

Comments/Adverse Effects

Relief of congestion

Dog: 2–4 mg/kg IV/IM/SC q2–4h;
0.66 mg/kg IV bolus followed by
0.66 mg/kg/h CRI
Cat: 1–2 mg/kg IV/IM/SC q2–4h

Azotemia, dehydration
Electrolyte disturbances
Monitor renal function
Repeated doses based on respiratory
rate and other signs

ACE
inhibitor

Anti‐RAAS
Hypertension

Enalapril
Dog/Cat: 0.5 mg/kg q12–24h
Benazepril
Dog/Cat: 0.25–0.5 mg/kg q12–24h
Lisinopril
Dog: 0.25–0.5 mg/kg q24h
Ramipril
Dog: 0.25 mg/kg q24h
Imidipril
Dog: 0.25–0.5 mg/kg q24h

Azotemia, hypotension
Monitor renal function
Initiation might be delayed until acute
congestion resolved

Sodium
nitroprusside

Hypertension
Afterload reduction
Preload reduction

Dog: 1–10 μg/kg/min CRI

Hypotension, monitor blood pressure
Light sensitive
Typically only used for 12–48 h

Nitroglycerin

Afterload reduction
Preload reduction

Dog: 1–10 μg/kg/min CRI

Hypotension, monitor blood pressure
Typically only used for 12–48 h

Hydralazine

Hypertension
Afterload reduction

Dog: 0.2–2.0 mg/kg q12h

Hypotension
Gastrointestinal signs

Sildenafil

Pulmonary
hypertension

Dog: 1–3 mg/kg q8h

Variably effective
Expensive

Dopamine

Poor contractility

Dog: 1–10 μg/kg/min CRI

Tachycardia, arrhythmias
Used only for 12–48 h

Dobutamine

Poor contractility

Dog: 2.5–10 μg/kg/min CRI

Tachycardia, arrhythmias
(less than dopamine)
Used only for 12–48 h

Pimobendan

Poor contractility
Afterload reduction

Dog: 0.25 mg/kg q12h
0.15 mg/kg IV once

Contraindicated if outflow
obstruction present

Digoxin

Poor contractility
Supraventricular
tach

Dog: 0.005–0.0075 mg/kg q12h
Cat: 0.03125 mg/cat q24–48h

Long half‐life
Monitor serum levels
Gastrointestinal signs
Typically only used if atrial fibrillation
is present

Diuretics
Furosemide

Vasodilators

Positive inotropes

ACE, angiotensin converting enzyme; CRI, constant rate infusion; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; RAAS, renin‐angiotensin‐aldosterone
system; SC, subcutaneous.

initial presentation, and can help guide the initial or subsequent dosing strategy. In the majority of instances,
mild azotemia, electrolyte abnormalities, increased total
protein, loss of body weight, and other signs of volume
depletion will be detected after the first 18–24 hours of
diuretic therapy. In many cases, mild increases in BUN
or creatinine and mild clinical dehydration are noted and
do not necessitate complete cessation of the diuretic
therapy. The possibility of severe azotemia, electrolyte

imbalances, or acute kidney injury, particularly if preexisting renal dysfunction is present, is the main limiting
factor regarding the dose and frequency of diuretic
administration. In cases where diuretic therapy results in
these signs, temporary cessation of diuretic administration along with replacement fluids administered either
SC or IV might be needed.
In treating acute CHF, clinicians continuously weigh
hydration status and renal function against the degree of

195

VetBooks.ir

196

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

respiratory compromise and prescribed dose of diuretics. There is no “one size fits all” formula for diuretic
administration and clinicians should constantly reassess
their therapy during the first 18–24 hours. The authors
discourage the routine use of IV fluid administration at
the same time diuretics are being administered. Rather,
they recommend offering water ad libitum during treatment of acute CHF to allow patients to semi‐self‐regulate their hydration status. Given the potency of the loop
diuretics, patients will be unable to consume enough
water to replace the fluids being lost. In cases of dire
CHF or instances where patients obsessively drink
repeated quantities of water when offered, water restriction might be needed.
While diuretics are generally considered a highly effective means of relieving congestion, inadequate response
to diuretics or the inability to administer sufficient doses
due to renal disease necessitates additional strategies to
improve renal perfusion and decrease intravascular pressure though positive inotropes and vasodilators.
Positive Inotropes
Acute heart failure is accompanied by decreased cardiac
output. Decreased tissue perfusion, particularly to the
kidneys, activates sodium‐ and water‐retaining mechanisms, such as the RAAS and SNS, leading to signs of
congestion. Poor perfusion of the proximal convoluted
tubule can decrease response to furosemide as active
secretion of furosemide into the nephron’s intraluminal
space is required for its diuretic effect. Positive inotropes
increase myocardial contractility and cardiac output and
are particularly indicated in instances of low‐output (forward) heart failure wherein signs of cardiac shock, such
as weakness, pallor, hypotension, and hypothermia, are
evident. Positive inotropes are often used in dogs with
DCM, and less commonly in dogs with MMVD. Because
most forms of feline cardiomyopathy are diastolic in
nature, positive inotropes are rarely used in cats with
heart failure. Positive inotropes act via increased binding
of calcium ions to the myocardial actin‐myosin‐troponin
complex, either by increasing intracellular calcium concentration or by increasing the sensitivity of the actin‐
myosin‐troponin complex to calcium binding.
Commonly administered positive inotropes include
sympathomimetic agents such as dopamine or dobutamine, calcium sensitizers such as pimobendan, and
intracellular calcium agents such as digoxin. Dopamine
is a precursor of norepinephrine while dobutamine is a
synthetic catecholamine, and both agents bind to myocyte beta‐adrenergic receptors in order to increase myocardial contractility and heart rate. At high doses, both
agents also act on peripheral alpha‐1 receptors to cause
unwanted arterial vasoconstriction. In dogs, dopamine

(1–10 μg/kg/min) or dobutamine (2.5–10 μg/kg/min) are
administered via constant rate infusion (CRI) and titrated
upwards to effect. Both agents are diluted in small volumes of 5% dextrose to limit the total volume of fluids
administered to dogs with acute CHF. During administration, blood pressure, mentation, muscle tone, urine
output, and other indices of improved tissue perfusion
such as body temperature or blood lactate guide dose
titration. For both dopamine and dobutamine, the rate‐
limiting factor during administration is tachycardia,
tachyarrhythmias, or excessive vasoconstriction. Efficacy
likely is best within the first 48 hours of administration,
after which the effects wane as beta‐receptors are saturated or downregulated.
Pimobendan is a calcium sensitizer and phosphodieterase inhibitor. Its positive inotropic action is due to its
ability to increase the binding of calcium ions to the
actin‐­
myosin‐troponin complex without a substantial
increase in intracellular calcium concentration. This
mechanism provides improved cardiac contractility
without substantial concomitant increases in myocardial
oxygen or energy demands. Pimobendan (0.25 mg/kg PO
BID or 0.15 mg/kg IV once in dogs followed by start of
oral dosing 12 hours after injection) can used in place of
either dopamine or dobutamine when constant rate infusion is not practical. Pimobendan is well tolerated in dogs
with acute CHF and oral dosing continues into the chronic
phase of CHF once the acute episode of CHF is resolved.
Digoxin is a digitalis glycoside with modest positive
inotropic effect as well as ability to reduce or slow conduction through the AV node. Its use in acute heart failure is limited by its variable oral bioavailability, long
half‐life, and narrow therapeutic window. Use of digoxin
for acute heart failure has been largely replaced by
pimobendan except in instances of atrial fibrillation or
supraventricular tachycardia wherein oral digoxin
(0.005–0.0075 mg/kg PO BID) is used to help slow the
ventricular heart rate. The long‐half life of digoxin precludes rapid achievement of therapeutic serum levels,
and digoxin therapy is usually combined with other antiarrhythmic agents such as diltiazem (see Chapter 21).
Toxicity includes arrhythmias and gastrointestinal signs
such as vomiting, anorexia, and diarrhea. The authors
discourage the use of IV digoxin administration due to a
high incidence of toxicity.
Vasodilators
Venous and arterial vasodilators reduce preload and
afterload, respectively. In cases of acute CHF, venous
vasodilation is often used in conjunction with diuretics
to help rapidly relieve congestion. Arterial vasodilation
reduces peripheral vascular resistance/afterload and
encourages improved cardiac output.

VetBooks.ir

19 Management of Heart Failure

Nitroprusside is a potent mixed vasodilator capable of
both venous and arterial vasodilation. It acts by releasing
nitric oxide, which induces vascular smooth muscle
relaxation. Nitroprusside is metabolized very rapidly and
is administered via CRI (1–10 μg/kg/min in dogs). Its
rate‐limiting factor is systemic arterial hypotension, and
blood pressure monitoring is highly recommended during use. Typically, the dosage is adjusted to achieve a systolic arterial blood pressure no lower than 90 mmHg.
The short half‐life of nitroprusside allows clinicians to
effectively make changes in infusion rates in response to
blood pressure. Nitroprusside, while highly effective, is
only occasionally used due to its need for CRI and sensitivity to light that requires the administration set to be
covered in light‐protective wrapping. Similar to dopamine or dobutamine, nitroprusside infusions are given
short term, typically not longer than 48 hours. At very
high doses or for extended periods of administration,
accumulation of nitroprusside metabolites such as
cyanogen can result in toxicity. Nitroprusside is rarely
used in cats. At the time of writing, supply shortages of
nitroprusside have severely curtailed its use and alternative nitric oxide donors such as IV nitroglycerin (1–10 μg/
kg/min) have been used.
ACE Inhibitors
ACE inhibitors form a cornerstone of therapy of chronic
CHF. Their utility in acute life‐threatening CHF is less
evident. Compared to hydralazine or nitroprusside, the
arterial dilating effects of ACEI are modest. ACEI’s ability to decrease AT II and aldosterone production appears
more beneficial over longer periods of time as opposed

to rapidly acting short‐term effects in acute CHF. The
rate‐limiting factors affecting ACEI use include azotemia
and systemic arterial hypotension. The authors occasionally delay initiation of ACEI until acute CHF is stabilized with diuretics, positive inotropes, and other
vasodilators, and are especially cautious in patients
already suffering from systemic hypotension or in those
that required very high doses of diuretics to alleviate
congestion and are significantly dehydrated. In these
cases, ACEI administration might be delayed until the
patient’s hydration status and renal bloodwork are
reevaluated. They are then prescribed as part of the
chronic CHF therapy with close monitoring of renal
bloodwork and systemic blood pressure.
Additional Therapies for Acute CHF
Oxygen supplementation is provided in cases of respiratory compromise and hypoxemia. Inspired O2 concentration is typically increased to 40% through the use
of oxygen cages or, in the case of large dogs, nasal insufflation. Manual removal of pleural, pericardial, or
abdominal fluid should be performed if these effusions
are a cause of respiratory compromise. In patients that
are extremely anxious, mild sedation with morphine
(0.1–1.0 mg/kg SC/IM in dogs), acepromazine (0.1–
0.2 mg/kg SC/IM in dogs) or butorphanol (0.1–0.3 mg/
kg IM/IV in dogs or cats) can be considered. Care must
be taken to avoid oversedation as further compromise
of respiratory function can result. Bronchodilators
such as aminophylline or theophylline or cough suppressants such as hydrocodone are rarely needed in
cases of acute CHF.

­Further Reading
Atkins C, Bonagura J, Ettinger S, et al. Guidelines for the
diagnosis and treatment of canine chronic valvular heart
disease. J Vet Intern Med 2009; 23: 1142–50.
Boswood A, Haggstrom J, Gordon SG, et al. Effect of
pimobendan in dogs with preclinical myxomatous mitral
valve disease and cardiomegaly: the EPIC study – a
randomized clinical trial. J Vet Intern Med 2016; 30:
1765–79.
Ferasin L, Defrancesco T. Management of acute heart
failure in cats. J Vet Cardiol 2015; 17(Suppl 1): S173–89.

Haggstrom J, Boswood A, O’Grady M, et al. Effect of
pimobendan or benazepril hydrochloride on survival
times in dogs with congestive heart failure caused by
naturally occurring myxomatous mitral valve disease:
the QUEST study. J Vet Intern Med 2008; 22: 1124–35.
Luis Fuentes V. Treatment of congestive heart failure. In:
Luis Fuentes V, Johnson LR, Dennis S, eds. BSAVA
Manual of Canine and Feline Cardiorespiratory
Medicine. Gloucester, UK: British Small Animal
Veterinary Association, 2010, pp. 153–9.

197

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

199

20
Ventricular Arrhythmias
Amara H. Estrada, DVM, DACVIM (Cardiology)1 and Romain Pariaut, DVM, DACVIM (Cardiology),
DECVIM-CA (Cardiology)2
1
2

Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA
Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Ventricular arrhythmias (VA) such as single ventricular
premature depolarizations (contractions) (VPCs) can be
seen in normal animals in low numbers (less than 50 per
24‐hour period on a Holter monitor). They are very commonly seen in association with noncardiac disease, possibly due to myocardial ischemia, electrolyte abnormalities
or other factors surrounding the underlying disease. For
example, VPCs can be seen following vehicular trauma
(traumatic myocarditis), surgery, gastric dilation and volvulus, splenic disease, immune‐mediated hemolytic anemia and/or polycythemia, hypoxia, the use of anesthetic
agents (especially thiobarbiturates), pancreatitis, prostatitis, and neurologic disease. Thus, ventricular arrhythmias are relatively common to any number of different
systemic diseases. They may also be associated with
­primary underlying myocardial diseases such as dilated
cardiomyopathy in Doberman pinschers and arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy in boxers. They
can also be idiopathic in origin, meaning that no underlying systemic or cardiac disorder can be identified.
The most important clinical considerations with VPCs
are whether there is an underlying systemic or cardiac
cause of the VPCs and whether there is the need to treat
the VA. Decisions to treat VA should be based on hemodynamic consequences and the risk of degeneration of the VA
into an unstable rhythm such as ventricular fibrillation.
Single VPCs do not cause clinical signs as they are transient
and hemodynamically not significant. What is more
important is attempting to identify malignant characteristics of VPCs or patient groups that might be more susceptible to the development of an unstable rhythm that can
lead to sudden death. However, our ability to predict the
likelihood of sudden death associated with VPCs is poor. It

appears that in dogs and cats with VPCs and no underlying
heart disease, the number of VPCs is not predictive of the
risk of sudden death, which in this setting is typically low.
When there is underlying myocardial disease, the presence
of VPCs may indicate an increased risk of sudden death or
simply be a marker for the severity of the disease (for example, Doberman pinschers with dilated cardiomyopathy or
cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy). The presence of
VPCs in boxers with familial ventricular arrhythmias may
indicate an increased risk of sudden death.

­Signalment
Certain breeds with specific underlying cardiac diseases are
predisposed to malignant VA. Doberman pinschers with
dilated cardiomyopathy, boxers with arrhythmogenic right
ventricular cardiomyopathy, dogs with severe subaortic stenosis, young German shepherds with i­nherited ventricular
arrhythmias, dogs and cats with myocarditis and cats with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy represent situations where a
VA may signal increased risk for clinical signs or sudden
death. Other than the specific patient groups and underlying type of cardiac diseases mentioned above, there is no
other specific age, breed or sex predilection

­History and Clinical Signs
Dogs with VA secondary to systemic disease often do not
need the VA to be treated as the arrhythmia tends to be
self‐limiting if the underlying disease is addressed. For
example, a patient with VPCs and gastric dilation‐volvulus does not necessarily require antiarrhythmic therapy
for the VPCs, and instead needs relief of the dilation and
volvulus. This will in turn lead to resolution of the

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

200

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

arrhythmias, usually within 72 hours. Dogs with single
VPCs and underlying myocardial disease may or may not
need to be treated. More often, the presence of VPCs in
a patient with underlying heart disease indicates the
need to further investigate the arrhythmia (e.g., with
24‐hour ambulatory ECG [Holter] analysis) to determine
if more serious arrhythmias are occurring at other times
(Figure 20.1).
An example would be a Doberman pinscher with
dilated cardiomyopathy, who is already receiving therapy
but is found to have a newly discovered ventricular
arrhythmia. Immediate introduction of antiarrhythmic
therapy in this case may or may not be appropriate and
further evaluation with Holter monitoring would be recommended. Patients with VPCs do not show clinical
signs associated with only single premature beats. Even
with ventricular tachycardia, if the rate of the ventricular
is below 200–220 bpm, no clinical signs may be present.
The rate at which a ventricular tachycardia will cause
clinical signs will depend on many underlying factors
such as rate, underlying myocardial function, species,
and/or breed. Typically, however, when the rate of the
ventricular tachycardia is rapid (greater than 250 bpm),
signs of poor cardiac output will be present and syncope
may occur. Clinical signs will also be influenced by the
degree of underlying heart disease. Thus, the patient
with systolic dysfunction and ventricular arrhythmias
may exhibit clinical signs at a slower ventricular rate than
a patient without underlying myocardial disease and
ventricular tachycardia. Patients with more serious ventricular arrhythmias (ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation) and compromised/diminished myocardial
function may have a history of exercise intolerance,
shortness of breath, syncope or near syncope.

­Diagnosis
Two basic ECG characteristics of VPCs are that they
are premature in their timing (earlier than the sinus
beat) and they are wide and bizarre in morphology
compared to the sinus beat (Figures 20.2 and 20.3).
They appear wide and bizarre because VPCs originate
below the bundle of His and therefore cannot take
advantage of the specialized conduction system. They
therefore must depolarize the ventricles muscle cell to
muscle cell. This is relatively slow and produces a wide
and bizarre complex. QRS complexes can be positive or
negative in lead II, depending on the site of origin of the
VPC, and they have no relationship to the P‐waves.
Because depolarization occurs in an abnormal fashion,
repolarization is also abnormal and there is typically a
large and bizarre T‐wave which is opposite in polarity
to the VPC.

Ventricular premature depolarizations can occur in
patterns such as ventricular bigeminy (every other beat is
a VPC) and ventricular trigeminy (every third beat is a
VPC). This type of pattern, however, does not correlate
with severity or potential malignancy of a ventricular
rhythm. More important characteristics of potentially
dangerous ventricular arrhythmias include the rate of
firing of a VPC and the morphology of a ventricular
rhythm. If a VPC fires rapidly and occurs close to the
peak of the preceding T‐wave (so‐called R‐on‐T phenomenon), depolarization during this time may predispose to ventricular fibrillation (Figure 20.4).
Ventricular rhythms can be monomorphic (one
morphology) or polymorphic (several different mor­
phologies), with the polymorphism generally considered
to imply multiple origins or pathways for the arrhythmia,
thus increasing the potential for degeneration into a
malignant arrhythmia (Figure 20.5).
A ventricular couplet is two consecutive VPCs, a
­ventricular triplet is three consecutive VPCs, and ventricular tachycardia is >3 consecutive VPCs occurring at
a rate of >170–180 bpm. Ventricular tachycardia is
­considered sustained if it lasts >30 seconds and nonsustained if it lasts <30 seconds. A ventricular rhythm that is
less than approximately 140–170 bpm is not truly a
­tachycardia and is therefore best termed an accelerated
idioventricular rhythm (sometimes referred to as slow
ventricular tachycardia) (Figure 20.6).
Accelerated idioventricular rhythms are seen commonly in hospitalized patients in association with noncardiac diseases as mentioned in the beginning of the chapter.
These are often benign, the rate is too slow to cause ­clinical
signs and they often do not require therapy.

­Therapy
Prior to discussing specific therapeutic interventions, it is
important to review the main objectives of treating a ventricular arrhythmia: (1) to improve hemodynamics in order
to alleviate clinical signs and (2) to prevent sudden death.
When making the decision to treat or not, it is important to attempt to determine whether the arrhythmia is
causing hemodynamic compromise. A healthy heart can
tolerate many types of VA whereas a diseased heart
­cannot. Therefore, the presence or absence of underlying
cardiac disease is an important factor in this decision.
Evaluation of the peripheral pulse quality, mucous membrane color, attitude of the patient, and arterial blood
pressure can be helpful in determining whether hemodynamics are being affected. Sustained ventricular tachycardia at a high rate is more likely to cause hemodynamic
compromise than an idioventricular rhythm or a ventricular tachycardia firing at slower rates.

VetBooks.ir

20 Ventricular Arrhythmias

(a)

(b)

Figure 20.1 ECG and Holter tracings from a boxer dog acquired during a screening clinic for arrhythmogenic right ventricular
cardiomyopathy. (a) Six‐lead ECG showing a normal sinus rhythm present with a heart rate of approximately 136 bpm. (Paper speed
50 mm/s, sensitivity 10 mm/mV.) (b) A full screen shot from a 24‐hour Holter worn by the same dog. There is ventricular bigeminy present
throughout the ECG on this screen (VAs in red). (Paper speed 50 mm/s, sensitivity 10 mm/mV.)

201

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

VetBooks.ir

202

Figure 20.2 Lead II ECG from a dog with single monomorphic ventricular premature contractions (arrows). (Paper speed 50 mm/s,
sensitivity 5 mm/mV.)

Figure 20.3 Lead II ECG from a cat with a monomorphic ventricular tachycardia at a rate of approximately 375 bpm. (Paper speed
50 mm/s, sensitivity 10 mm/mV.)
Figure 20.4 ECG strip from a dog in
ventricular fibrillation. Ventricular
fibrillation on the left portion of the
tracing isT terminated with an external
biphasic defibrillation shock, which
restores a spontaneous rhythm. Note that
the morphology of the two beats after
defibrillation is altered (aberrant
conduction) as a result of myocardial
stunning from the electrical shock.

Figure 20.5 Three‐lead ECG from a Doberman pinscher with polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. Note the abrupt changes in
morphology of the ventricular complexes throughout the ECG (arrows). (Paper speed 50 mm/s, sensitivity 10 mm/mV.)

The second important consideration for decisions
regarding the initiation of antiarrhythmic or other
­therapeutic intervention for a ventricular arrhythmia is
whether the arrhythmia is likely to degenerate into

­ventricular fibrillation, which will cause sudden death.
Again, the presence or absence of underlying cardiac disease is important since a healthy heart can tolerate more
than a diseased heart. It is believed that the faster the

VetBooks.ir

20 Ventricular Arrhythmias

Figure 20.6 Six‐lead ECG from a dog with an accelerated idioventricular rhythm. Note that the initial seven beats are wide and bizarre in
morphology as typical for ventricular ectopy, but the rate is slow (approximately 125 bpm). When the idioventricular rhythm breaks
spontaneously, normal sinus beats are then seen (arrows) at a rate of approximately 90 bpm. (Paper speed 50 mm/s, sensitivity 5 mm/mV.)

ventricular tachycardia, the more likely a beat will fall
within the vulnerable period and induce ventricular
fibrillation (R‐on‐T phenomenon). Polymorphic ventricular tachycardia is also thought to be more dangerous
than monomorphic ventricular tachycardia. As mentioned above, certain patient groups appear to have an
increased risk of sudden death associated with ventricular tachycardia.
Acute Therapy of Ventricular Tachycardia
Initial therapy for dogs or cats with ventricular tachycardia that is thought to be malignant and directly related to
the current clinical signs is an IV bolus of lidocaine
(see Table 20.1 for doses).
Lidocaine should be used with caution in cats, as they
are very sensitive to its CNS effects. In both cats and
dogs, it is important to determine plasma or serum
potassium concentration as lidocaine will be less effective when hypokalemia is present. Thus, if lidocaine fails
to convert a ventricular rhythm, assessment of a patient’s
electrolyte values, specifically potassium, is required.
Additionally, hyperkalemia can also be a cause of sinoventricular rhythms which can mimic the appearance of
ventricular tachycardia in a cat.
Fortunately, most ventricular arrhythmias are responsive to therapy with lidocaine. However, some severe
ventricular arrhythmias may not terminate following
lidocaine injection, and in this situation, IV procainamide would be the next antiarrhythmic to administer.

Table 20.1 Typical medication doses
Drug name

Dosage

Amiodarone

Oral: 10–20 mg/kg PO q24h for 7–10 days
then reduce to 3–15 mg/kg PO q24–48 h
thereafter (D)

Atenolol

Oral: 0.2–1 mg/kg q12–24h (D), 6.25–12.5 mg
q12–24h (C)

Esmolol

IV bolus: 0.2–0.5 mg/kg over 1 min, repeat
q5min (D, C)

Lidocaine

IV bolus: 2 mg/kg over 30 s; maximum three
boluses (D)
0.25–0.5 mg/kg (C)
CRI 25–80 μg/kg/min (D)

Mexiletine

Oral: 4–8 mg/kg PO q8h (D)

Procainamide

IV bolus: 5–15 mg/kg over 1 min (D)
1–2 mg/kg (C)
CRI 20–50 μg/kg/min (D)

Sotalol

Oral: 1–3 mg/kg q12h (D, C)

C, cat; D, dog; IV, intravenous; CRI, constant rate infusion; PO, by
mouth (per os).

Intravenous procainamide may result in hypotension and
should therefore be administered slowly. With refractory
ventricular arrhythmias, magnesium sulfate supplementation can also be considered. Magnesium has primary
antiarrhythmic properties similar to Class III agents, so
supplementation works well in combination with lidocaine or other Class I agents. Early administration may

203

VetBooks.ir

204

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

prevent worsening of ventricular arrhythmias and low
magnesium concentrations may result in hypokalemia
that is nonresponsive despite adequate supplementation.
Other alternatives, such as synchronized cardioversion,
esmolol or precordial thump, can be attempted if the
above therapies fail to improve hemodynamic stability.
Precordial thump for control of ventricular arrhythmias was previously recommended as an initial maneuver in the treatment of ventricular tachycardia (VT) or
ventricular fibrillation, but is now only considered for
patients with witnessed, monitored and unstable VT
resulting in cardiac arrest/asystole. A precordial thump
is a very carefully aimed blow with the fist to the chest
with the intent to interrupt a life‐threatening rhythm.
The thump is thought to produce an electrical depolarization of 2–5 joules, but is only effective if used
near the onset of ventricular fibrillation. The precordial thump for VT remains controversial as precordial
blows can trigger ventricular fibrillation (i.e., commotio cordis). It should only be used for asystole or ventricular fibrillation when a defibrillator is unavailable
for use.
Chronic Therapy of Ventricular Tachycardia
All chronic antiarrhythmic agents have the potential to
act as proarrhythmics, so their use should be monitored.
This is ideally done by obtaining a 24‐hour Holter
recording before and 8–15 days after initiation of antiarrhythmics. If worsening arrhythmias develop, then a
proarrhythmic effect should be considered as an underlying etiology. In addition, all antiarrhythmic agents have
significant toxicity profiles. In both dogs and cats, the
authors’ first choice for chronic ventricular arrhythmia
therapy is sotalol. Although not a pure beta‐blocker,
sotalol has significant beta‐blocking effects, and should
therefore be used with caution and slowly uptitrated in
dogs with significant ventricular systolic dysfunction,
such as those with dilated cardiomyopathy. In addition,

it should not be combined with other beta‐blockers. It is
the first choice for boxers with arrhythmogenic right
ventricular cardiomyopathy.
Amiodarone is a drug that appears to be very effective
for refractory arrhythmias but it has been reported to
have significant and severe side‐effects. The low end of
the dosage range should be used first and uptitrated only
if necessary. There are many side‐effects to the chronic
use of amiodarone. It may cause a hepatopathy, so liver
enzymes should be evaluated before starting and periodically while receiving amiodarone and any time anorexia develops. It may also cause neutropenia of unknown
clinical significance and neurologic signs, and/or ataxia,
especially at higher doses and with prolonged use.
Amiodarone can be combined with a beta‐blocker.
Additionally, it does not appear to have significant negative inotropic effects and is thus safe to use in patients
with ventricular dysfunction. The authors have not used
this drug in cats.
Mexiletine is another useful antiarrhythmic agent, but
has become increasingly more difficult to find for veterinary patients and has several times come off the market.
It is often used in combination with atenolol or sotalol
for refractory arrhythmias or as an initial antiarrhythmic
agent for dogs with systolic dysfunction. The authors
have not used mexiletine as an antiarrhythmic in cats.
Although antiarrhythmics are usually successful at
controlling clinical signs in animals with ventricular
arrhythmias, their ability to decrease the risk for sudden
death is uncertain. Recently, the use of implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICD) has been investigated in
dogs. These devices, which have similarities with pacemakers, are extensively used in people to terminate life‐
threatening episodes of ventricular tachycardia or
fibrillation with high‐energy electrical shocks. Accurate
detection of arrhythmias amenable to electrical therapy
is, however, still challenging in dogs. Advances in ICD
technology and programmability may help to expand
their use in veterinary medicine.

VetBooks.ir

205

21
Supraventricular Arrhythmias
Romain Pariaut, DVM, DACVIM (Cardiology), DECVIM-CA (Cardiology)1 and
Amara H. Estrada, DVM, DACVIM (Cardiology)2
1
2

Department of Clinical Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA

Arrhythmias are classified as supraventricular or ven­
tricular based upon the location of the cardiac tissues
responsible for their occurrence. Supraventricular ana­
tomic structures include the sinus and atrioventricular
(AV) nodes, the His bundle, the atrial myocardium, the
ostia of the coronary sinus, pulmonary veins and venae
cavae (Figure 21.1).
Arrhythmias can be further divided into bradyarrhyth­
mias (heart rate <60 bpm in dogs; <100 bpm in cats) or
tachyarrhythmias (heart rate typically >180–200 bpm in
dogs; >220–240 bpm in cats). Major bradyarrhythmias
include sinus bradycardia, sick sinus syndrome (sinus
node dysfunction), atrial standstill and atrioventricular
(AV) blocks. Among tachyarrhythmias, atrial fibrillation
(AF) is by far the most common. Other forms of
supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) are less commonly
encountered in clinical practice (Table 21.1).

­Sinus Bradycardia
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Sinus bradycardia (or exaggerated sinus arrhythmia) is
rarely a primary disorder and is usually benign in small
animal patients. It results from an underlying disease
responsible for excessive vagal tone, particularly gastro­
intestinal, respiratory, neurologic, and ocular diseases.
Drugs (digoxin, opioids, calcium channel blockers, beta‐
blockers), hypothermia, and hypothyroidism are other
extrinsic causes of sinus bradycardia. Though rare, sinus
bradycardia, when diagnosed in an animal with impaired
consciousness, should raise the suspicion of elevated
intracranial pressure leading to brainstem compression.
The clinical picture of this physiologic response, known
as the Cushing’s reflex, combines bradycardia, systemic

hypertension and an abnormal respiratory pattern,
­characterized by periods of apnea.
Signalment
There is no breed or age predisposition. These animals
are usually free of any underlying cardiac disease.
History and Clinical Signs
Most dogs and cats do not display clinical signs that can
solely be attributed to sinus bradycardia. However,
extreme cases of sinus bradycardia may cause lethargy
and collapse.
Diagnosis
On the surface ECG, P‐waves are accompanied by QRS
complexes and the QRS complexes are in direct associa­
tion with the preceding P‐wave, such that the PR interval
is relatively constant. The P‐waves are typically positive in
leads II, III, and aVF. When markedly elevated vagal tone
is the cause for the bradycardia in dogs, a wandering pace­
maker, which corresponds to a variation in the amplitude
of the P‐wave usually in relation to the respiratory cycle,
may be present. The QRS complexes are usually narrow
(duration <60 ms in dogs; 40 ms in cats) (Figure 21.2).
Therapy
Treatment is usually not necessary. However, vagally
induced bradyarrhythmias respond to the administra­
tion of parasympatholytic medications. An increase in
heart rate following the intravenous administration of
atropine or glycopyrrolate confirms the contribution of
excessive vagal tone to the bradycardia. Transient AV
block frequently occurs following parenteral administra­
tion of atropine, most likely because of an initial blockade

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

206

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

Figure 21.1 Supraventricular structures
include the sinus node, the atrial
myocardium, the atrioventricular node (AV
node), the His bundle and the ostia of the
veins entering the atria. Supraventricular
rhythms are characterized by a narrow
QRS complex, while ventricular rhythms
are characterized by a wide and “bizarre”
QRS complex.

Supraventricular
Sinus node

AV node

Ventricular

Table 21.1 Differential diagnosis of supraventricular arrhythmias
Rate (beats/min)

P‐waves (II,III,aVF)

QRS complexes

P:QRS relationship

Regularity

Sinus bradycardia

<60 (D)
<100 (C)

Positive
Wandering
pacemaker

Narrow

P before QRS
1:1

Regular, or regularly
irregular (sinus arrhythmia)

Sick sinus
syndrome

Variable pauses
>3 s

Positive
Negative
Occasionally absent

Narrow
Wide (VEB)

P before QRS

Atrial standstill

20–60 (D)

Absent

Wide(VEB)

None

Regular

First‐degree AV
block

WNL

Positive
Wandering
pacemaker

Narrow

P before QRS
1:1

Regular, or regularly
irregular (sinus arrhythmia

Second‐degree
AV block

WNL pauses

Positive

Narrow
Wide(BBB)

P before QRS
Isolated P

Irregular

Third‐degree AV
block

20–60 (D)
80–140 (C)

Positive

Narrow (JEB)
Wide (VEB)

None

Regular

Atrial fibrillation

100–120 Lone AF
150–180 No CHF
>180 CHF

Absent
Fibrillation waves

Narrow
Rarely
wide(BBB)

None

Irregular

Focal atrial
tachycardia

210–230

Positive
Negative

Narrow
Rarely
wide(BBB)

P before QRS

Regular or irregular

Atrial flutter

180–350

Absent
Flutter waves

Narrow
Rarely
wide(BBB)

None

regular or irregular

Junctional
tachycardia

120–200

Negative

Narrow
Rarely
wide(BBB)

P during or after
QRS

Regular

AV reciprocating
tachycardia

190–300

Negative

Narrow
Rarely
wide(BBB)

P after QRS

Regular

Irregular

AF, atrial fibrillation; AV, atrioventricular; BBB, bundle branch block; C, cat; CHF, congestive heart failure; D, dog; JEB, junctional escape beat;
VEB, ventricular escape beat.

VetBooks.ir

21 Supraventricular Arrhythmias

Figure 21.2 ECG of a healthy dog illustrating respiratory sinus arrhythmia with a wandering pacemaker (arrows).

of presynaptic muscarinic receptors that normally inhibit
acetylcholine release. Once postsynaptic muscarinic
blockade is established, this transient bradycardia
resolves. The bradycardia subsides sooner after intrave­
nous administration, due to a more intense chronotropic
response than seen with subcutaneous and intramuscu­
lar injections. Side‐effects associated with repeated
injections of parasympatholytic agents, such as mydria­
sis, dry mouth, constipation, urinary retention, and on
occasion neurologic signs, limit their chronic use.
Prognosis
In most cases, resolution of the extrinsic cause will be
accompanied by a return to normal heart rate.

­Sick Sinus Syndrome (Sinus Node
Dysfunction)
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Sick sinus syndrome is a disease of the tissues of the con­
duction system characterized by periods of normal sinus
rhythm or sinus bradycardia, interspersed with long
periods of sinus arrest and a failure of the AV and ven­
tricular pacemakers to initiate an escape rhythm. Lack of
cardiac output resulting from a pause of approximately
6–8 seconds can lead to syncope. Histopathologic exam­
ination of the sinus node reveals degenerative changes
characterized by the extensive replacement of nodal cells
by fibrous and fibro‐fatty tissue.
Epidemiology
Sick sinus syndrome is the indication for 15–25% of per­
manent pacemaker implantation in dogs. It has not been
reported in cats.
Signalment
It affects older dogs with a higher prevalence in miniature
schnauzers. It is also reported in pugs, cocker spaniels,

dachshunds, West Highland white terriers, and other
small terrier breeds. Females are at higher risk of devel­
oping sick sinus syndrome than male dogs.
History and Clinical Signs
Initially, dogs show signs of confusion, stumbling or
episodic weakness, during which they become recum­
bent with no alteration of consciousness. These signs
then progress to syncope, sometimes triggered by exer­
cise or excitement. However, in the early stages of the
disease, signs may be absent or limited to a decrease in
activity level.
Diagnosis
Physical Examination

Physical examination frequently reveals periods of brad­
ycardia, asystole or short runs of tachycardia followed by
long pauses (Figure 21.3).
The presence of an apical systolic left‐sided murmur
on auscultation is common as these dogs are also predis­
posed to degenerative mitral valve disease.
Electrocardiography

Sinus arrest and sinus block cannot be differentiated,
and are identified as a prolonged pause without a P‐wave
on the ECG. A variant of the disease, sometimes called
bradycardia‐tachycardia syndrome, is characterized by
periods of paroxysmal SVT followed by a period of asys­
tole, caused by the temporary failure of the sinus rhythm
to resume when the tachycardia abruptly terminates.
A partial or adequate increase in heart rate in response
to atropine is common in these dogs and does not rule
out the presence of sick sinus syndrome, particularly
when there are ECG findings compatible with the syn­
drome in the face of syncopal episodes. However, the use
of opioids and other sedatives frequently results in a
worsening of the periods of asystole. It is not uncommon
that dogs which were asymptomatic while awake become
hemodynamically unstable after sedation or while under
anesthesia.

207

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

VetBooks.ir

208

Figure 21.3 Six‐lead ECG of a dog with sick sinus syndrome. After the first two sinus complexes, there is an unexpected 2.3‐second pause
that is terminated by a ventricular escape beat (arrow). Note that the propagation to the ventricles of a P‐wave (*) is prevented by the
occurrence of the escape beat.

Therapy
Medical Therapy

Two drugs are occasionally successful at temporarily
increasing heart rate and alleviating clinical signs in dogs
with sick sinus syndrome. Terbutaline is a selective
beta‐2‐agonist commonly used as a bronchodilator.
Aminophylline or theophylline is a phosphodiesterase
inhibitor and bronchodilator with mild chronotropic
effects. See Table 21.2 for drug dosages.
Pacemaker Therapy
Long‐term management of sick sinus syndrome requires
permanent pacemaker implantation. The goal of pace­
maker therapy is to stimulate a heartbeat when necessary
in order to maintain the heart rate within a predeter­
mined range that optimizes cardiac output. The basic
function of a pacemaker is to deliver an electric current
to the heart that triggers contraction. Modern pacemak­
ers also sense the intrinsic cardiac electrical activity, only
delivering an impulse if the native conduction system
fails to depolarize (Figure 21.4).
For optimal cardiac performance, the pacing system
should mimic normal physiology as closely as possible.

Therefore, atrial pacing when AV nodal function is unaf­
fected by disease may be preferred in order to maintain
synchrony between atrial and ventricular activity.
However, the simplest and most commonly used type of
pacing in veterinary patients involves a single lead placed
in the right ventricle via the jugular vein.
Prognosis
Sudden death is rare in dogs with sick sinus syndrome.
However, long‐term quality of life is typically diminished
with medical therapy alone. Conversely, permanent
transvenous pacemaker implantation alleviates clinical
signs in the majority of dogs with sick sinus syndrome.

­Persistent Atrial Standstill
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Persistent atrial standstill, or “silent atrium,” corresponds
to the absence of atrial tissue depolarization and
contraction, despite normal sinus nodal activity.
­
Histologically, extensive fibrosis extends throughout the
atria. It may occur secondary to the progression of

VetBooks.ir

21 Supraventricular Arrhythmias

Table 21.2 Drug dosages and indications
Drug name

Dosage

Indications

Atropine

SC, IM, IV: 0.02–0.04 mg/kg (D, C)

Sinus bradycardia
Sick sinus syndrome,
First‐ and second‐degree AV block

Glycopyrrolate

SC, IM, IV: 0.005–0.01 mg/kg (D, C)

Sinus bradycardia
Sick sinus syndrome,
First‐ and second‐degree AV block

Terbutaline

Oral: 0.2 mg/kg q8–12h (D)
0.625 mg q8–12h (C)
IV: 0.01 mg/kg IV (D, C)

Sinus bradycardia
Sick sinus syndrome

Isoproterenol

CRI: 0.04–0.09 μg/kg/min, to effect (D,C)

Second‐ and third‐degree AV block

Aminophylline/
Theophylline

Oral: 10 mg/kg q12h (extended release) (D, C)
IV: 10 mg/kg (D)

Sick sinus syndrome

Digoxin

Oral: 0.005 mg/kg q12h (D)

AF (rate control)

Diltiazem

IV bolus: 0.1–0.4 mg/kg over 5 min (D, C)
CRI: 0.05–0.15 mg/kg/h (D, C)
Oral: 1–2 mg/kg q8h (D, C)
3 mg/kg q12h (extended release) (D)
15–30 mg q12–24h (extended release) (C)

SVT (rate control or conversion)
AF (rate control)

Atenolol

Oral: 0.2–1 mg/kg q12‐24h (D)
6.25–12.5 mg q12–24h (C)

SVT (rate control or conversion)
AF (rate control)

Esmolol

IV bolus: 0.2–0.5 mg/kg over 1 min, repeat q5min (D, C)

SVT conversion

Procainamide

IV bolus: 5–15 mg/kg over 1 min (D)
1–2 mg/kg (C)
CRI: 20–50 μg/kg/min (D)

SVT conversion

Lidocaine

IV bolus: 2 mg/kg over 30 s. Maximum 3 boluses (D)
0.25–0.5 mg/kg (C)

SVT conversion
Vagally mediated AF conversion

Sotalol

Oral: 1–3 mg/kg q12h (D, C)

SVT conversion
SR maintenance

AF, atrial fibrillation; AV, atrioventricular; C, cat; CRI, constant rate infusion; D, dog; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; SC, subcutaneous;
SR, sinus rhythm; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia.

­primary cardiac disease, myocarditis, or as a manifesta­
tion of a neuromuscular disorder. However, the etiology
often remains unknown.
Hyperkalemia is described as a cause for transient
atrial standstill. Other possibilities include quinidine or
digoxin toxicity, myocardial infarction, hypoxia, and
hypothermia.
In the presence of persistent atrial standstill, the combi­
nation of chronic bradycardia, lack of atrial contribution
to ventricular filling and decreased atrial natriuretic pep­
tide production results in low cardiac output, increased
circulating blood volume, and ultimately heart failure.
Epidemiology
It is a rare arrhythmia in dogs, and there are only a few
documented cases in cats.

Signalment
Atrial standstill has been identified in various dog
breeds, with a possible higher prevalence in English
springer spaniels. It usually affects young adults, but
can be diagnosed as early as 4–6 months of age. Most
cats diagnosed with atrial standstill have echocardio­
graphic changes consistent with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy.
History and Clinical Signs
Most animals show signs of low cardiac output, includ­
ing profound lethargy and syncope, in addition to
­evidence of left‐ or right‐sided congestive heart failure.
In rare cases of muscular dystrophies, progressive skele­
tal muscle wasting may occur.

209

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

Diagnosis

VetBooks.ir

210

Electrocardiography

The ECG of persistent atrial standstill is characterized
by a lack of P‐waves with a regular ventricular or AV
nodal escape rhythm, at a rate of 20–60 bpm in dogs. In
cases of transient atrial standstill from hyperkalemia, a
narrowing of the T‐wave and an increase in its ampli­
tude occur when plasma potassium concentration
increases above 5.5–6 mmol/L. As potassium concen­
tration continues to rise, it leads to bradycardia associ­
ated with reduced P‐wave amplitude and a widening
of the QRS complexes. The P‐waves then disappear,
mimicking the ECG of persistent atrial standstill
(Figure 21.5). Another term used to describe this
rhythm disturbance associated with hyperkalemia is
sinoventricular rhythm.
Echocardiography
Figure 21.4 Permanent transvenous pacemaker in a dog with
third‐degree atrioventricular block. The upper panel is a lateral
radiographic view of the thorax showing a transvenous lead
implanted in the right ventricular apex and connected to a
pacemaker generator secured subcutaneously in the region of the
neck. The ECG tracing in the lower panel shows regular right
ventricular pacing (arrows) and occasional P‐waves that are
dissociated from the ventricular complexes. Note that the QRS
complexes are wide and “bizarre” and preceded by a pacing spike.

On echocardiogram, mild to severe atrial dilation is
­present with no evidence of atrial contraction. Some
degree of ventricular dilation is usually visible.
Therapy
Treatment relies on permanent transvenous ventricular
pacemaker implantation.
K+ 5.6 mmol/L

K+ 7 mmol/L

II

K+ 9 mmol/L

BURDICK

007868

Figure 21.5 ECG strips of a dog with hyperkalemia. As serum potassium increases (top to bottom panel), heart rate decreases, QRS
complexes widen, T‐waves become tall and peaked, and P‐wave amplitude decreases.

VetBooks.ir

21 Supraventricular Arrhythmias

Prognosis
Myocardial damage usually progresses, extending to
the ventricles. Most animals succumb within 12–18
months after initial diagnosis, despite pacemaker
implantation.

Syncopal episodes are rarely witnessed in cats with AV
block and dyspnea is a more frequent chief complaint
by owners of cats presented with AV block, whether
­congestive heart failure is present or not.
Diagnosis

­Atrioventricular Block
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Causes of AV block include excessive vagal tone, AV
node fibrosis, inflammation or infiltration, and poten­
tially drug toxicity (calcium channel blockers, beta‐
blockers, or digoxin). Age‐related fibrodegenerative
changes in the AV node is the most common cause of AV
block in dogs.
Epidemiology
Atrioventricular block represents between 60% and 80%
of the indications for permanent pacemaker implanta­
tion in dogs. The prevalence of clinically significant AV
block is much lower in cats than dogs. When AV block
does occur in cats, it is typically associated with cardio­
myopathy. Fortunately, feline escape rhythms are
­typically faster than canine (80–120 bpm) and pacing
therapy is usually not required.
Signalment
Atrioventricular block is more common in geriatric pets.
Most dogs are above 10 years of age at the time of diag­
nosis. Labradors, cocker spaniels, West Highland white
terriers, beagles, German shepherds, springer spaniels,
Cavalier King Charles spaniels, and dachshunds are
overrepresented. Cats with high‐degree second‐degree
and complete AV block are typically older than 10 years
of age. There is no evidence of breed or sex predisposi­
tion in this species.
History and Clinical Signs
The hemodynamic effect of AV block depends on the
rate of ventricular contraction. However, one‐third of
cats, and occasionally dogs, with advanced AV block may
show no apparent signs, and bradycardia is detected on
physical examination. More commonly, animals show
signs of anorexia, lethargy, exercise intolerance, disori­
entation, episodic weakness, and syncopal episodes.
Some animals develop right‐sided congestive heart
­failure and, less commonly, left‐sided congestive heart
failure if the bradycardia is left untreated.

Electrocardiography

There are three types of AV block. With first‐degree
AV block, all the atrial impulses are conducted to
the ventricles, but the PR interval is prolonged on the
ECG (PR >130 ms in dogs, >90 ms in cats). Second‐
degree AV block is diagnosed when some P‐waves are
not followed by a QRS complex on the surface ECG.
Second‐degree AV block is said to be high grade when
the number of atrial impulses that fail to be conducted
(P‐waves not followed by a QRS complex) to the ven­
tricles are more than the number of impulses that are
conducted (P‐waves followed by a QRS complex).
Third‐degree or complete AV block is characterized
by an absence of conducted P‐waves to the ventricles.
The ECG displays independent atrial and ventricular
activities (Figure 21.6).
Cardiac output is dramatically reduced. In response,
the atrial rate, which is under adrenergic tone, is ele­
vated. Electrical activation of the ventricles is dependent
on an escape rhythm beyond the site of block. In dogs,
the QRS complexes are generally wide and bizarre at
rates around 20–60 bpm. In cats, the escape rhythm is
usually seen as narrow QRS complexes, indicating their
origin in the area of the His bundle, and it occurs at a rate
of 80–140 bpm.
Finally, the ventricular rate is regular, unless ventricu­
lar premature beats originating from ischemic areas of
myocardium are present.
Echocardiography

An echocardiogram is indicated to identify concomi­
tant structural cardiac disease, which is frequent in
cats with complete AV block. It is also essential to
identify cardiac neoplasia that can infiltrate and dis­
rupt the AV nodal tissue, to assess systolic function in
the presence of myocarditis, and to determine the
degree of volume overload secondary to chronic
bradycardia.
Other Methods

Serum cardiac troponin I can be used to assess the degree
of myocardial damage and raise a suspicion of myocardi­
tis. Although a mild elevation of plasma cardiac troponin
I level is common in dogs with complete AV block,
marked increases suggest myocarditis as the cause for
the AV block.

211

VetBooks.ir

212

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

(a)
II

(b)
II

(c)

Figure 21.6 ECG strips of dogs with atrioventricular block. (a) First‐degree atrioventricular block: there is a prolongation of the PR interval
(180 ms, recording speed at 50 mm/s) and all the P‐waves are associated with a QRS complex. (b) Second‐degree atrioventricular block:
the third and sixth P‐waves (arrows) are not followed by a QRS complex, indicating an intermittent failure of the impulse to propagate
to the ventricles. (c) Third‐degree atrioventricular block: there is complete dissociation between the P‐waves and the QRS complexes.
The ventricles are activated by an escape rhythm at a rate of 37 bpm (recording speed at 50 mm/s).

Therapy
Medical Therapy

Sympathomimetic chronotropes increase heart rate by
beta‐adrenergic stimulation. Agents with beta‐2 effects
cause systemic vasodilation, whereas drugs with associ­
ated alpha stimulation cause vasoconstriction. Dopamine
(5–10 μg/kg/min IV) and dobutamine (2–10 μg/kg/min
IV) may contribute to an increase in heart rate and
­systolic function. They are usually administered as a con­
tinuous rate infusion and the dose is increased to effect.
They are particularly indicated in the management of
beta‐blocker overdose. Isoproterenol, a pure beta‐ago­
nist, improves conduction in the AV node and the His–
Purkinje system, which may result in the partial or
complete resolution of AV block. It may also increase the
rate of a ventricular escape rhythm in complete AV block,
but usually with limited success. It is administered as a
continuous rate infusion and its dose adjusted to effect.
However, it causes a significant decrease in diastolic
blood pressure via beta‐2 stimulation. Finally, respiratory
and metabolic acidosis decrease its effectiveness.

Most dogs will usually die of noncardiac‐related causes,
unless concurrent progressive degenerative valvular dis­
ease or cardiomyopathy is present.
Pacemaker implantation may not be required in the vast
majority of cats with complete AV block. Indeed, these ani­
mals have a median survival greater than one year without
pacemaker therapy. Finally, the presence of underlying
structural heart disease or congestive heart failure at the
time of diagnosis may not significantly alter their prognosis.

­Atrial Fibrillation
Etiology/Pathophysiology

Permanent ventricular pacemaker implantation is the treat­
ment of choice for dogs and cats with clinical AV block.

Atrial fibrillation is characterized by uncoordinated
atrial activation from multiple simultaneous electrical
wavelets resulting in inadequate mechanical contraction
and an irregular ventricular response rate. Atrial dilation
is a risk factor for developing AF. However, it commonly
occurs in large‐breed dogs with only mild to moderate
atrial dilation, and it is rarely present in small‐breed
dogs with degenerative mitral valve disease despite
extreme atrial dilation. It is also rarely diagnosed in cats.
Fibrosis, inflammation, and autonomic imbalances are
other important contributors to the initiation of AF.

Prognosis

Epidemiology

In dogs, following permanent pacemaker implantation,
estimated survival at one year is approximately 85%.

In dogs, AF is one of the most common types of tachyar­
rhythmias that require treatment. Most dogs with AF

Pacemaker Therapy

VetBooks.ir

21 Supraventricular Arrhythmias

have underlying primary cardiac disease, in the form of
dilated cardiomyopathy or degenerative mitral valve dis­
ease. Less commonly, “lone atrial fibrillation” occurs in
giant‐breed dogs with structurally normal hearts. Atrial
fibrillation is rarely identified in cats but most cats with
AF have underlying structural cardiac disease with atrial
enlargement. Many of these cats also show signs of con­
gestive heart failure.
Signalment
The vast majority of dogs with AF are giant‐ and large‐
breed dogs. In the giant‐breed group, Irish wolfhounds,
mastiffs, Newfoundlands, rottweilers, and Great Danes
are overrepresented, with a male predisposition. Cats
with AF are usually older males.
History and Clinical Signs
Most dogs with “lone” atrial fibrillation are asymptomatic.
Conversely, some dogs with compensated cardiac disease
and AF show signs of lethargy, exercise intolerance, and
rarely anorexia, cough or syncope. When AF occurs in the
presence of congestive heart failure, generalized weak­
ness, dyspnea, cough, and abdominal distension from
ascites are usually present. Cats frequently show signs of
an underlying cardiac disease, including dyspnea and
arterial thromboembolism. However, AF can also be an
incidental finding on auscultation in this species.
Diagnosis
Physical Examination

On physical examination, AF is identified as a sustained
and irregularly irregular rhythm accompanied with pulse
deficits. A murmur may be ausculted, as severe underly­
ing cardiac disease is common in dogs with AF.
Electrocardiography

On the surface ECG, AF is an irregular tachyarrhythmia,
with usually narrow QRS complexes and no P‐waves that can
be replaced by an undulation of the baseline, or F‐waves. It is
also permanent, indicating that sinus rhythm never sponta­
neously resumes following initiation of AF. The average heart
rate is typically above 180–200 bpm (Figure 21.7).
The rate is much lower with “lone” AF, usually
approaching 100–120 bpm at rest. Although atrial fibril­
lation is a SVT, concurrent lesions of the ventricular con­
duction system (bundle branch block) may result in
widening of the QRS complexes that may resemble those
of ventricular tachycardia.
Ambulatory 24‐Hour Holter Recording

Determination of the average ventricular rate during AF
is critical information in deciding upon a treatment

strategy. Unfortunately, brief ECG recordings obtained
in an unfamiliar environment do not adequately reflect
the daily variations of heart rate. Heart rate is therefore
better assessed from a 24‐hour Holter recording. For
­reference, the average heart rate of healthy dogs varies
between 85 and 100 bpm. Conversely, it is approximately
120 bpm in dogs with “lone” AF, 155 bpm in dogs with
underlying cardiac and 200 bpm in dogs with congestive
heart failure.
Therapy
Treatment Strategy

A rate‐control strategy is usually applied to the treat­
ment of AF. This approach aims at slowing ventricular
rate in response to the rapid supraventricular impulses
which are bombarding the AV node. Control of the num­
ber of impulses, which are able to conduct through the
AV node, will help in alleviation of clinical signs and pre­
vention of further deterioration of ventricular function.
However, it does not terminate the arrhythmia.
Rate‐control is based on using drugs to decrease the
ability of the AV node to conduct impulses. The need for
pharmacologic control of the heart rate is determined
from the heart rate distribution obtained from a baseline
24‐hour Holter recording. The effect of rate‐control
drugs is then assessed on a follow‐up Holter two weeks
after treatment initiation. What constitutes adequate
rate control has not been precisely defined and may
depend on the animal’s underlying myocardial function.
Usually, an average heart rate of no greater than 120–
140 bpm is considered adequate to observe clinical
improvement. If the average heart rate is considered too
high, drug dosages are increased by small increments
with close monitoring of the animal’s clinical status, as
response to antiarrhythmics varies between patients. In
contrast, medical therapy is usually not needed in dogs
with “lone” AF. “Lone” AF can be successfully terminated
via DC electrical cardioversion. However, there does not
appear to be any benefit in converting the rhythm when
adequate/appropriate rate‐control therapy is effective.
Medical Therapy
Calcium Channel Blockers

Diltiazem is widely used for the management of AF. A
graded dose of diltiazem results in a decrease in ven­
tricular response rate, because of slower action potential
propagation in the AV node. Oral formulations include
an extended‐release form. When evaluated for long‐
term management of AF, a dose of 3–5 mg/kg q12h PO
of the extended‐release formulation usually achieves
satisfactory rate‐control. Better rate‐control, especially
during periods associated with high adrenergic tone,
can be obtained by adding digoxin to the treatment regi­
men. Calcium channel blockers decrease ventricular

213

VetBooks.ir

214

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease
I

(a)

II

III

aVR

aVL

aVF

Speed: 50 mm/sec

Limb: 5 mm/mV

Chest: 5.0 mm/mV

F 60~ 0.15–100 Hz

(b)
II

III

aVR

aVL

aVF

Figure 21.7 Six‐lead ECG of a dog with atrial fibrillation (speed: 50 mm/s). (a) Atrial fibrillation appears as an irregular and narrow QRS
complex tachycardia at a rate of 220 beats. Note that the eighty complex has a wide and “bizarre” morphology, suggesting it is a
ventricular premature contraction (VPC). (b) Following administration of rate‐control medications, atrial fibrillation is still present but the
heart rate has decreased to 140 bpm.

contractility and may cause hypotension when used in
animals with severely depressed cardiac function.
Beta‐Blockers

The range of indications and side‐effects for beta‐block­
ers is very similar to that of calcium channel blockers.
Beta‐1‐selective agents, such as atenolol, are preferred to
nonselective agents that can cause bronchospasm.

Prognosis
Long‐term prognosis is good for dogs with “lone” AF.
However, in some breeds, in particular Irish wolfhounds,
it may be considered an early sign of dilated cardiomyo­
pathy. In AF dogs with heart disease, median survival has
been reported to be 32 months. However, it was only five
months when congestive heart failure was present. In
cats, treatment targeted at AF is rarely required as their

VetBooks.ir

21 Supraventricular Arrhythmias

ventricular response rate usually approaches the heart
rate recorded in cats with sinus rhythm and heart failure.

flutter results from an electrical impulse circling rapidly
and continuously around a large area of myocardium.
Focal junctional tachycardia is caused by the rapid dis­
charge of cells in the area of the AV node. Finally, atrio­
ventricular reciprocating tachycardias result from the
presence of an accessory pathway, which is a small strand
of muscle tissue bridging the atria and ventricles through
the cardiac skeleton and forming an alternative route of
atrioventricular or ventriculoatrial electrical conduction
besides the atrioventricular node. When conduction is
also possible from atrium to ventricle, preexcitation may
be identified during periods of sinus rhythm as short PR
intervals and a widening of the initial portion of the QRS
complexes (Figure 21.8). This finding confirms the exist­
ence of an accessory pathway. During episodes of atrio­
ventricular reciprocating tachycardia, the impulse typically
descends along the atrioventricular node to the ventricles
and returns to the atrium using the accessory pathway.
Sustained tachyarrhythmias can lead to the develop­
ment of heart failure, a phenomenon known as tachycar­
diomyopathy. It is likely that a sustained rate above

­Other Forms of Supraventricular
Tachyarrhythmia
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Initiation of tachyarrhythmias requires a suitable sub­
strate and precipitating factors. Interstitial fibrosis,
inflammation, ischemia or atrial chamber dilation, com­
bined with adrenergic stimulation and electrolyte abnor­
malities promote the risk for tachyarrhythmia. It is
therefore expected that SVTs are commonly diagnosed
in pets with heart failure.
Supraventricular tachyarrhythmias encompass focal
atrial tachycardia, atrial flutter, focal junctional tachycar­
dia, and atrioventricular reciprocating tachycardia. Focal
atrial tachycardia is caused by the rapid and repeated acti­
vation of a small area of diseased atrial myocytes. Atrial
(a)

(b)
I

E 6.0~ 0.5 – 4.0 H:W

SA node
AP

II
AV node

III

aVR

aVL

aVF

Figure 21.8 Ventricular preexcitation. (a) When a dog has an accessory pathway (AP), the sinus impulse may conduct simultaneously
through the atrioventricular node and the abnormal muscle bundle. Ventricular activation is initiated without delay from the accessory
pathway, resulting in a short PR interval and widening of the QRS complex. (b) Six‐lead ECG of a dog with ventricular preexcitation.

215

VetBooks.ir

216

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

250 bpm can induce severe myocardial dysfunction
within 3–4 weeks in dogs.
Epidemiology
Supraventricular tachycardias other than AF are rare in
both dogs and cats.
Signalment
Large‐ and giant‐breed dogs, in addition to brachyce­
phalic breeds, are more commonly diagnosed with SVTs.
Tachyarrhythmias associated with an accessory pathway
have more frequently been reported in Labradors.
History and Clinical Signs
Signs of SVTs include weight loss, lethargy, exercise
intolerance, excessive panting, and dyspnea. However, it
is not uncommon for dogs to be perceived as being non­
clinical. Owners of dogs with SVTs may report “seeing”
their pet’s heart pounding in the chest during episodes of
tachycardia. Weakness and transient loss of conscious­
ness are less common with SVT. Additionally, SVTs may
only be recognized at the time of physical examination in
dogs with signs of congestive heart failure.
Diagnosis
Physical Examination

Cardiac auscultation is a useful diagnostic tool to calcu­
late heart rate, detect occasional ectopic beats, and dis­
tinguish between paroxysmal and sustained arrhythmias.
While paroxysmal SVTs are usually regular, SVTs may
also be irregular. Some dogs experiencing episodes of
paroxysmal SVT will be in sinus rhythm at the time of
presentation. Femoral pulses may be weaker during
bouts of tachycardia.
Electrocardiography

It is critical to differentiate supraventricular from ven­
tricular tachycardia. However, treatment can be initiated
without identifying the exact mechanism of an SVT.
The first step in the diagnosis of tachyarrhythmias is
recognizing that an uninterrupted and irregular (a varia­
tion >100 ms between RR intervals) tachycardia is
­typically AF. Once AF is ruled out, SVTs must be differ­
entiated from ventricular tachycardia by looking at the
morphology of the QRS complexes. Ventricular tachy­
cardias have wide QRS complexes (>0.06 s in dogs;
>0.04 s in cats) followed by a large T‐wave directed
opposite to the QRS complex, whereas the main charac­
teristic of SVTs is narrow QRS complexes, indicating
that electrical impulses, once they reach the ventricles,

propagate within specialized muscular bundles of the
His–Purkinje conduction system, similar to normal
sinus beats. However, on occasion, SVTs can display
wide QRS complexes if a bundle branch block is present.
In these challenging cases, the identification of P‐waves
associated with QRS complexes confirms the origin of
the arrhythmia above the His bundle. P‐waves can occur
before, during or after the QRS complexes. They can be
positive or negative. Oftentimes, P‐waves are buried
within the T‐waves. Although rarely effective, vagal
maneuvers can be done to slow AV conduction, reveal­
ing hidden P‐waves associated to QRS complexes.
It is important to consider that ventricular tachycar­
dias are much more frequent than SVTs. Following care­
ful examination of the ECG, if uncertainty persists about
the origin of a wide QRS complex tachycardia, it should
be first treated as if it were ventricular tachycardia.
Ambulatory 24‐Hour Holter Recording

The information collected from Holter recordings
includes the number of episodes and their duration, the
modes of arrhythmia onset and termination, and infor­
mation about the overall heart rate, especially when the
animal is in a familiar environment. Evaluation of heart
rate distribution over 24 hours in the light of an activity
log completed by the owner during the period of record­
ing is a source of valuable information on the circadian
pattern of the arrhythmia and on the contribution of adr­
energic tone to the initiation and rate of the arrhythmia.
Echocardiography

An echocardiogram is useful to assess for the presence of
structural cardiac disease and tachycardia‐induced
cardiomyopathy.
Therapy
Decision to Treat

Treatment is justified when SVTs cause clinical signs,
which are directly related to their rate and duration, as
well as ventricular performance. In the absence of obvi­
ous clinical signs, treatment should be considered if
tachycardia‐induced cardiomyopathy is suspected.
When SVTs are intermittent, relating the clinical signs to
the arrhythmia may be challenging. In that situation,
long‐term recording of the cardiac rhythm via ambula­
tory 24‐hour Holter recording, or preferably with a wear­
able or an implantable loop event recorder, is indicated.
A rate‐control or rhythm‐control strategy, which con­
sists of restoring sinus rhythm, can be applied to the
treatment of SVTs. Drug selection is based on the type of
arrhythmia, the risk of adverse reactions, and the degree
of cardiac dysfunction. Other factors to take into account
include decreased oral medication absorption, drug

VetBooks.ir

21 Supraventricular Arrhythmias

metabolism and elimination in the presence of ascites, as
well as decreased hepatic and renal blood flow that
accompany heart failure. Moreover, drug selection may
depend on the level of certainty regarding the nature of
the arrhythmia. Indeed, it may be challenging to deter­
mine the origin of wide‐complex tachycardias, which are
characteristic of ventricular tachyarrhythmias but on
occasion correspond to SVTs with aberrant intraven­
tricular conduction. For example, drugs used for rate‐
control management of SVTs, in particular calcium
channel blockers, may cause hemodynamic collapse if
given in the presence of rapid ventricular tachycardia
and would persist at a fast rate despite treatment. Besides
the drugs used for chronic management, paroxysmal
SVTs may require emergency intervention when they
cause hemodynamic instability.
Acute Management

Antiarrhythmic drug administration should always be pre­
ceded by attempts to identify and eliminate potential trig­
gers for the arrhythmia. This includes correcting electrolyte
disturbances, hypoxemia, hypovolemia, and acidosis.
Common drugs used for the management of SVTs
include calcium channel blockers (diltiazem), beta‐
blockers (esmolol), sodium channel blockers (procaina­
mide, lidocaine), and drugs that combine several
antiarrhythmic properties (sotalol).
Diltiazem

On occasion, diltiazem terminates SVTs if the arrhythmia
mechanism is dependent on the AV node. Diltiazem can
be administered as intravenous boluses and constant rate
infusion for acute management of tachyarrhythmias.
Esmolol

Esmolol is a short‐acting intravenous beta‐1‐selective
blocker that is rapidly metabolized by blood esterases. It
is used for rate‐control and termination of AV node‐
dependent SVTs. However, it may be less effective than
intravenous diltiazem.
Procainamide

Procainamide has been used for the management of
SVTs. It is also indicated for acute management of broad‐
complex tachycardias, when discrimination between
SVT and ventricular tachycardia is difficult, as it is also
very effective in terminating ventricular arrhythmias.
Unfortunately, it is no longer available in an oral formu­
lation and the IV formulation has limited availability
outside the United States.
Lidocaine

While lidocaine is extensively used as first‐line therapy
for acute termination of ventricular tachycardia, its use

for treatment of SVT has only been reported recently. It
has been shown to terminate episodes of SVTs in the
presence or absence of an accessory pathway. Lidocaine
has also been used successfully to terminate recent onset
of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation initiated by elevated
vagal tone in large‐breed dogs with normal cardiac func­
tion. One to two boluses of lidocaine restored sinus
rhythm within 30–90 seconds, while causing mild self‐
limited hypotension following the intravenous bolus.
Sotalol

Although availability of the IV formulation of sotalol is
limited, the oral formulation can be used for acute man­
agement of SVTs, as most of them are not immediately
life‐threatening. Sotalol has potassium channel and mild
beta‐blocking properties, which make it a good option to
terminate and prevent/decrease the recurrence of focal
atrial tachycardias, atrial flutter, and AV reciprocating
tachycardia. Conversion of those arrhythmias back to
sinus rhythm usually occurs 2–4 hours after oral admin­
istration of the drug.
Long‐Term Management

Termination of the arrhythmia and maintenance of sinus
rhythm is the preferred approach for the long‐term man­
agement of SVTs (rhythm‐control strategy). It is more
likely to succeed when limited structural cardiac changes
are present. However, rate‐control strategies used for the
management of atrial fibrillation can also safely be
applied to the control of most sustained SVTs.
Among various antiarrhythmic medications, sotalol
has proven to be the most effective rhythm‐control drug.
Conversion to sinus rhythm usually occurs just a few
hours after oral administration, but it can take up to a
few days to observe a response. Sotalol is also effective at
preventing arrhythmia recurrence. The negative ino­
tropic effect of sotalol is modest compared to other beta‐
blockers. Nonetheless, dogs with myocardial failure
should be closely monitored while receiving sotalol.
Atrioventricular reciprocating tachycardia usually
responds well to sotalol, which alters the electrophysio­
logic properties of all the cardiac structures necessary for
the maintenance of this arrhythmia, including the acces­
sory pathway, the atrial myocardium, the AV node, and
the ventricular myocardium. In dogs that fail to respond
to monotherapy, sotalol can be combined with mexile­
tine (5–7 mg/kg q8h) with better results.
Nonpharmacologic Treatment of Supraventricular
Arrhythmias

Synchronized DC cardioversion and radiofrequency
catheter ablation have been successfully used to treat
supraventricular arrhythmias. In particular, dogs with
AV reciprocating tachycardia show the best results with

217

VetBooks.ir

218

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

radiofrequency ablation. The technique consists in iden­
tifying the location of the accessory pathway, usually
around the tricuspid valve annulus, and delivering radi­
ofrequency energy to permanently damage the tissue
and block electrical conduction along the abnormal
muscle bundle. However, the necessary equipment is
available in only a few specialized veterinary centers.

Prognosis
Adequate rhythm or rate‐control prevents complica­
tions, such as tachycardia‐induced cardiomyopathy.
When the arrhythmia terminates following the adminis­
tration of antiarrhythmic medications, it is critical to
monitor with frequent 24‐hour Holter recordings for any
signs of arrhythmia recurrence.

­Further Reading
Estrada AH, Maisenbacher HW 3rd, Prosek R, Schold J,
Powell M, VanGilder JM. Evaluation of pacing site in
dogs with naturally occurring complete heart block. J
Vet Cardiol 2009; 11: 137–9.
Gelzer ARM, Kraus MS, Rishniw, M, et al. Combination
therapy with digoxin and diltiazem controls ventricular
rate in chronic atrial fibrillation in dogs better than
digoxin or diltiazem monotherapy: a randomized crossover
study in 18 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2009; 23: 499–508.
Menaut P, Bélanger MC, Beauchamp G, Ponzio NM, Moise
NS. Atrial fibrillation in dogs with and without
structural and functional cardiac disease: a retrospective
study of 109 cases. J Vet Cardiol 2005; 7: 75–83.

Pariaut R, Moise NS, Koetje BD, et al. Lidocaine converts
acute vagally associated atrial fibrillation to sinus
rhythm in German shepherd dogs with inherited
arrhythmias. J Vet Intern Med 2008; 22: 1274–82.
Santilli RA, Perego M, Crosara S, et al. Utility of 12‐lead
electrocardiogram for differentiating parosxysmal
supraventricular tachycardias in dogs. J Vet Intern Med
2008; 22: 915–23.
Pariaut R, Santilli RA, Moise NS. Supraventricular
tachyarrhythmias in dogs. In: Bonagura JD, Twedt DC,
eds. Kirk’s Current Veterinary Therapy XV. St Louis,
MO: Elsevier, 2013, pp. 737–44.

VetBooks.ir

219

22
Systemic Hypertension
Rebecca L. Stepien, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Cardiology)
Department of Medical Sciences, University of Wisconsin School of Veterinary Medicine, Madison, WI, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Systemic hypertension (HT) describes a situation of
sustained elevation of blood pressure (BP). Systemic
­
hypertension is a clinical condition and should be considered a clinical complication of certain diseases rather
than a disease in itself. In veterinary medicine, systolic
blood pressure (SBP) is the value most often used to
assess BP status in the conscious clinical patient, and systemic hypertension is typically diagnosed when reliable
measures of SBP deliver values ≥160 mmHg. Clinically
detectable damage caused by HT may be noted in the
eyes, central nervous system, heart, and kidneys. Injury
related to HT in these organ systems is often collectively
termed “target organ damage” (TOD). Target organ
damage may be clinically obvious, especially in the ­ocular
or nervous systems. In other cases, TOD may be subtle
and result in accelerated progression of deterioration of
damaged organs (e.g., accelerated deterioration of renal
function) rather than overt clinical signs.
In veterinary patients, systemic hypertension has typically been identified as one of three types: situational
(so‐called “white coat”) hypertension, systemic hypertension secondary to systemic disease, and idiopathic
systemic hypertension. Once situational hypertension
has been ruled out, systemic hypertension secondary to
systemic disease is more common than idiopathic hypertension. The designation of HT as “idiopathic” in a given
patient is dependent on a thorough search for common
diseases associated with HT.
Pathophysiology of Systemic Hypertension
The pathophysiologic mechanism(s) of any individual’s
elevated BP is likely related to the cause of the HT, but the
specific pathways leading to sustained elevations in BP are

poorly understood for most diseases. Blood pressure in
health is modulated by interaction of diverse physiologic
systems affecting the heart, kidney, brain, and vasculature.
These systems rely on neural modulation (via the sympathetic nervous system [SNS]), hormonal modulation (e.g.,
renin‐angiotensin‐aldosterone system [RAAS], natriuretic peptides), vascular resistance modulation by circulating or local vasoactive mediators (e.g., endothelin,
thromboxane, prostaglandins, etc.) and any structural
changes (e.g., arteriosclerosis) that may be present.
Abnormalities in any of these contributing ­factors or the
interaction among these factors may alter arterial BP.
In health, increased BP typically leads to natriuresis in
the normal kidney and lowering of systemic BP. No matter what the mechanism by which the initial elevation in
BP occurs (e.g., catecholamine excess or alterations in
RAAS activity), if “normalization” of elevated BP via
natriuresis does not occur or is inadequate, abnormality
in renal sodium handling is implied, and this may be the
final common pathway for many etiologies of HT.
The fact that multiple and complicated pathophysiologic pathways are involved in modulation of BP and
development of HT has three clinical repercussions.
First, HT due to different diseases is likely to respond to
different medications, based on the pathophysiologic
pathway of the development of HT in an individual
patient. Second, lack of complete understanding of these
pathways limits our ability to apply specific physiologic
blocks to lower BP, and nonspecific vasodilation becomes
the treatment of choice for many cases of HT. Last,
because any decrease in BP below the individual’s current set point (normal or abnormal) is likely to stimulate
reactive, BP‐increasing responses from modulating systems like the SNS and RAAS, simultaneous blockade of
these systems may be required when direct vasodilators
are used in order to optimize response.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

220

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

Pathophysiology of Target Organ Damage
Arterial blood flow is maintained at relatively constant
levels in the brain, kidneys, and eyes through a process of
vascular autoregulation, wherein small resistance vessels
constrict when BP is elevated and dilate when BP is
decreased to maintain flow. Hypertensive damage in
these organs occurs when these autoregulatory mechanisms fail. Elevated BP without adequate resistance vessel constriction causes overdistension of vessels, which
leads to damage to endothelial tight junctions and allows
protein and plasma leakage into interstitial tissue in
affected tissue beds (i.e., tissue edema). If excessive vascular resistance vessel constriction occurs, ischemia of
local tissues may result in focal hemorrhage and necrosis. Permanent structural changes such as arteriosclerosis may develop, decreasing vascular distensibility. Any
combination of these mechanisms may result in clinical
signs of TOD (Table 22.1).

­Epidemiology
The most common diseases associated with HT in
dogs include acute or chronic renal disease, especially

protein‐losing renal disease, hyperadrenocorticism,
adrenal tumors, including pheochromocytomas and
aldosterone‐secreting tumors, and diabetes mellitus.
The most common diseases associated with feline HT
include chronic renal disease, feline hyperthyroidism,
hyperaldosteronism, and diabetes mellitus. In both species, the suspected association (medical or age group
related) between subclinical renal dysfunction and both
diabetes mellitus and hyperthyroidism may partially
account for the occurrence of HT in affected animals.
Ten to 15% of hyperthyroid cats that are normotensive at
the time of diagnosis may become hypertensive after
successful therapy for hyperthyroidism, indicating other
mechanisms of HT at work in these patients. The prevalence of idiopathic and situational HT remains unclear
for both species.

­Signalment
Systemic hypertension is associated with many diseases
that are more common in older animals, but aging itself
is not a cause of HT. In the case of secondary HT, the
signalment of affected animals reflects groups at risk for
the underlying disease. In cats, because two common

Table 22.1 Evidence of target organ damage. Clinical signs of target organ damage and additional recommended testing
Organ system affected

Associated clinical findings

Recommended diagnostic testing

Eyes

Acute blindness due to retinal detachment or
severe hyphema
Retinal hemorrhage
Retinal vascular narrowing or tortuosity
Focal retinal transudates
Focal retinal ischemic degeneration
Partial or complete retinal detachment
Papilledema

Fundoscopic examination
Coagulation/platelet assessment if hyphema or retinal
hemorrhage

Brain

Seizures (focal facial or grand mal)
“Stroke‐like” intracranial neurologic deficits
Decreased mentation/obtundation
Photophobia
Nystagmus

Complete neurologic examination
Additional imaging (e.g., MRI)

Kidneys

Proteinuria
Microalbuminuria
Progressive decrease in renal function

Serum BUN and creatinine
Complete urinalysis
Urine culture
Quantitation of proteinuria or albuminuria
Advanced renal testing (e.g., GFR)

Heart

Left ventricular concentric hypertrophy
Arrhythmia
Gallop rhythm
Systolic heart murmur
Increased sensitivity to fluid loading (unexpected
acute heart failure after fluid administration)
Epistaxis

Auscultation
Thoracic radiographs
Echocardiography
Doppler echocardiography may be required to rule out
other causes of LV hypertrophy (e.g., subaortic stenosis)
Assessment for coagulation/platelet abnormalities if
epistaxis

Note: recommended testing list is not exhaustive, additional testing may be indicated in individual patients.
BUN, blood urea nitrogen; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; LV, left ventricle; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.

VetBooks.ir

22 Systemic Hypertension

diseases associated with HT are diseases of older cats
(chronic kidney disease [CKD] and hyperthyroidism),
the age distribution of hypertensive cats tends to include
a greater proportion of older than younger patients.

­History and Clinical Signs
Patients with HT are typically identified by BP measurements taken when a suspicious underlying disease or
condition (e.g., proteinuria, hyperadrenocorticism) is
diagnosed or suspected. Blood pressure should also be
monitored in any patient receiving drugs that can cause
vasoconstriction, such as phenylpropanolamine, a
­common medication for urinary incontinence that is
responsible for BP elevations in some dogs. Additional
HT patients are recognized when evidence of TOD
(e.g., ocular hemorrhage, neurologic signs, gallop heart
sound) is identified. In these patients, further evaluation
(see Table 22.1) after diagnosis of HT may reveal
the underlying cause. The clinical history of hypertensive patients may be consistent with the underlying
­disease (e.g., polyuria/polydypsia with renal disease),
reflect TOD (e.g., acute blindness due to retinal detachment or obtundation due to increased intracranial
pressure) or reveal use of hypertensive medications
­
(e.g., phenylpropanolamine). Because of the high variability of clinical signs, and because changes in mentation
and behavior due to HT may be subtle or attributed to
aging changes, a high level of suspicion for HT should
be maintained regarding possible reasons for and signs
of HT in clinical patients.

­Diagnosis
Patient Selection and Set‐Up
Blood pressure should be measured in dogs and cats
with diseases known to be associated with HT, and in
those animals showing evidence of TOD. In both species,
diagnosis or suspicion of renal disease (acute or chronic,
proteinuric or nonproteinuric), adrenal neoplasias (e.g.,
pheochromcytoma or aldosterone‐secreting tumors)
and diabetes mellitus should lead to BP assessment. In
cats, evaluation of hyperthyroidism should include BP
assessment and BP should be reevaluated after successful therapy for hyperthyroidism. Similarly, suspicion of
or diagnosis of hyperadenocorticism in dogs should
include evaluation of blood pressure.
Animals with evidence of TOD (see Table 22.1)
should have BP measured at the earliest opportunity
regardless of underlying disease, so that intervention
may ease or prevent further damage. If an animal with

TOD is diagnosed as HT, antihypertensive therapy
should begin immediately.
Nonspecific screening of patients for HT is not recommended. The prevalence of HT in healthy‐appearing animals without causative disease is low, so many positive
diagnoses of HT in this patient group will be false positives due to situational hypertension. Normal animals
may be tentatively diagnosed with HT when elevated BP
is a result of agitation or anxiety during BP evaluation.
These animals may be identified as anxious during measurement, and repeat measurements later in the day or
the following day after a period of acclimation may
­render more accurate results. Animals without causative
disease or evidence of TOD may be accepted as normotensive if a confirmatory BP measurement after an initial
HT measurement is within normal range. In most cases,
animals with known causative disease or TOD and initially elevated BP are confirmed as “true” HT if confirmatory measurement is performed.
Commonly available methods to assess BP in dogs
and cats include direct measurement (via arterial puncture or arterial cannulation) or indirect (noninvasive)
methods, including Doppler sphygmomanometry and
oscillometry. Although high‐definition oscillometry
(HDO) is now available, results may not be comparable
to other methods and repeatable measurements may be
difficult to obtain in awake cats. “Standard” oscillometry (widely available in stand‐alone monitors or anesthesia monitors) or Doppler sphygmomanometry is
currently recommended for clinical use.
Prior to BP measurement, the patient should be
allowed to relax with minimal restraint for 5–10 minutes
in a quiet area. The owner may help calm the animal
­during the measurement if appropriate. Systolic BP is
typically used for clinical decision making and heart rate
should be recorded in all patients. Notation of heart rate
and any rhythm abnormalities may assist with full evaluation of the patient; tachycardia during BP measurement
may signal increased patient anxiety, or provide additional information regarding underlying disease status
(e.g., sinus tachycardia or arrhythmias in thyrotoxic
cats). A gradually decreasing heart rate during measurement repetitions may occur in a patient that is slowly
relaxing, and additional measurements at the lower heart
rate may provide more accurate results than the initial
measurements at a higher heart rate.
Methods of Measurement
Direct Blood Pressure Measurement

Direct arterial BP measurement is performed by inserting a needle or catheter attached to a pressure transducer
into a peripheral artery in a clinical patient to obtain
a pressure trace. Arterial cannulation using the dorsal

221

VetBooks.ir

222

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

pedal artery is most frequently used for anesthesia and
postanesthesia monitoring, but is typically impractical
for clinical use on conscious patients for diagnostic purposes. Direct femoral puncture may be used for acute
measurement of BP in conscious animals with local
anesthesia, but is time‐consuming and cumbersome in
clinical practice.
Doppler Sphygmomanometry

Doppler sphygmomanometry (DS) is the most common
method of measuring BP in cats and is also used commonly in dogs. A piezoelectric crystal attached to an
audio amplifier is applied to the skin overlying a peripheral artery and an occlusion cuff inflated with a pressure
bulb is positioned proximally on the same limb. The BP
cuff is premeasured and sized such that the width of the
cuff is approximately 40% of the circumference of the
limb at the level of cuff placement.
In dogs and cats, the forelimb is the most common
measurement site with the animal in lateral recumbency
or sitting and the limb held at the level of the right atrium.
The cuff is placed at mid‐antebrachium and attached to
the sphygmomanometer. The probe (with coupling gel)
is held or taped in place over an artery distal to the cuff
(usually the palmar arterial arch) and the position is
adjusted until a clear pulsatile audio signal can be
detected. The cuff is inflated to approximately
20–40 mmHg past the point at which the sound of blood
flow is occluded and then slowly deflated. The pressure
at which the sound signal reappears is recorded as the
systolic BP. As the cuff is further deflated, the audio signal will become muffled – this pressure may be recorded
as diastolic BP but is less reliable than the systolic BP by
this method. Three to five repeated measurements taken
approximately 30 seconds to one minute apart can be
averaged to render a representative SBP.
Oscillometry (OSC)

Oscillometric BP devices deliver systolic, diastolic, and
mean BP values as well as heart rate. These systems are
most reliable in cats when a tailhead cuff is used in unrestrained sternal recumbency, but forelimb (radial level),
hindlimb (metatarsal level or proximal to hock in recumbent animal) or tailhead (in standing or recumbent animals) cuffs may be used in dogs.
The cuff width is chosen similarly to the DS technique.
The cuff is positioned with the bladder of the cuff (usually identified on the cuff by a small arrow) centered
squarely over the artery and secured. The OSC machine
is set to read BP at approximately one‐minute intervals.
The arithmetic mean of 3–5 SBP replicates is used as a
representative value, with any obvious erroneous or outlying values discarded. OSC equipment may be unable to

read BP accurately at high heart rates (>180 bpm) or if an
arrhythmia is present, and a Doppler or invasive measurement system should be used in these patients.
Doppler and OSC devices may not deliver the exact same
results in a given patient, nor will different measurements sites in the same patient deliver the exact same
results for SBP. Therefore, the same technique and the
same cuff site should be used consistently in a given
patient when monitoring BP over time.

­Therapy
Acute or chronic HT may result in life‐altering or life‐
limiting TOD and may affect the quality and therefore
length of life in an affected patient. The goals of HT therapy are to stop or limit the extent of TOD in affected animals and to improve the quality of life in all patients. This
may be accomplished by use of medications that decrease
SBP and concurrent therapy of underlying causative disease. In all cases, control or resolution of the underlying
condition is an important part of HT management.
Medical Therapy
The goal of therapy of HT is reduction of SBP to
<160 mmHg, and ideally to 120–140 mmHg. Optimal
therapy of HT usually involves use of a direct vasodilating agent (e.g., amlodipine or hydralazine) along with an
agent to prevent reactive stimulation of the RAAS (usually an angiotensin‐converting enzyme inhibitor [ACEI]
or more recently, angiotensin receptor blockers [ARBs],
e.g., telmisartan).
In cats, amlodipine (0.625–1.25 mg per cat PO q24h) is
often successful as a single agent to control HT, with
minimal side‐effects in most patients. In dogs, ACEIs
(enalapril or benazepril 0.25–0.5 mg/kg PO q12–24h) are
useful in decreasing proteinuria commonly associated
with HT and are typically considered a first‐line agent to
treat HT of any etiology. Angiotensin‐converting enzyme
inhibitors alone may not bring BP into the desired range
in dogs and amlodipine (0.2–0.4 mg/kg PO q24h) or
hydralazine (0.5–2.0 mg/kg PO q12h) may be added. The
once‐daily dosing regimen of amlodipine makes use of
this drug more appealing than twice‐daily dosing with
hydralazine in most patients. Telmisartan has recently
been approved for therapy of HT due to CRD in cats and
expected decreases in SBP are similar to those expected
with amlodipine therapy. Spironolactone (1–2 mg/kg PO
q12h) has theoretical benefits in limiting RAAS activation in chronic HT, but studies supporting improved
quality of life or survival outcomes with this medication
are lacking at this time. Beta‐blocking medications like

VetBooks.ir

22 Systemic Hypertension

atenolol do not appear to provide reliable BP control, but
may be useful to limit tachycardia in thyrotoxic cats.
Alpha‐blocking (e.g., prazosin) or mixed adrenergic‐
blocking medications (e.g., labetolol) have not been
­systematically evaluated in clinical veterinary patients.
In patients with evidence of acute TOD (e.g., intracranial neurologic signs or acute blindness due to retinal detachment), medications with quick onset of
action should be used, with a goal of reducing the SBP
by ~25% in the first few hours. The most commonly
used rapid‐onset medication for this purpose is
hydralazine, which may have onset of action within
1–2 hours. Acutely, furosemide 1–2 mg/kg IV can be
administered to nonazotemic patients, but this medication is not suitable for long‐term therapy of HT. If
continuous intravenous infusion is possible, sodium
nitroprusside (typically diluted in 0.9% saline) can be
administered beginning at a rate of 1–2 μg/kg/min
with upward titration as needed to attain the goal of
25% reduction of SBP in the first few hours.
Alternatively, fenoldopam, a selective dopamine‐1
receptor agonist, can be delivered as a constant rate
infusion (CRI) at an initial dose of 0.1 μg/kg/min, with
doses titrated upward by 0.1 μg/kg/min at 15‐minute
intervals until the 25% reduction in SBP is reached,
with a maximal infusion rate of 1.6 μg/kg/min. Constant
BP monitoring is required when using sodium nitroprusside or fenoldopam due to the rapid onset of action
and potent BP‐lowering effects of these medications.
Some diseases (hyperadrenocorticism in dogs, hyperthyroidism in cats) may contribute to systemic hypertension through mechanisms that may be at least partially
reversible with therapy for the underlying disease. In
dogs with hyperadrenocorticism, successful medical or
surgical therapy may be associated with decreased but
not always normalized BP. Similarly, hyperthyroid cats
that are hypertensive prior to therapy for hyperthyroidism may have normal BP after successful therapy for
hyperthyroidism or maintain elevated BP. Additionally,
cats successfully treated for hyperthyroidism may
develop HT post treatment. In order to manage these
complicated canine and feline HT cases, close monitoring of BP is recommended both before and after therapy
of the underlying disease.
While no specific treatment protocols have been published, a reasonable approach to these patients follows
the general approach to management of HT with some
modification of follow‐up decision making. Patients with
these diseases and BP ≥180 mmHg may be considered to
be at increased risk for TOD and despite plans to modify
the underlying disease state, should be treated for their
HT as other therapies commence. Once underlying disease therapy starts, the BP should be monitored periodi-

cally throughout the course of treatment until the
underlying disease is alleviated or resolved. Blood pressure should be assessed again at this point, and consideration given to discontinuing the antihypertensive
medication on a trial basis in normotensive patients (this
should only be attempted in patients with no co‐morbid
risks factors and no evidence of TOD). In patients with
pretreatment BP <180 mmHg, therapy of the underlying
disease can commence without concurrent therapy of
HT as long as no evidence of TOD is present, with posttreatment monitoring of BP recommended. Rechecking
BP post therapy for feline hyperthyroidism should be
performed regardless of pretreatment BP, since late‐
developing HT (i.e., 3–6 months post normalization of
thyroid status) has been documented in these patients.
Monitoring
Use of higher doses of amlodipine or hydralazine or use
of “normal” doses in debilitated animals may result in
hypotension, which may be discernible as weakness,
lethargy or mental dullness and prerenal azotemia. In
most cases, discontinuing the medication for 1–2 doses
and then decreasing the subsequent dosage administered will result in clinical improvement, but cautious
fluid administration may be required to resolve
azotemia. Amlodipine may cause gingival hyperplasia in
some ­animals; discontinuation of this medication and
substitution of hydralazine or telmisartan is recom­
mended in affected animals. Use of ACEI in dehydrated
animals may result in prerenal azotemia and occasionally hyperkalemia. Again, temporary discontinuation of
ACEI and reinstitution when hydration is normalized
should improve renal function.
Once target blood pressure has been achieved with
therapy, routine monitoring at least every three months
is recommended. Body weight and condition may change
over time, requiring adjustment of BP medication dosing. In dogs, dosage increases may be necessary over
time to maintain BP in the target range. In patients in
whom improvement of SBP into target range is difficult,
partial reduction of SBP should still be sought. The risk
of TOD increases with increasing SBP, so even some
degree of improvement may be beneficial.

­Prognosis
Prognosis for improvement in HT and decreased incidence
and degree of TOD is good in patients treated promptly
and monitored closely. Animals with retinal detachment
may regain some amount of vision but may not attain complete normality. Decreased proteinuria may be noted in

223

VetBooks.ir

224

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

animals receiving ACEIs or ARBs. In many patients,
improvement may be subtle, but noted by the patient’s
owner as improvements in wakefulness, interest in eating
and interaction, and increased activity. Improvement in
general quality of life is reported in many patients.

Proof of improved survival in treated veterinary HT
patients is lacking, but because untreated TOD contributes to decreased quality of life, untreated HT may lead
to euthanasia.

­Further Reading
Acierno MJ, Brown S, Coleman AE, et al. ACVIM
consensus statement: Guidelines for the identification,
evaluation, and management of systemic hypertension
in dogs and cats. J Vet Intern Med 2018; 32(6): 1803–22.
Coleman AE, Brown SA, Traas AM, et al. Safety and
efficacy of orally administered telmisartan for the
treatment of systemic hypertension in cats: results of a
double‐blind, placebo‐controlled, randomized clinical
trial. J Vet Intern Med 2019; 33(2): 478–88.
Huhtinen M, Derré G, Renoldi HJ, et al. Randomized
placebo‐controlled clinical trial of a chewable
formulation of amlodipine for the treatment of

hypertension in client‐owned cats. J Vet Intern Med
2015; 29(3): 786–93.
Jepson RE. Feline systemic hypertension: classification and
pathogenesis. J Feline Med Surg 2011; 13(1): 25–34.
Sent U, Gössl R, Elliott J, Syme HM, Zimmering T.
Comparison of efficacy of long‐term oral treatment with
telmisartan and benazepril in cats with chronic kidney
disease. J Vet Intern Med 2015; 29(6): 1479–87.
Stepien RL. Feline systemic hypertension: diagnosis and
management. J Feline Med Surg 2011; 13(1): 35–43.
Syme H. Hypertension in small animal kidney disease. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2011; 41(1): 63–89.

VetBooks.ir

225

23
Pulmonary Hypertension
Heidi B. Kellihan, DVM, DACVIM (Cardiology)
Department of Medical Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is an elevation in systolic
pulmonary arterial pressure greater than 30 mmHgI.
Typically, PH is a complication of other primary diseases
and occasionally occurs as an idiopathic process.
Pulmonary arterial pressure is influenced by pulmonary
blood flow, pulmonary vascular resistance, and pulmonary venous pressure. Ultimately, PH can be considered
an umbrella term encompassing pulmonary arterial
hypertension (precapillary PH) and pulmonary venous
hypertension (postcapillary PH) (Figure 23.1).
Normally, the pulmonary vasculature is composed of
thin‐walled, low‐pressure, high‐capacitance, and low‐
resistance vessels. The pulmonary vasculature receives
the complete cardiac output from the right heart with
every contraction. Pulmonary hypertension results when
there is an imbalance in pulmonary vascular mediators
favoring vasoconstriction and muscularization of pulmonary arteries.
The three main components involved in PH development are the endothelin pathway, the prostacyclin pathway, and the nitric oxide pathway. In the presence of PH,
the endothelin pathway contributes to the release of the
potent vasoconstrictor, endothelin‐1 from endothelial
cells, resulting in pulmonary artery vasoconstriction,
smooth muscle cell proliferation, and increased collagen
synthesis. Prostacyclins, released by the pulmonary
artery endothelium, normally mediates vasodilation, yet
with PH, the vasodilatory effects are negated and the
result is pulmonary artery vasoconstriction, cellular proliferation, and thrombosis. In the normal setting, nitric
oxide release from vascular endothelium leads to an
increase in vasodilatory cGMP. In the presence of PH,

the nitric oxide pathway is deranged and results in
­vasoconstriction, smooth muscle cell proliferation and
hypertrophy, platelet aggregation, and adhesion.
In addition to alterations in pulmonary vascular mediators contributing to PH, hypoxia also directly affects
pulmonary vascular tone. Hypoxia (globally or locally)
results in pulmonary artery vasoconstriction, which is in
contrast to the systemic vasculature which vasodilates in
response to hypoxia. Pulmonary artery vasoconstriction,
in response to hypoxia, is a compensatory mechanism to
divert blood away from hypoxic lung. Unfortunately, in
the setting of PH, hypoxia from respiratory disease and
left‐sided congestive heart failure will worsen preexisting PH severity.
The vascular changes that result from the imbalance of
these pathways promote muscularization of normally
nonmuscular peripheral pulmonary arteries, medial
hypertrophy, loss of peripheral pulmonary arteries, intimal proliferation, and vascular thrombosis. Ultimately,
these vascular changes result in an increase in pulmonary vascular resistance leading to right ventricular
hypertrophy that can result in congestive heart failure
and death.

­Epidemiology
Since PH usually occurs secondary to another disease
process, the presence of PH in the population is potentially extensive. In reports of PH in dogs, the majority of
cases result from left‐sided heart disease (53%), pulmonary disease (28%), pulmonary thromboembolism (4%),
heartworm disease (4%), congenital heart disease (i.e.,
left‐to‐right shunts) (3%), and miscellaneous causes (7%).

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

VetBooks.ir

226

Pulmonary Hypertension

Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension

Pulmonary Venous Hypertension

Primary

Pulmonary Disease

Thromboembolic

Left-Heart Disease

Heartworm
Congenital
Idiopathic

Pulmonary Fibrosis
COPD
Neoplasia
Hypoxia

Heartworm
Cushing’s
Protein-losing Disease
Neoplasia

Myxomatous Mitral Valve Disease
Dilated Cardiomyopathy
Left-heart Disease
Hypoxia

Figure 23.1 Pulmonary hypertension classification (see text for details). COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

­Signalment

­Physical Examination

The typical signalment of the patient with PH is a middle‐aged to older small‐breed dog, which reflects the
population of dogs that are predisposed to myxomatous
mitral valve disease and chronic pulmonary disease. The
exceptions to this typical signalment include the young
heartworm‐infected dog and the dog with congenital
heart disease that results in a reverse patent ductus arteriosus, reverse ventricular septal defect or reverse atrial
septal defect.

Dogs with PH often have abnormal physical examination findings that could be directly associated with
increased pulmonary artery pressure or may be present
secondary to the underlying disease process that
resulted in the PH. These findings may include mitral
and/or tricuspid insufficiency, heart murmurs, split or
prominent second heart sounds, pulmonary crackles,
cyanosis, and ascites. In most cases, detection of these
abnormal physical examination findings in combination
with typical clinical signs leads the clinician to suspect a
diagnosis of PH.

­History and Clinical Signs
The clinical history of the dog with symptomatic PH typically includes a combination of cough, dyspnea, lethargy,
exercise intolerance, reported heart murmurs, ascites,
and syncope. Because PH is often a consequence of
underlying cardiac and pulmonary disease, it may be difficult to determine if the etiology of the clinical sign is a
direct result of the PH or the underlying disease process.

­Diagnosis
The goals of diagnosing PH include defining the underlying etiology of the PH, determining the severity of
PH, assessing for evidence of right heart impairment,
and to obtain information that may aid in patient
prognostication.

VetBooks.ir

23 Pulmonary Hypertension

Right Heart Catheterization
Right heart catheterization is the gold standard in diagnosing PH. Unfortunately, in veterinary medicine right
heart catheterization is usually prohibitive due to the
need for sedation and the unacceptable level of invasiveness required. Right heart catheterization provides true
measurements of pulmonary artery pressure, right ventricular pressure, right atrial pressure, and pulmonary
capillary wedge pressure. In addition, cardiac output
measurements can be obtained to calculate pulmonary
vascular resistance. Pulmonary vascular resistance
(PVR) can be calculated by the following equation and
expressed as dynes*sec*cm−5.
PVR

mPAP PCWP

80 /CO

where mPAP indicates mean pulmonary artery pressure,
PCWP is pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, and CO is
cardiac output. Measuring and calculating mPAP, PCWP,
and PVR help to determine the etiology of the PH. Based
on these measurements, PH can be further classified as
pulmonary arterial or venous hypertension. Pulmonary
arterial hypertension can be diagnosed if the mPAP is
increased, the PVR is elevated, and the PCWP is normal.
Pulmonary venous hypertension can be diagnosed if the
mPAP is increased, the PVR is normal, and the PCWP is
elevated.
Thoracic Radiography
Pulmonary hypertension cannot be diagnosed by thoracic
radiographs but there are specific changes associated with
PH that, when present, would support the diagnosis of
PH. Right heart enlargement, pulmonary artery enlargement, and pulmonary artery tortuosity are abnormalities
that may suggest the presence of PH (Figure 23.2).

Figure 23.2 Thoracic radiographs from a
dog with severe pulmonary hypertension
from heartworm infection. (a) Lateral view.
(b) Ventrodorsal view. Black arrowheads
show the borders of the enlarged right
atrium. * shows the enlarged main
pulmonary artery. Black arrows show the
borders of the severely dilated and
tortuous right pulmonary artery. White
arrows indicate the region of interstitial to
alveolar pulmonary infiltrates.

(a)

On the other hand, thoracic radiographs may only show
changes that represent the underlying disease process
that results in PH development (i.e., left‐sided heart disease, left‐sided congestive heart failure, primary pulmonary disease, patent ductus arteriosus). Noncardiogenic
pulmonary edema can form as a direct result of PH and is
typically in a patchy, diffuse alveolar lung pattern.
Electrocardiogram
The electrocardiogram is of limited use in contributing
to PH diagnosis. If there are findings of a right axis deviation or evidence of right heart enlargement, this would
help support the diagnosis of PH (Figure 23.3).
Echocardiogram
Echocardiography is the standard, noninvasive method
for quantifying and diagnosing PH in veterinary medicine. Tricuspid regurgitation enables the clinician to
estimate the systolic pulmonary artery pressure
(Figure 23.4) and pulmonic insufficiency provides estimation of the mean and diastolic pulmonary artery
pressures (Figure 23.5).
Based on tricuspid regurgitation, PH can be classified as
mild (≥2.8 to <3.5 m/s, ≥31 to <50 mmHg), moderate (3.5–
4.3 m/s, 50–75 mmHg) or severe (>4.3 m/s, >75 mmHg).
Multiple two‐dimensional, M‐mode, and Doppler echocardiographic findings support the diagnosis of PH when
tricuspid regurgitation is or is not present, and they
include interventricular septal flattening (Figure 23.6),
right ventricular hypertrophy, right ventricular dilation,
decreased tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion, main
pulmonary artery enlargement, abnormal pulmonary
artery flow profiles, and decreased relative area change
(a.k.a. distensibility index) of the right pulmonary artery.

(b)

227

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

VetBooks.ir

228

Figure 23.3 Electrocardiogram from a dog with severe pulmonary hypertension secondary to a reverse patent ductus arteriosus.
Leads I, II, and aVF. 50 mm/s with a sensitivity of 10 mm/mV. Heart rate is 85 bpm. Sinus rhythm with evidence of right heart enlargement
(deep S‐waves in leads I, II, and aVF) and a right axis deviation.

(a)

(b)

Figure 23.4 Tricuspid regurgitation in a dog with severe pulmonary hypertension secondary to intersitial lung disease. (a) Color Doppler
showing tricuspid regurgitation. White arrows show the borders of the tricuspid regurgitation jet. RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle.
(b) Spectral Doppler of the tricuspid regurgitation jet. * indicates the peak velocity (4.8 m/s, 92 mmHg).

­Therapy
The goals of treatment for patients with PH are to treat
the underlying disease, improve clinical signs (i.e., exercise intolerance, cough, syncope, congestive heart ­failure),

lower pulmonary artery pressure, improve right ventricular function, prolong survival, and improve quality of life.
Since PH is a sequela of an underlying disease in many
patients, treating the underlying problem is often the first
step. Targeting the primary disease (i.e., medications for

VetBooks.ir

23 Pulmonary Hypertension

(a)

(b)

Figure 23.5 Pulmonic insufficiency in a dog with severe pulmonary hypertension secondary to interstitial lung disease. (a) Color Doppler
showing pulmonic insufficiency. White arrow shows the pulmonic insufficiency jet. PA, pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricle. (b) Spectral
Doppler of the pulmonic insufficiency jet. ** shows the peak velocity (estimated mean pulmonary artery pressure, 3.4 m/s, 46 mmHg) and
* shows the end‐diastolic velocity (estimated diastolic pulmonary artery pressure, 2 m/s, 16 mmHg).

Sildenafil

Figure 23.6 Septal flattening in a dog with severe pulmonary
hypertension secondary to pulmonary neoplasia. Severe septal
flattening at end‐diastole indicating high right ventricular
pressures. * shows the flat interventricular septum bowing over to
the left side. LV, left ventricular lumen; RV, right ventricular lumen.

congestive heart failure, anticoagulants for pulmonary
thromboembolism, oxygen for respiratory disease) in
conjunction with directly lowering PA pressures is often
necessary.
There are multiple treatment options that target the
different pathways involved in PH. Unfortunately, in
­veterinary medicine many are extremely cost prohibitive
(i.e., endothelin antagonists cost ~$50 000/year) or
require frequent and impractical administration of
­medication (i.e., prostacyclins require a continuous rate
infusion or 6–12 times daily dosing).

Sildenafil (Viagra® and Revatio®) is a selective phosphodiesterase‐5 inhibitor that specifically targets receptors in
the pulmonary vasculature and results in pulmonary
artery vasodilation. In dogs with PH, sildenafil is administered at a dose of 1–2 mg/kg orally q8h. Sildenafil has
been shown to lower the estimated pulmonary artery
pressures in dogs and to improve clinical signs, survival
times and quality of life. For the most part, sildenafil has
minimal side‐effects (i.e., gastrointestinal upset) in most
cases of PH, with the exception of left‐sided heart disease. Sildenafil can lower the pulmonary artery pressure
to a dangerous level in dogs with elevated pulmonary
venous pressure, resulting in flooding of the pulmonary
capillaries and subsequent congestive heart failure. In
dogs with left‐sided heart disease, sildenafil is indicated
only if the patient is syncopal or in right‐sided congestive
heart failure and pimobendan should be considered a
viable alternative treatment option in these cases as a
pulmonary artery vasodilator.

­Prognosis
The prognosis for patients with PH is variable and
dependent on the underlying disease process. With the
advent of sildenafil, the prognosis for PH in dogs has
improved. Now that there is a viable treatment option,
clinicians are more readily recognizing PH as a clinical
syndrome in patients with clinical signs, physical examinations findings, and diagnostic testing results consistent with PH.

229

VetBooks.ir

230

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

­Further Reading
Bach JF, Rozanski EA, MacGregor J, Betkowski JM, Rush
JE. Retrospective evaluation of sildenafil citrate as a
therapy for pulmonary hypertension in dogs. J Vet Intern
Med 2006; 20(5): 1132–5.
Johnson L, Boon J, Orton EC. Clinical characteristics of
53 dogs with Doppler‐derived evidence of pulmonary
hypertension: 1992–1996. J Vet Intern Med 1999; 13(5):
440–7.
Kellum HB, Stepien RL. Sildenafil citrate therapy in 22
dogs with pulmonary hypertension. J Vet Intern Med
2007; 21(6): 1258–64.
Kellihan HB, Stepien RL. Pulmonary hypertension in dogs:
diagnosis and therapy. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2010; 40(4): 623–41.
Kellihan HB, Stepien RL. Pulmonary hypertension in
canine degenerative mitral valve disease. J Vet Cardio
2012; 14(1): 149–64.

Kellihan HB, Waller KR, Pinkos A, Steinberg H, Bates ML.
Acute resolution of pulmonary alveolar infiltrates in 10
dogs with pulmonary hypertension treated with sildenafil
citrate: 2005–2014. J Vet Cardiol 2015; 17(3): 182–91.
Tian L, Kellihan HB, Henningsen J, et al. Pulmonary artery
relative area change is inversely related to ex vivo
measured arterial elastic modulus in the canine model of
acute pulmonary embolization. J Biomechanics 2014;
47(12): 2904–10.
Visser LC, Im MK, Johnson LR, Stern JA. Diagnostic value
of right pulmonary artery distensibility index in dogs
with pulmonary arterial hypertension: Comparison with
Doppler echocardiographic estimates of pulmonary
arterial pressure. J Vet Intern Med 2016; 30(2); 543–52.

VetBooks.ir

231

24
Congenital Heart Disease
Brian A. Scansen DVM, MS, DACVIM (Cardiology)
Department of Clinical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA

Congenital heart disease (CHD) accounts for a small
subset of dogs and cats presenting for veterinary care,
estimated to account for less than 10% of cardiac disease
in these species. However, the spectrum of CHD is broad
and complex – making the diagnosis, treatment, and
prognosis for these animals more challenging. Successful
diagnosis and treatment of CHD provides great potential impact on patient survival – e.g., correctly diagnosing and closing a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) can
give an animal an additional decade or more of life. Since
some forms of CHD are curable, it is imperative that
animals with CHD not be missed during pediatric
­
­general examination.

­Etiology
Causes of CHD
The precise etiology of CHD in nearly all veterinary
­species is not known. In humans, both genetic and environmental factors (drug use, toxin exposure, or infectious diseases during pregnancy) have been implicated in
the genesis of CHD. In some breeds of dog there is a clear
familial component, though the genetics have not been
fully elucidated for any defect. Examples of diseases with
a well‐recognized inheritable component include patent
ductus arteriosus (PDA) in the poodle, atrial septal
defect (ASD) in the standard poodle and Doberman
­pinscher, subaortic stenosis (SAS) in the Newfoundland,
pulmonary valve stenosis (PS) in the beagle, tetralogy of
Fallot and related defects in the keeshond, ventricular
septal defect (VSD) in the beagle and English springer
spaniel, and tricuspid valve dysplasia (TVD) in the
Labrador retriever.
The following paragraphs define some of the more
common congenital heart malformations seen in ­animals

as well as briefly describing the pathophysiology of such
lesions. Figure 24.1 provides gross postmortem examples
of several of these defects.
Left‐to‐Right Shunting Lesions
A shunt is defined as an abnormal mixing of blood in the
heart or great vessels. The consequences of mixing
between the left and right heart (shunting) vary depending on their magnitude and direction. In a left‐to‐right
shunt (meaning from the systemic circulation to the
pulmonary circulation) the signs are principally of
­volume overload to the lungs and the left heart because
the normal amount of blood flowing to the lungs is
­augmented by the amount added from the shunt before
returning to the left heart. Conversely, right‐to‐left
shunts (where blood is diverted from the venous system
to the systemic arterial system) result in poor oxygenation and cyanosis.
Patent Ductus Arteriosus

The ductus arteriosus is a normal structure in the fetus
derived from the left sixth aortic arch and allows for the
diversion of blood away from the lungs in utero when the
lungs are not expanded by air. Within the first 12–24
hours after birth, the ductus begins to constrict in
response to increased oxygen tension and is closed
within the first week of life. If the ductus remains open,
the fall in pulmonary vascular resistance allows flow
from the aorta to the pulmonary artery. Persistent
patency of the ductus arteriosus is the most common
CHD of the dog and appears to be the second most
­common defect of the cat. Definitive therapy is an option
for animals with PDA (via either interventional closure
or surgical ligation) and long‐term survival is excellent
after closure if heart failure or frequent arrhythmias have
not yet developed.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

232

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 24.1 Gross postmortem specimens of common congenital heart defects. (a) A dog with patent ductus arteriosus; the image is
taken from a caudal perspective with the descending aorta (Ao) coming toward the viewer. The origin of the ductus (asterisk) within the
aorta can be seen traversing ventral toward the pulmonary artery, which is seen below as the left (L) and right (R) branches. (b) A dog with
tricuspid valve dysplasia showing severe right atrial (RA) enlargement, a sheet‐like tricuspid valve with fused, thick leaflets (arrowheads),
and the ostium of a patent foramen ovale (arrow). (c) A dog with pulmonary valve stenosis showing moderate right ventricular (RV)
hypertrophy and thickened pulmonary valve leaflets (arrow). (d) A dog with a large ventricular septal defect (arrow), seen in the
membranous septum at the junction of the left ventricle (LV) and aorta (Ao).

Ventricular Septal Defects

Ventricular septal defects are the most common form of
CHD in cats, and are also seen in ~9% of dogs with
CHD. The pathophysiology of VSD is such that small
defects (restrictive) may be well tolerated and not result
in overt signs of cardiac dysfunction. Larger defects,
however, result in the shunting of large volumes of blood
from the left ventricle to the pulmonary circulation. The
result of this increased pulmonary flow is damage to the
lung vasculature and volume overload as the blood
returns to the left heart. VSDs can occur in several different areas along the interventricular septum and
numerous classification schemes have been developed

to characterize the location of the defect. Exact confirmation of the size of the defect and secondary cardiac
changes (e.g., aortic insufficiency or left ventricular
enlargement) carry prognostic information for the
­clients. Additionally, some defects may be in a location
amenable to catheter‐based closure.
Atrial Septal Defects

As with a VSD, an atrial septal defect is a hole in the
intracardiac septum separating the left and right heart.
ASD is a rare defect in small animals, accounting for
2–6% of cases. In addition, it is often seen in association
with other defects.

VetBooks.ir

24 Congenital Heart Disease

The degree of shunting depends on the size of the
defect and the relative resistance of the pulmonary versus the systemic circulation. Typically, flow is driven
from the left atrium across the ASD to the right,
thereby increasing blood flow through the lungs. In
contrast to left‐to‐right shunts such as PDA and VSD
that result in left heart enlargement, atrial‐level shunts
cause right heart enlargement as the increased pulmonary venous return is shunted to the right atrium. With
profound shunting, pulmonary hypertension and shunt
reversal (Eisenmenger’s physiology) may occur. Flow
across the atrial septum may also develop if right atrial
pressure becomes elevated, even in the presence of a
normally formed atrial septum. This develops because
the atrial septum is composed of two membranes that
are closed during the first week of life as left atrial
pressure exceeds right atrial pressure. If the animal has
right‐sided heart disease that elevates right atrial pressure (pulmonary stenosis, tricuspid dysplasia, tetralogy of Fallot), then the membranes may remain
separate and allow flow across the atrial septum
from right to left, referred to as a patent foramen
ovale (PFO).
In the setting of a large ASD or concurrent defects,
presenting signs will be an asymptomatic heart murmur,
pulmonary overcirculation, or weakness, lethargy, or
cyanosis associated with pulmonary hypertension and
shunt reversal.
Atrioventricular Septal Defects

Defects of the atrioventricular septum (AVSD) may be
considered separate from ASD or VSD. The atrioventricular septum is composed of centrally located tissue
derived from the endocardial cushions. With an AVSD,
defects may occur in the interatrial septum above the
atrioventricular valves (a primum defect) or the interventricular septum just below the atrioventricular
valves (inlet VSD), and may cause concurrent malformations of the ­atrioventricular valves. These defects
were formerly referred to as endocardial cushion
defects or defects in the atrioventricular canal. Signs
vary depending on the relative size of each defect,
but both congestive heart failure and cyanosis are
common. AVSDs are relatively uncommon in dogs,
but are seen in roughly 10% of cats with CHD.
The diagnosis is made by demonstration of the atrioventricular valves in the same imaging plane and variably sized defects in the ventral interatrial septum,
inlet interventricular septum, and septal leaflets of the
atrioventricular valves. There are also partial forms of
AVSD recognized, depending on the presence/absence
of atrial and ventricular septal defects as well as
the degree of development of distinct mitral and tricuspid annuli.

Stenotic Valve Lesions
Subaortic Stenosis

Aortic stenosis occurs almost exclusively in the dog and
is very rare in the cat. In almost all cases, obstruction is
the result of subaortic tissue that narrows the left ventricular outflow tract. The tissue may be a discrete
fibrous ridge or a tunnel‐like narrowing. Rarely, valvar
aortic stenosis is seen with fusion and/or thickening of
the valve leaflets. In order to maintain forward stroke
volume, such that the same volume of blood is pumped
out of the left ventricle with each heartbeat, the blood
must accelerate through the narrowing at a higher velocity. This requires that a greater left ventricular pressure
be generated. The elevated left ventricular pressure leads
to increased left ventricular wall stress and the development of concentric left ventricular hypertrophy.
The natural history of SAS includes a near normal
lifespan for patients with mild disease; those with
moderate to severe disease may experience exercise
­
intolerance, syncope, left‐sided congestive heart failure,
or sudden cardiac death. All patients with SAS are
believed to be at higher risk for development of bacterial
endocarditis due to damage of aortic valve integrity from
the turbulent, high‐velocity jet. As such, antibiotic
prophylaxis is advised for surgical or dental procedures,
or in cases of potential bacteremia (e.g., skin laceration).
Screening young dogs for SAS bears some mention.
First, SAS may progress as the dog grows because the
subvalvar ridge does not change in size while the heart
and stroke volume increase with the patient’s development. Therefore, the final assessment of severity can
only be made when the patient is full grown or nearly so.
Second, screening breeding dogs for mild disease is a
very real clinical problem as some breeds (boxer, greyhound, etc.) have aortic flow velocities that, with excitement, may be considered mild stenosis. This creates a
gray zone between normal and mildly affected that can
make breeding recommendations challenging.
Pulmonary Valve Stenosis

Pulmonary valve stenosis (PS) is principally a disease of
the valve leaflets and/or annulus, rather than the subvalvar region as in SAS. PS comes in varying forms – fusion
of the valve leaflets resulting in a narrowed orifice and
doming valves, valvular thickening and dysplasia resulting in thick immobile valves that do not open normally,
and annular hypoplasia where the valve annulus is abnormally small. The same hemodynamic derangements
described above for SAS apply to the right ventricle in
patients with PS. Right ventricular concentric hypertrophy is common and at times can be so severe as to create
a dynamic and muscular subvalvar obstruction. In these
instances, the right ventricle (RV) hypertrophies to such

233

VetBooks.ir

234

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

an extent that it obstructs blood flow from getting out of
the right heart during contraction.
The natural history of PS is more benign than for SAS,
although patients may similarly suffer exercise intolerance, syncope, sudden cardiac death, and right‐sided
congestive heart failure if the disease is severe. Dogs with
PS do not appear to be at an increased risk for endocarditis. Elevated right atrial pressure in the presence of a
PFO may allow shunting of blood across the atrial septum from right to left and the development of cyanosis
and secondary erythrocytosis. PFO is seen in ~30% of
dogs with PS as the atrial septum does not close normally
at birth due to elevated right atrial pressure. If flow from
the right atrium to left atrium is substantial across a PFO,
the animal may have significant mixing of poorly
­oxygenated blood from the right atrium to the left and
clinical cyanosis.
Mitral and Tricuspid Valve Stenosis

Mitral valve dysplasia (MVD) and TVD may result in stenosis of these valves. Atrioventricular valve stenosis is
rare in small animals, but both mitral stenosis and tricuspid stenosis are occasionally encountered in dogs and
cats. These lesions lead to progressive atrial enlargement, atrial arrhythmias, and congestive heart failure if
left untreated.
Regurgitant Valve Lesions
Mitral and Tricuspid Valve Dysplasia

Congenital malformations of the atrioventricular valves
are considered rare in dogs, but account for a greater
proportion of congenital heart disease in cats. Mitral
valve dysplasia or TVD is a developmental abnormality
of valve formation, resulting in abnormal leaflet shape,
attachment, and/or function. Animals with MVD or
TVD have pathology that typically results in regurgitation of the affected valve; however, a combination of stenosis and regurgitation may be encountered. Chronic
mitral valve regurgitation leads to left ventricular and
left atrial volume overload and dilation in the setting of
MVD, which may lead to left‐sided congestive heart failure. Similar progression may be seen in the right heart
for TVD. Postmortem findings of dysplastic atrioventricular valves display fused and malformed leaflets with
shortened chordae tendineae. Direct attachment from
the papillary muscle to the valve is common.
Aortic and Pulmonary Valve Dysplasia

Congenital defects of the semilunar valves typically
result in stenosis, as described above. In both SAS and
PS, regurgitation, or insufficiency, of the affected valve is
commonly observed by color Doppler imaging.
Pulmonary valve insufficiency can even be seen in the

majority of otherwise apparently healthy dogs when
screened by Doppler echocardiography. However, aortic
or pulmonary insufficiency is typically well tolerated and
seldom of clinical significance. Rarely, cases of aortic or
pulmonary valve dysplasia resulting in a predominantly
regurgitant valve with severe insufficiency are detected,
which may progress to cardiac decompensation.
Malformations of the Great Vessels
Vascular Ring Anomalies

Several malformations of the arterial system have been
described in animals; the most common clinical presentation is a pediatric animal with dysphagia. The basic
pathophysiology of these malformations is an embryologic defect resulting from abnormal persistence or
regression of fetal vascular structures (aortic arches),
ultimately leading to an abnormal spatial arrangement of
the major intrathoracic arteries relative to the trachea
and esophagus. Clinical signs are the direct result of
extraluminal compression of the esophagus (resulting in
megaesophagus, regurgitation, or aspiration pneumonia) and/or trachea (resulting in inspiratory stridor,
coughing, or dyspnea). Persistence of the right aortic
arch is the most common vascular ring observed in small
animals. Therapy is directed at surgical decompression
and transection of the offending structure, though
esophageal dysfunction may persist if not corrected at a
young age.
Cyanotic Heart Disease
Tetralogy of Fallot

Cyanotic heart disease is not common in small animals,
but tetralogy of Fallot (ToF) is recognized in 2–6% of
cases of CHD. ToF is the most common cyanotic CHD
of humans and the four components of the tetralogy are
right ventricular outflow tract obstruction, right ventricular hypertrophy, VSD, and dextroposition of the
aorta. The underlying pathophysiology of this defect is
believed to result from incomplete rotation and faulty
partitioning of the developmental outflow tracts
(­comprising the distal portions of the left and right
­ventricles and the proximal portion of the great vessels). In simple terms, the aorta receives more of the
embryologic tissue and aortic development occurs at
the expense of the pulmonary trunk. Therefore, the
­ventricular septum cannot close because the aorta is
enlarged and deviated to the right. The result of right
ventricular outflow obstruction with a VSD is that
deoxygenated blood is diverted to the systemic circulation, causing cyanosis, weakness, and collapse. Long‐
standing sequelae include erythrocytosis and blood
hyperviscosity due to increased erythropoiesis.

VetBooks.ir

24 Congenital Heart Disease

­Epidemiology
The prevalence of CHD in the dog and cat is difficult to
quantify due to a lack of routine perinatal care, occurrence
of conditions that are not apparent on routine physical
examination, and hospital biases in published reports.
The work of Detweiler and Patterson in the Philadelphia
area suggested a CHD prevalence rate of 0.56% among
5000 dogs surveyed in the mid‐twentieth century, while
Buchanan found a rate of 0.67% for all dogs presented to
the University of Pennsylvania between 1987 and 1989.
While the true prevalence of CHD in dogs and cats is
unknown, there are data available evaluating the relative
incidence of specific malformations in each species. The
author compiled data from several studies in an attempt
to summarize the relative prevalence of CHD in small
animals. Ten applicable studies of CHD prevalence in
dogs were found in the veterinary literature, comprising a
sum of 4694 defects. When totaled, PDA (26%), SAS
(24%), and PS (22%) were the most common and of nearly
equal incidence. As such, these three diseases should be
highest on a practitioner’s differential list when listening
to a puppy with a loud heart murmur; other congenital
malformations of the heart are less common.
There are fewer data available about CHD prevalence
in the cat. When evaluating several studies of CHD prevalence in cats, five studies covering 435 defects can be
found. Ventricular septal defect appears to be the most
common defect in the cat, comprising over 18% of cases.
PDA is not generally considered a common disease in
the cat, compared to the dog, but was noted in over 11%
of defects. Dysplasia of the atrioventricular valves (mitral
or tricuspid) each accounted for an additional 10% of
defects. Feline CHD, therefore, should be considered
­distinct from and with a different incidence of common
defects than canine CHD. Semilunar valve disease
(PS and SAS) is exceedingly rare in cats.

­Signalment
Age
Most animals with CHD present at a young age. However,
adult animals with undiagnosed CHD may present later
in life and often as a result of complications (heart failure, syncope, or cyanosis) from their cardiovascular disorder if it was not detected at an earlier age.
Sex
Both sexes are commonly afflicted with CHD, though
sex predilections for some specific conditions have
been identified. PDA has been reported to occur more

commonly in female dogs, with a 3:1 female predominance. Pulmonary valve stenosis has not been recognized as having gender predominance except in the
English bulldog, where males are more commonly
afflicted than females. A male predominance for TVD
has also been reported in the veterinary literature. In the
cat, a male predominance has been suggested for atrioventricular valve malformation, aortic stenosis, and
­tricuspid valve dysplasia.
Breed
Numerous breed predilections have been reported for
animals with CHD, particularly dogs. Table 24.1 shows a
listing of common defects and the breeds known or suspected to have an increased prevalence of each defect.
This table should not be considered authoritative or
exhaustive, as spontaneous defects can occur in any breed
at any time. Additionally, the incidence of CHD will likely
change as breed populations continue to evolve. In the
cat, few breed predilections are recognized other than
endocardial fibroelastosis, which is reported to have a
higher prevalence in Burmese and Siamese breeds.

­History and Clinical Signs
Animals with complex defects or severe CHD may present within the first days to weeks of life due to failure to
thrive, dyspnea, cyanosis, or syncope. It is likely that
most puppies and kittens with severe cardiac malformations die early in life and prior to veterinary examination.
The common history for dogs and cats with CHD is that
of an asymptomatic pet with an appointment for a wellness exam, deworming, and vaccination. Auscultation
during the physical examination of these patients is often
the first and earliest clue that CHD may be present – as
such, careful and thorough examination of all young animals is advised.

­Diagnosis
Auscultation
Screening for congenital cardiac disease typically begins
with a thorough physical examination performed at the
first general health examination. Auscultation is imperative for screening of CHD as the most common forms of
CHD typically present with a systolic (SAS, PS, VSD,
TVD) or continuous (PDA) murmur. Auscultation in
puppies and kittens should be performed in a quiet room
with appropriate restraint and sufficient time devoted to
a thorough examination.

235

VetBooks.ir

Table 24.1 Breed predilection of common congenital heart defects in the dog
PDA

SAS/AS

PS

VSD

ASD

MVD

TVD

ToF

Vasc Ring

Australian
shepherd

Bouvier de
Flandres

Airedale terrier

Beagle

Boxer

Bull terrier

Boxer

English
bulldog

Cocker
spaniel

Bichon frise

Boxer

American
Staffordshire terrier

Brittany
spaniel

Doberman
pinscher

German
shepherd

German
shepherd

Keeshond

German
shepherd

Cavalier King
Charles spaniel

Bull terrier

Beagle

Chow chow

Standard
poodle

Golden
retriever

Golden
retriever

Wire‐haired
fox terrier

Great
Dane

Chihuahua

Dogue de Bordeaux

Boxer

English bulldog

Great Dane

Great Dane

Cocker spaniel

English bulldog

Boykin spaniel

English springer spaniel

Mastiff

Labrador
retriever

Collie

German shepherd

Bull mastiff

French bulldog

Newfoundland

Old English sheepdog

English springer
spaniel

Golden retriever

Cavalier King
Charles spaniel

German
shepherd

Rottweiler

Weimeraner

German shepherd

Great Dane

Chihuahua

Keeshond

Keeshond

Newfoundland

Cocker spaniel

Newfoundland

Kerry blue terrier

Rottweiler

English bulldog

Samoyed

Labrador retriever

Samoyed

French bulldog

Maltese

Miniature schnauzer

Miniature poodle

Pittbull terrier

Newfoundland

Samoyed

Pomeranian

Terrier crosses

Rottweiler

West Highland white terrier

Shetland sheepdog

Yorkshire errier

Irish setter

Toy poodle
Yorkshire terrier
AS, valvar aortic stenosis; ASD, atrial septal defect; MVD, mitral valve dysplasia; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; PS, pulmonary valve stenosis; SAS, subaortic stenosis; ToF, tetralogy of Fallot;
TVD, tricuspid valve dysplasia; Vasc Ring, vascular ring anomaly; VSD, ventricular septal defect.

VetBooks.ir

24 Congenital Heart Disease

For dogs, all valve areas should be evaluated, including
the mitral valve area on the left thoracic wall where the apical impulse is felt most strongly, the semilunar valve area
(aortic and pulmonary valves) at the left heart base (the
ventral 2nd–4th intercostal spaces), the area of the great
vessels just dorsal to the left heart base, and the tricuspid
valve area on the right thoracic wall. In the cat, localization
of individual valve areas is more problematic and auscultation is usually directed along the left and right sternal border, moving from caudal to cranial on either side.
Murmur location and intensity are useful in differentiating between types of CHD as well as for distinguishing
a physiologic or innocent murmur from that caused by
CHD. Left and right apical systolic murmurs are commonly due to atrioventricular valve regurgitation and, in
a young animal, if an apical systolic murmur is heard,
defects of MVD and TVD should be considered most
strongly. The murmur of a typical membranous VSD is
harsh and systolic at the right sternal boarder. Left basilar systolic murmurs can be more problematic as they
can indicate either an innocent murmur or CHD such as
SAS, PS, or ASD. High‐intensity murmurs (grade IV–VI
or louder) usually indicate the presence of significant
CHD regardless of location and are an indication for
more advanced diagnostics. However, less intense murmurs (grade III–VI or less) may originate either from
CHD or an innocent cause.
Evaluating left basilar systolic murmurs with a rubric
of the 6 Ss (Table 24.2) can be useful to try and guide the
need for additional diagnostic testing. In general, a soft
left basilar systolic murmur heard in a young puppy or
kitten that decreases in intensity over the first months of
life and/or disappears by 6 months of age is likely to be
innocent. If the murmur is loud or harsh, continuous or

diastolic in duration, or associated with concurrent
­cardiac signs (arrhythmia, cough, syncope), then CHD
should be considered more likely and further testing
should be advised.
Other aspects of a cardiac physical examination
include evaluation of the mucous membranes, jugular
veins, and pulse quality. Mucous membranes should be
evaluated for evidence of cyanosis, which may be indicative of a right‐to‐left intracardiac shunt. Very poor
peripheral perfusion can be suggested by pale mucous
membranes and/or a prolonged capillary refill time even
in the absence of an obvious heart murmur. Hypokinetic
femoral pulses are commonly detected in moderate to
severe SAS, while a hyperkinetic pulse quality is suggestive of a wide pulse pressure from PDA or severe aortic
insufficiency. Jugular pulsation with or without distension can suggest tricuspid regurgitation or elevated
right‐sided pressures due to tricuspid valve dysplasia,
PS, or pulmonary hypertension from severe left‐to‐right
shunting defects.
Additional Diagnostic Tests
While the physical examination is an important aspect of
screening for the presence of CHD, it is difficult to make
a definitive diagnosis from signalment and physical
examination alone. Ancillary diagnostic tests, like thoracic radiography and electrocardiography (ECG), may
be useful in narrowing the differential diagnostic list and
determining disease severity, but can also add cost to the
initial evaluation without providing definitive diagnostic
information. In current veterinary practice, echocardiography with Doppler is considered the gold standard
diagnostic test for confirmation of CHD.

Table 24.2 An auscultation rubric, the six Ss, for evaluation of a left basilar systolic murmur in a young animal to help determine
the likelihood that the murmur is physiologic or innocent versus pathologic
Descriptor

An innocent or physiologic murmur is more likely

Significant congenital heart disease is more likely

Sensitive

The murmur is absent or much softer at rest; it
changes with position or phase of respiration

The murmur is present at rest or with activity;
it can be heard at all times

Short

The murmur is of short duration,
predominantly early systolic

The murmur remains loud throughout nearly
all of systole

Single

There are no other associated abnormal heart
sounds or physical exam abnormalities; no
clicks, gallops, or arrhythmias are heard

Additional auscultatory abnormalities are
present and/or there are other physical exam
abnormalities

Small

The murmur is localized to the left base or one
single location, it does not radiate

The murmur radiates from the point of
maximal intensity

Soft

The murmur is soft or quiet; generally grade I
or II out of VI

The murmur is loud, generally grade III–VI or
louder

Systolic

The murmur duration is limited to systole

The murmur is continuous or a diastolic
component can also be appreciated

Source: Adapted from Bronzetti and Corzani (2010) with permission of SAGE Publications.

237

VetBooks.ir

238

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

Electrocardiography

Thoracic Radiography

Electrocardiography may be beneficial in detecting cardiac changes related to CHD, though is most useful for
characterizing dysrhythmias heard on auscultation.
CHDs that cause ventricular enlargement, such as PS
and SAS, may provide a substrate for ventricular
arrhythmias secondary to myocardial ischemia.
However, ECG is a more specific rather than sensitive
test as animals with CHD may have a normal ECG.
Figure 24.2 shows examples of rhythm disturbances that
may be seen in the setting of CHD. Again, it should be
noted that such findings are supportive of a diagnosis,
but not definitive.

Similar to ECG, thoracic radiographs provide useful supplementary information in the evaluation of a patient with
suspected CHD. However, thoracic radiography is most
useful when the veterinarian suspects an animal’s heart
disease has decompensated and resulted in pulmonary
edema or pleural effusion. If signs of r­ espiratory compromise or cough are apparent on examination, thoracic radiographs are strongly advised. In the asymptomatic animal
with a murmur, however, they are less specific than echocardiography in confirming a diagnosis. Figure 24.3 provides examples of radiographic ­evidence of decompensated
heart failure ­secondary to CHD.

I

(a)

II

III

aVR
aVL
aVF

I

50 mm/sec
10 mm/mV
60~ 0.05–40 Hz

(b)

II

III

0000 – 0000

6 – Second Delayed

00536

Figure 24.2 Example ECG traces from two dogs with congenital heart disease, recorded at 50 mm/s paper speed, calibration of 1 cm/mV.
(a) Six‐lead ECG from a 1.5‐year‐old miniature pinscher with pulmonary valve stenosis. A regular rhythm with right axis deviation,
characterized by prominent S‐waves in leads I, II, and III, is seen. (b) A three‐lead ECG trace from a 1‐year‐old golden retriever with
subaortic stenosis. An underlying sinus arrhythmia is seen with one premature ventricular complex (asterisk). The R‐wave amplitude is tall,
consistent with left ventricular hypertrophy, and the ST segment is mildly depressed, consistent with subendocardial ischemia – both
findings common in dogs with subaortic stenosis.

VetBooks.ir

24 Congenital Heart Disease

(a)

(c)

(e)

(b)

(d)

(f)

Figure 24.3 Compilation of thoracic radiographs from two dogs and a cat with congenital heart disease and decompensated heart failure.
(a,b) A 1.5‐year‐old mixed‐breed dog with a PDA. Severe left heart enlargement, dilation of the aortic arch, pulmonary venous distension and
tortuosity, and perihilar interstitial densities are apparent. (c,d) A 5‐month‐old Angora cat with a large atrial septal defect. Severe cardiac
enlargement, pulmonary overcirculation, and mild pulmonary interstitial infiltrates are apparent. (e,f) A 3‐year‐old German shepherd dog
with tricuspid valve dysplasia and right‐sided congestive heart failure. Right atrial and ventricular enlargement is evident in the dorsoventral
view (e). In the lateral view (f), the thoracic structures, including the cardiac silhouette, are obscured by severe pleural effusion.

Cardiac Biomarkers: Troponin and NT‐proBNP

In recent years, the use of cardiac biomarkers to screen
­animals for the presence of acquired cardiovascular ­disease
has gained in popularity. The biomarkers receiving the

most attention in veterinary cardiology include cardiac
troponin I (cTnI) and the amino terminus of the prohormone B‐type natriuretic peptide (NT‐proBNP). There
have been no comprehensive studies looking at the utility

239

VetBooks.ir

240

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

of these tests in animals with CHD, though evidence in
human cardiology suggests that these markers are often
elevated in children with severe CHD. At this time, no
guidance can be given for or against the utility of cardiac
biomarkers in screening animals for CHD.
Echocardiography

History, physical examination, thoracic radiography, and
ECG are all useful diagnostic tests for determining the
presence of CHD, but are less capable of making a definitive diagnosis, assessing disease severity, or ruling out
the presence of multiple or complex congenital lesions.
In veterinary medicine, echocardiography with Doppler
is the noninvasive gold standard for definitive diagnosis
of CHD. All animals with a high suspicion of CHD should
ideally have a detailed echocardiogram performed by a
veterinarian trained in the diagnosis of CHD.
Echocardiography allows for the detection of specific
types of CHD, the presence of concomitant defects, and
assessment of disease severity, risk for complications,
direction of cardiac shunting, estimate of intracardiac
pressures, and likelihood of congestive heart failure.
Echocardiography is also necessary in assessing the need
for therapy as well as for planning interventional or surgical options. Figure 24.4 provides representative two‐
dimensional images of common CHD seen in the dog
and cat by echocardiography.
Angiography

Nonselective or selective angiography with fluoroscopic
visualization of cardiac structures was historically the
definitive test for CHD prior to the advent of echocardiography. For some defects, angiography is still utilized, particularly for lesions of the great vessels that are not easily
appreciated by ultrasound. Figure 24.5 shows a nonselective, digitally subtracted angiogram of a right‐to‐left
shunting PDA in a cat, while Figure 24.6 shows a right ventriculogram from a dog with PS. In practice, angiography
is used most commonly at the time of interventional therapy to confirm the diagnosis, visualize the defect to be
addressed, and guide intervention with balloon or device,
as discussed in the interventional therapy section.
Cross‐Sectional Imaging

Cardiac computed tomography and magnetic resonance
imaging allow three‐dimensional reconstructions of the
heart and great vessels. Such imaging modalities are
commonly employed in human medicine to evaluate
children with CHD and case reports of their use in veterinary medicine are present in the literature. Figure 24.7
shows a three‐dimensional reconstruction of a computed tomographic angiogram in a dog with PS. The
benefit of cross‐sectional imaging is likely greatest in
instances of complex CHD where the cardiac anatomy
can be viewed from multiple perspectives in situ.

­Therapy
Medical Therapy
Asymptomatic Disease

Treatment of asymptomatic CHD depends on the
­specific underlying disease and its severity, so definitive
diagnosis is essential. In general, diseases of moderate to
severe outflow tract obstruction causing concentric
hypertrophy (e.g., SAS and PS) are treated by the author
with beta‐blockers such as atenolol. Atenolol is typically
uptitrated in dose over 4–8 weeks, starting at 0.2–0.5 mg/
kg (0.1–0.2 mg/lb) q12h PO and increasing to a target
dose of 1–1.5 mg/kg (0.4–0.7 mg/lb) q12h PO. The
rationale for such therapy is that beta‐blockers help to
reduce the force of myocardial contraction, thereby
reducing myocardial oxygen demand and protecting the
diseased/hypertrophied myocardium. The antiarrhythmic properties of atenolol are also believed to be of
­benefit as these patients are at risk for life‐threatening
arrhythmias. Atenolol is often chosen given its low cost,
appropriate size tablets, and ease of administration.
Therapy for asymptomatic diseases of volume overload such as moderate to severe mitral or tricuspid
regurgitation and left‐to‐right shunting defects like PDA,
prior to development of CHF, is controversial. However,
the addition of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitors such as enalapril at 0.5 mg/kg (0.2 mg/lb) q12h
PO is common if there is severe ventricular dilation,
impaired cardiac output, and atrial enlargement suggesting high risk for development of CHF.
Symptomatic Disease

Medical therapy of symptomatic CHD depends on the
type of lesion and developing clinical signs. Diseases
of outflow tract obstruction (SAS, PS) commonly cause
exercise intolerance and syncope related to reduced
­cardiac output, inappropriate baroreceptor activation,
and/or ventricular arrhythmias. Life‐threatening or
symptomatic ventricular arrhythmias are treated with
antiarrhythmic agents. Sotalol at a dose of 1–2 mg/kg
(0.4–0.9 mg/lb) q12h PO is typically the first‐line antiarrhythmic of choice so long as ventricular function is not
severely depressed. Syncope that occurs without ventricular arrhythmias (presumed to be reflex‐mediated
­syncope whereby the cardiac hypertrophy stimulates an
exaggerated baroreceptor response) is typically treated
with beta‐blockade. Modification of exercise level with
avoidance of high‐level intense or burst activity will also
commonly reduce this clinical sign.
Diseases of left‐sided volume overload will commonly cause symptoms of cough in the dog prior to the
onset of CHF due to severe left atrial enlargement and
resultant left bronchial compression. Bronchial compression in the absence of CHF may be treated with

VetBooks.ir

24 Congenital Heart Disease

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 24.4 Representative two‐dimensional echocardiographic images of common congenital heart defects in two dogs and a cat. (a,b)
Long‐axis images from a 6‐month‐old Newfoundland with subaortic stenosis. The ascending aorta (Ao) is dilated and there is a ring of
hyperechoic tissue (arrow) immediately below the aortic valve. Turbulent flow is seen originating at this location in (b). (c,d) Short‐axis
images of pulmonary valve stenosis in a 9‐month‐old mixed‐breed dog. The right ventricle (RV) is hypertrophied, the pulmonary
trunk (PA) is dilated, and the pulmonary valve leaflets are thickened and fused together at their tips (arrow). Turbulence begins at the level
of the stenosed valve in (d). (e,f ) Long‐axis images of a membranous ventricular septal defect (VSD) in a cat. Immediately below the aorta
(Ao) there is a drop‐out in the ventricular septum consistent with a VSD (arrow). Color Doppler shows the direction of the turbulent flow
across the VSD from left to right in (f ).

ACE inhibitors and low‐dose furosemide (1 mg/kg
[0.5 mg/lb] q12h PO) to decrease preload and left atrial
pressure, thereby reducing bronchial compression and
minimizing symptoms.

Pulmonary hypertension can develop in CHD secondary to left‐to‐right shunting lesions such as PDA, VSD,
and ASD or secondary to chronic, severe elevations in
left atrial pressure. Pulmonary hypertension therapy is

241

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

VetBooks.ir

242

Figure 24.5 Lateral nonselective digitally subtracted angiogram
of a right‐to‐left shunting PDA in a 1‐year‐old cat. The injection
was made into a cephalic vein and contrast can be seen in the
cranial vena cava (CrVC), right atrium (RA), right ventricle (RV), and
pulmonary arteries (arrowheads). Contrast can be seen to
communicate from the pulmonary artery through the ductus
(asterisk) and into the descending aorta (DAo).

Figure 24.6 Selective right ventriculogram from a 6‐month‐old
English bulldog with pulmonary valve stenosis. An angiographic
catheter is present in the right ventricle and contrast is injected,
highlighting thickened and doming pulmonary valve leaflets
(arrow), muscular hypertrophy and narrowing of the right ventricular
outflow tract below the valve, and a dilated pulmonary trunk
(asterisk). A calibration catheter is present in the esophagus.

Figure 24.7 Three‐dimensional reconstruction of a computed
tomographic angiogram in a 2‐year‐old English bulldog with
pulmonary valve stenosis. The thorax is viewed from a ventral
perspective and the narrowed pulmonary valve annulus can be
seen (arrow) with poststenotic dilation of the pulmonary trunk
(asterisk) and a severely dilated right atrium (RA).

instituted with the development of secondary symptoms
such as severe exercise intolerance, syncope, right‐sided
CHF, and shunt reversal causing right‐to‐left shunting,
hypoxemia, and erythrocytosis. Therapy is aimed at
­pulmonary vasodilation, most commonly with phosphodiesterase‐V inhibitors like sildenafil (usual dose 2 mg/kg
[1 mg/lb] q8–12h PO).
Defects leading to pulmonary hypertension and shunt
reversal (so‐called Eisenmenger’s physiology) lead to
cyanosis and secondary erythrocytosis (packed cell
­volume >55%) and are treated with periodic phlebotomy
or chemotherapeutic agents causing reduction in RBC
production, such as hydroxyurea. The aim of phlebotomy or hydroxyurea therapy for cyanotic heart disease is
a packed cell volume of approximately 55–60% as this level
of erythrocytosis balances increased oxygen‐carrying
capacity without hyperviscosity.
Severe congenital cardiac disease due to either pressure or volume overload will commonly lead to development of left‐ or right‐sided CHF. Left‐sided CHF presents
with coughing, tachypnea, and respiratory distress
secondary to pulmonary edema, whereas right‐sided
­
CHF presents with signs of jugular distension, hepatomegaly, ascites, and/or pleural effusion. CHF, regardless
of cause, is treated with diuretics and ACE inhibitors.

VetBooks.ir

24 Congenital Heart Disease

In the author’s experience, right‐sided CHF will commonly need higher doses of oral furosemide or an alternative diuretic such as torsemide due to the potential for
intestinal edema causing decreased gastrointestinal
absorption. ACE inhibitors should always be used in the
treatment of chronic CHF to decrease RAAS activation
associated with advanced heart failure and diuretic
administration.
Pimobendan has become standard of care in the treatment of CHF secondary to acquired cardiac diseases,
such as dilated cardiomyopathy and chronic degenerative valve disease. While no definitive data are available
on the use of pimobendan in congenital cardiac disease,
most cardiologists advocate its use with CHF due to
­diseases of volume overload such as PDA or mitral valve
dysplasia. The administration of pimobendan as a treatment for CHF secondary to diseases of pressure overload
like SAS and PS is becoming more commonplace.
However, extralabel use of pimobendan should be done
cautiously in the setting of outflow tract obstruction due
to potential for increase in pressure gradient, wall stress,
and myocardial oxygen consumption. Consultation with
a veterinary cardiologist is advised prior to pimobendan
use in cases of SAS and PS with CHF.
Surgical and Interventional Therapy
Congenital heart disease can be palliated medically, as
noted above, but also may be treated by minimally invasive (interventional) or traditional surgical techniques
whenever possible. An accurate diagnosis of CHD is
­critical to appropriately guide therapy as some animals
can go on to live a normal life if treated early.
(a)

(b)

The decision to operate or pursue transcatheter therapy
relates to the expertise of the veterinarian performing
the procedure, anatomy of the defect, and client preference. Prospective comparison studies are lacking in veterinary medicine, though retrospective data on PDA
closure suggest comparable to improved outcomes from
a transcatheter approach compared to surgery. Novel
devices, such as the Amplatz™ canine ductal occluder,
have greatly improved the ease with which PDA occlusion can be performed from a transarterial approach
(Figure 24.8). Gordon et al. showed complete PDA occlusion in 40 of 41 dogs treated by a transarterial canine‐
specific device with no perioperative mortality compared
to a reported perioperative mortality of 2–8% in the surgical literature during open PDA ligation [1].
The CHD conditions which currently have a well‐
established surgical or interventional treatment option
include PDA, persistent right aortic arch (PRAA), and
PS. Dogs with VSD or ASD have been successfully
treated by both surgical and interventional techniques
and, though costly, open surgical repair and newer transcatheter devices for closure of these defects may be
­considered for the motivated client. Cyanotic ToF dogs
can be palliated by surgical construction of a systemic‐
to‐pulmonary anastamosis, typically a modified Blalock–
Taussig shunt, which improves pulmonary blood flow
and lessens central cyanosis. Open‐heart repair of ToF
has also been described in the dog. Atrioventricular
valve dysplasia is seldom treated by surgical or interventional techniques but if a stenotic component is present,
balloon valvuloplasty of the tricuspid or mitral valve may
be considered. Open surgical repair of a dysplastic valve
may also be considered for the motivated client.
(c)

Figure 24.8 Fluoroscopic images obtained during transcatheter occlusion of PDA in a 2‐year‐old mixed‐breed dog. (a) A sheath has been
advanced from the femoral artery to the thoracic aorta and injected contrast agent defines the ductus (asterisk) and the pulmonary trunk
(PA). (b) The Amplatz™ canine ductal occluder (arrow) has been advanced through the same sheath and deployed across the ductus, with
contrast showing complete ductal occlusion. (c) The wire attached to the Amplatz™ canine ductal occluder has been removed as well as
the sheath, and the device (arrow) is left permanently in place.

243

VetBooks.ir

244

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

­Prognosis
The prognosis for the animal with CHD is heavily
dependent on the underlying condition and the severity
of the defect. Mild stenosis of the semilunar valves (PS,
SAS) rarely causes morbidity or altered survival.
Conversely, dogs with severe SAS have been reported to
have median survival of only 1.5–4 years. For left‐to‐
right shunting lesions, prognosis is highly dependent on
the volume of shunt flow. Small shunts (e.g., restrictive
VSDs) are often well tolerated and can be associated with
a normal lifespan. Large PDAs, however, are known to

result in mortality of 60% or more within a year of diagnosis if they are not closed by surgery or intervention.
For most CHD, there is a paucity of literature on prognosis and survival. Experienced cardiologists have seen animals with severe disease live a near‐normal lifespan, while
other animals with moderate disease die from the defect
prematurely. At the present time, predicting the precise
prognosis for an individual animal with CHD is very difficult. Serial evaluations to detect asymptomatic cardiac
dysfunction or dysrhythmias, as well as the development of
clinical signs (cough, lethargy, collapse, etc.), are currently
the methods used to monitor these animals.

Reference
1 Gordon SG, Miller MW, Roland RM, et al. Transcatheter

atrial septal defect closure with the Amplatzer atrial

septal occluder in 13 dogs: short‐ and mid‐term
outcome. J Vet Intern Med 2009; 23(5): 995–1002.

Further Reading
Bronzetti G and Corzani A. The seven “S” murmurs: an
alliteration about innocent murmurs in cardiac
auscultation. Clin Pediatr 2010; 49(7): 713.
Francis AJ, Johnson MJS, Culshaw GC, Corcoran BM, Martin
MWS, French AT. Outcome in 55 dogs with pulmonic
stenosis that did not undergo balloon valvuloplasty or
surgery. J Small Anim Pract 2011; 52(6): 282–8.
Hoglund K, Haggstrom J, Bussadori C, Kvart C. A
prospective study of systolic ejection murmurs and left

ventricular outflow tract in boxers. J Small Anim Pract
2011; 52(1): 11–17.
Meurs KM. Genetics of cardiac disease in the small animal
patient. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2010;
40(4): 701–15.
Oliveira P, Domenech O, Silva J, Vannini S, Bussadori R,
Bussadori C. Retrospective review of congenital heart
disease in 976 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2011; 25(3):
477–83.

VetBooks.ir

245

25
Valvular Heart Disease
Michele Borgarelli, DVM, PhD, DECVIM (Cardiology)
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, Virginia‐Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, Blacksburg, VA, USA

­Canine Degenerative Myxomatous
Mitral Valve Disease
Etiology and Pathophysiology
Canine chronic myxomatous mitral valve disease
(MMVD) is the result of a progressive myxomatous
degeneration of mitral valve leaflets and chordae tendinae. Pathologic changes include excessive deposition of
mucopolysaccharide, fragmentation of elastin, and disorganization and disruption of collagen.
The exact etiology of the disease has not been established. Because the disease has a high prevalence in some
breeds, such as Cavalier King Charles spaniel (CKCS), a
genetic predisposition has been hypothesized. Swenson
and co‐workers provided the first evidence of a genetic
predisposition in 1996. These authors reported that
CKCS dogs with a more severe disease status produced
more offspring with murmurs and with murmurs of
higher intensity than dogs with a low‐intensity status.
They concluded that MMVD is inherited as a polygenic
trait. The same etiology has been reported for other
breeds. It has also been reported that the threshold for
the expression of the disease is lower in males than in
females. This would explain why males present with the
disease at a younger age.
Recently, using a genome‐wide association study,
two specific loci associated with development of
MMVD in CKCS have been identified. It is likely that
other factors might contribute to the development of
the disease, including the anatomy of the mitral valve,
obesity, and exercise. Recently, serotonin has been
hypothesized as playing a role in the pathogenesis of
MMVD. However, despite similarities in the myxomatous pathology of serotoninergic and degenerative
mitral valves, a direct cause–effect relationship between
serotonin and the pathogenesis of MMVD has not
been established.

Activation of valvular interstitial cells (VICs) is likely
to play an important role in the pathogenesis of the disease. VICs represent the most common cell type in the
cardiac valves and are responsible for extracellular
matrix synthesis, valvular repair, and remodeling. VICs
are commonly present in a quiescent state but can be
activated by endothelial damage or valvular stress.
Activated VICs are able to synthesize collagen, fibronectin, elastin, and growth factors and are responsible for
extracellular matrix remodeling through production of
matrix metalloproteinases and their inhibitors (tissue
inhibitors of metalloproteinases [TIMPs]). Eventually,
this process leads to decreases in collagen content and
deposition of proteoglycan, typical of the myxomatous
degenerative process. In summary, it can be hypothesized that in dogs with a genetic predisposition for the
disease, mechanic stimuli can activate VICs with valvular remodeling and myxomatous degeneration. This
hypothesis would support the theory that myxomatous
degeneration is the end‐result of a continuous process of
damage and repair as a result of mitral valve stress.
The myxomatous degeneration of the valve leaflets
eventually leads to prolapse and valvular insufficiency.
Accordingly, mitral valve prolapse usually precedes
mitral valve insufficiency. Mild mitral valve insufficiency
is generally well tolerated by dogs and is not associated
with any compensatory response because it is not associated with decreased cardiac output. However, if the disease progresses and regurgitation through the mitral
valve into the left atrial becomes more severe, cardiac
output decreases and activation of compensatory mechanisms occurs. These mechanisms include activation of
the renin‐angiotensin‐aldosterone system (RAAS) and
sympathetic nervous system, and increased release of
endothelin, vasopressin, and natriuretic hormones. Due
to the chronic nature of the disease, these mechanisms
are not necessarily activated in the early stages of
MMVD. This consideration has important therapeutic

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

246

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

implications. In particular, when the RAAS becomes
activated in dogs with natural occurring MMVD has
been the source of much controversy. Some studies suggest that the RAAS might be activated relatively early in
the history of the disease, whereas other studies suggest
otherwise. Further complicating the picture is the observation that in dogs, alternative pathways for angiotensin
II production, such as the chymase pathway, may be particularly active. Moreover, it is possible that release of
natriuretic hormones from the dilated left atrium
and ventricle might balance RAAS and sympathetic
activation.
Moderate to severe mitral valve regurgitation leads to
left ventricular volume overload, left atrial and left ventricular enlargement. Mitral valve insufficiency due to
MMVD represents a unique hemodynamic condition
with increased preload and decreased afterload. This is
because a significant volume of left ventricular preload is
ejected into the left atrium at the beginning of systole.
Because the left atrium is a low‐pressure chamber, there
is no increase in cardiac work. This is likely the reason
why many dogs with severe mitral valve regurgitation
can tolerate this situation for a long time without presenting clinical signs.
Left ventricular eccentric hypertrophy, decreased
afterload, and increased sympathetic activation produce
hyperkinetic left ventricular function. Therefore, the
recognition of normal values for fractional shortening or
ejection fraction during an echocardiographic exam in
dogs with left ventricular enlargement suggests the presence of a systolic dysfunction. Systolic dysfunction has
been recognized to play an important role in disease progression and it is independent of clinical status. It has
been hypothesized that systolic dysfunction in dogs with
MMVD is the consequence of inadequate hypertrophy.
Wall stress imposed by pure volume overload might not
be a very potent stimulus for cardiac hypertrophy, and
experimental canine models of MMVD systolic dysfunction were associated with inadequate left ventricular
hypertrophy. Systolic dysfunction is more apparent in
large‐breed dogs affected by MMVD.
Left atrial function also plays an important role in the
pathophysiology of the disease. Slowly progressing mitral
valve regurgitation is associated with a progressive dilation of the left atrium. If left atrial compliance is maintained, filling pressure is also maintained close to normal
limits. Accordingly, patients with severe mitral regurgitation do not develop pulmonary edema. However,
chronic dilation of the left atrium is associated with left
atrial hypertrophy and remodeling that, with time,
decreases compliance and leads to development of pulmonary edema. In dogs with rupture of a major chorda
tendinea, there is an acute worsening of mitral regurgitation. In this condition, the left atrium has no time to

enlarge and there is a sudden increase of left atrial pressure with development of acute pulmonary edema.
Epidemiology
Myxomatous mitral valve disease is the most common
heart disease in dogs and the most frequent cause of congestive heart failure in this species. MMVD in dogs
­represents 75% of all cardiovascular disease in this species. The prevalence of the disease varies with age and
whether the study is based on necropsy, echocardiographic or clinical findings. The prevalence of MMVD
has also been correlated with breed. In some breeds,
such as the CKCS, the prevalence of the disease in animals older than 10 years is greater than 90%. Males are
also reported to develop the disease at a younger age
than females. Although the disease is more commonly
diagnosed in small‐breed dogs, it can occur in large‐
breed dogs.
History and Clinical Signs
Myxomatous mitral valve disease is a chronic disease in
which the clinical presentation is variable. Some patients
remain asymptomatic for all their lives, whereas others
develop life‐threating pulmonary edema and chronic
congestive heart failure (CHF). Most dogs with mild to
moderate MMVD are generally free of clinical signs.
The presence of clinical signs is generally related to the
severity of the disease. Dogs with pulmonary edema have
tachypnea and dyspnea. It has been reported that the
normal respiratory rate at rest for dogs should be less
than 30 breaths per minute. Accordingly, an increased
respiratory rate at rest might represent the first clinical
sign of worsening of the disease. Dogs with pulmonary
edema are often anxious and have difficulties sleeping.
They often cannot lie in lateral recumbency and prefer a
sternal position (orthopnea). Weight loss is common in
dogs with advanced stages of MMVD and CHF. Patients
that develop right‐sided heart failure have abdominal
distension due to ascites. Syncope is occasionally
reported in dogs with MMVD. Arrhythmias, pulmonary
hypertension, vasovagal syncope, and coughing can
cause syncope in these patients.
Cough represents the most common complaint for
dogs affected by MMVD, especially in small breeds. It
should be stressed that cough is a general clinical sign of
respiratory disease and its presence in a dog with a murmur is not an indicator for starting treatment for CHF.
Old small‐breed dogs are commonly affected by tracheobronchial disease and by MMVD. In these patients, the
cough is often the result of their primary respiratory disease and not heart disease. A recent study has shown
that cough was not associated with the presence of active

VetBooks.ir

25 Valvular Heart Disease

CHF in 206 dogs with MMVD at different stages. In this
study, cough was associated with left atrial enlargement
and the presence of an abnormal radiographic airway
pattern. Left atrial enlargement compressing the mainstem bronchus is believed to induce cough in patients
with primary bronchomalacia.
Diagnosis
The American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine
Specialty of Cardiology consensus panel has published
guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of canine
chronic valvular heart disease. The guidelines propose a
modification of a staging system for MMVD that is currently used to classify human patients with heart failure
(Table 25.1). This classification introduces the concept of
patients at risk for developing MMVD but that currently
do not have heart disease (stage A). The reason for introducing this stage is to encourage veterinarians to develop
appropriate screening programs and inform owners
regarding the risk of an animal developing the disease.
Diagnosis of MMVD is generally suspected following a
careful auscultation. In early stages of MMVD a midsystolic click may represent the only auscultatory finding.
The click is often intermittent and can be better appreciated at higher heart rates. It is believed the midsystolic
click is caused by vibration of the prolapsing mitral valve
leaflets and by the tensing of redundant chordae
tendineae. In dogs with mild MMVD and mild mitral
Table 25.1 Classification system for dogs affected by
myxomatous mitral valve disease (MMVD)
Stage

Definition

A

Dogs at risk for developing MMVD that have no
identifiable cardiac structural disorder (i.e., Cavalier
King Charles spaniel, dachshunds)

B1

Dogs with MMVD that have never developed clinical
signs and have no radiographic or echocardiographic
evidence of cardiac remodeling

B2

Dogs with MMVD that have never developed clinical
signs but have radiographic or echocardiographic
evidence of cardiac remodeling (i.e., lef‐sided heart
enlargement)

C

Dogs with MMVD and past or current clinical signs of
heart failure associated with structural heart
remodeling. Dogs presenting in heart failure for the
first time may show severe clinical signs requiring
hospitalization

D

Dogs with end‐stage MMVD and heart failure that is
refractory to standard therapy (i.e., furosemide,
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors,
pimobendan +/‐ spironolactone)

Source: Adapted from Atkins et al. (2009).

regurgitation, a low‐intensity, early systolic murmur
localized on the left apex can be heard. The murmur can
be intermittent and intensity can vary with heart rate
and phase of respiration. When moderate to severe
mitral regurgitation is present, the murmur becomes
holosystolic or pansystolic, more intense, and harsher. In
more severe cases, the murmur radiates to the base of
the left thorax and to the right side of the thorax. It
should be emphasized that the intensity of the murmur
does not always correlate with the severity of MMVD;
that is, loud murmurs do not automatically indicate
severe disease.
The auscultatory findings can be influenced by several
factors such as observer experience, obesity, panting,
presence of arrhythmias, and breeds. In a study on preclinical MMVD dogs, 26% of dogs with a confirmed
echocardiographic diagnosis of MMVD did not have a
murmur and large‐breed dogs with MMVD have less
intense murmurs compared with small‐breed dogs.
Thus, diagnosis of MMVD should not rely only on
­auscultatory findings. Indeed, the ACVIM consensus
recommends that although the presence of midsystolic
click or left apical murmur in a typical breed is strongly
suggestive of MMVD, echocardiographic confirmation
of the diagnosis is required. Echocardiography can evaluate the morphology of the valve leaflets and quantify
the degree of cardiac enlargement. The echocardiographic characteristics of MMVD include prolapse or
thickening of one or both mitral valve leaflets
(Figure 25.1).
Mitral valve prolapse is defined as an abnormal systolic displacement or bowing of the mitral valve leaflets
from the left ventricle toward the left atrium. In dogs,
some studies suggest that the right parasternal four‐
chamber, long‐axis view is the gold standard used to
identify the presence of mitral valve prolapse. Because

Figure 25.1 Echocardiographic right parasternal long axis view of
the left atrium, mitral valve, and left ventricle. The mitral valve
leaflets appear thickened and prolapse in the left atrium.

247

VetBooks.ir

248

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

echocardiographic diagnosis of mitral valve prolapse is
dependent on the morphology of the valve, and because
the normal mitral valve and mitral valve annulus present
a wide range of normality, we recommend that the
­diagnosis of mitral valve prolapse should be confirmed
in at least two echocardiographic views. Indeed, we have
recently reported that in dogs, mitral valve morphology
is saddle shaped, similar to what has been reported in
people. Therefore, using the right parasternal long‐axis
view may lead to an overestimation of the mitral valve
prolapse.
The ACVIM consensus statement recommends
­thoracic radiography for all dogs with MMVD to assess
the hemodynamic significance of the murmur through
evaluation of heart size and pulmonary vasculature and
to obtain a baseline when the patient is asymptomatic.
Careful evaluation of thoracic radiographs may help in
diagnosing concomitant primary respiratory diseases
that may be the cause for clinical signs, such as cough or
dyspnea. Thoracic radiographs, together with physical
examination, are also essential for monitoring dogs with
MMVD. A change in radiographic cardiac dimensions
observed between two different time points has been
suggested as a powerful predictor of outcome in dogs
with MMVD.
Prognosis
Myxomatous mitral valve disease is characterized by a
long preclinical period and many affectws dogs die for
reasons other than CHF. A study including a population
1.0
ISACHC 1
ISACHC 2
ISACHC 3

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Months

Figure 25.2 Survival curves for dogs with different stages of heart
failure according to the International Small Animal Cardiac Health
Council. Class 1 ISACHC are dogs with preclinical MMVD, class 2
ISACHC are dogs with moderate congestive heart failure, and class
3 ISACHC are dogs with severe heart failure (showing clinical signs
at rest and requiring close monitoring). Source: Borgarelli et al.
(2008). Reproduced with permission of John Wiley.

of 558 dogs affected by MMVD at different stages has
shown that more than 70% dogs were alive at the end of
the follow‐up period of 6.6 years (Figure 25.2).
In another study of 256 dogs affected with preclinical
MMVD, the overall mortality was 27%, with cardiac
death accounting for 11% during the 833‐day observation period. The same study showed that 30/83 dogs that
were available for reexamination progressed to a more
advanced stage of MMVD. Reported risk factors associated with progression of the disease or death included
age, gender, intensity of heart murmur, degree of valve
prolapse, severity of valve lesions, the degree of mitral
valve regurgitation, degree of left atrial enlargement,
severity of eccentric hypertrophy, rupture of chordae
tendinae, and increased concentration of natriuretic
peptides. Left atrial enlargement, assessed by echocardiography, seems to represent one of the most reliable
independent predictors of death. The risk of death from
cardiac disease for dogs with a left atrium/aortic root
ratio exceeding 1.7 was 2.1 times that of dogs with
smaller atria.
Another study reported that plasma N‐terminal pro‐
brain natriuretic peptide (NT‐proBNP) concentration
and indexed left ventricular end‐diastolic diameter were
independent risk factors for development of first‐onset
CHF. The presence of pulmonary hypertension due to
MMVD was recently reported to be associated with
higher risk of death.
Therapy
The Asymptomatic Dog (Stage B: ACVIM
Consensus)

Treatment of dogs with asymptomatic MMVD has been
a subject of controversy over the past years. This stage
includes dogs with the disease who have never developed
CHF. This group represents the majority of dogs diagnosed with MMVD. The ACVIM consensus suggests
that asymptomatic dogs could be further subdivided into
those with no radiographic or echocardiographic evidence of cardiac enlargement (stage B1) and those with
evidence of cardiac remodeling suggested by the presence of left atrial and ventricular enlargement (stage B2).
This subclassification emphasizes the fact that asymptomatic dogs are a heterogeneous group, including patients
with very mild disease as well as those with more
advanced disease that are more likely to develop clinical
signs of CHF.
The ACVIM consensus group unanimously recommended not treating dogs with MMVD in stage B1 of the
disease. In contrast, no consensus was reached for dogs
in stage B2. Two multicenter double‐blinded studies
evaluating the efficacy of enalapril on delaying the onset
of CHF in stage 1B dogs with MMVD have shown no

VetBooks.ir

25 Valvular Heart Disease

significant effect of angiotensin converting enzyme
inhibitor (ACEI) therapy on the primary outcome variable, which was time from inclusion in the study to the
onset of signs of CHF. Based on these results and the
observation that only a relatively small percentage of
dogs with asymptomatic disease progress to CHF or die
as a consequence of the disease, the author does not
­support treatment with an ACEI.
A recent multicenter clinical trial reported that
pimobendan delays onset of congestive heart failure in a
subpopulation of dogs with stage B2. It should be highlighted that enrolled dogs had significant cardiomegaly
identified by specific echocardiographic criteria. It is
possible, although not proven, that dogs in advanced
stage B2 may benefit from other medical treatments
such as spironolactone. This emphasizes the importance
of developing biomarkers able to identify patients at
higher risk for developing CHF. A study conducted on
72 asymptomatic dogs with MMVD showed that NT‐
proBNP at a cut‐off of 466 pmol/L had 80% sensitivity
and 76% specificity in predicting 12‐month progression
to cardiac death or CHF. Although these data appear
very promising, further studies are needed to confirm
the value of NT‐proBNP in distinguishing those patients
that will progress to CHF. Accordingly, assessment of
stage B dogs should include evaluation of multiple
parameters including clinical, radiographic, and echocardiographic findings.
The Symptomatic Dog (Stage C: ACVIM Consensus)

According to the ACVIM consensus, stage C includes
animals with MMVD and current or previous clinical
signs of CHF. Management of these patients is based on
administration of a combination of several medications,
including diuretics, ACEIs, and pimobendan. Although
no study has proven the efficacy of furosemide in dogs
with MMVD, there is a general consensus that diuretics
are essential for patients with CHF. The majority of dogs
enrolled in the multicenter studies evaluating the ­efficacy
of the ACEI and pimobendan in symptomatic dogs with
MMVD were on concomitant treatment with furosemide. The diagnosis of CHF should be reevaluated if
­diuretics do not improve clinical signs in dogs with suspected CHF. The dosage of furosemide should be
adjusted in order to keep the patients free from clinical
signs. Although the suggested mean dosage for these
patients is 2 mg/kg PO q12h, it could range from 0.5 mg/
kg PO q12h to 4–6 mg/kg PO q8h.
In human patients with CHF, teaching patients to
adjust their furosemide dosage on the basis of monitoring their weight and their clinical signs significantly
reduces the number of hospitalizations and may be associated with prolonged survival. A similar approach with
dogs in CHF is desirable but difficult. The use of an ACEI

together with furosemide in stage C dogs is based on evidence provided by several multicenter double‐blind
studies which provide evidence that an ACEI added to
therapy including furosemide improved the quality of
life and survival time.
Two recent studies have shown that pimobendan
improved survival and quality of life in stage C dogs
compared to standard treatment with an ACEI and
furosemide. The first study was conducted as a blinded,
randomized, positive‐controlled, multicenter study and
included 76 dogs. The study had a mandatory 56‐day
treatment period that was followed by an optional long‐
term treatment phase. In this study, pimobendan significantly improved a clinical measure of disease severity
and survival. The results of this study led to a larger
study in 260 dogs with stage C MMVD. This was a prospective multicenter randomized single‐blinded study
and the primary endpoint was a composite of cardiac
death, euthanasia for heart failure, or treatment failure.
Dogs were randomized to therapy with either ACEI or
pimobendan. Pimobendan was associated with significant improvement in the endpoint variables and this
benefit persisted after adjusting for all baseline variables. All dogs enrolled in this study were on concomitant furosemide treatment. It should be stressed that
none of these studies answer the question of whether
triple therapy involving furosemide, ACEI, and
pimobendan would be superior to double therapy with
pimobendan plus furosemide. The ACVIM consensus
recommended that chronic management of stage C
dogs includes a combination of ACEI, pimobendan, and
furosemide.
Spironolactone has been recently approved in Europe
for treatment of dogs with MMVD. In one study, spironolactone when added to furosemide and ACEI +/− digoxin
decreased risk of cardiac‐related death or euthanasia for
cardiac reasons by 69% in dogs with moderate to severe
MMVD. The dosage of spironolactone used in the clinical trial was 2 mg/kg q24h. One criticism of this study is
that a relatively low number of cases reached the endpoint compared to other studies evaluating stage C dogs.
One possible mechanism of action for spironolactone
would be related to its antifibrotic effects. Geriatric dogs
affected by MMVD have intramyocardial arterial
changes associated with areas of replacement fibrosis.
The exact role of vascular or myocardial fibrosis in the
pathogenesis of MMVD is still to be clarified. Positive
effects of aldosterone blockers such as spironolactone
could also be related to the mechanism of aldosterone
escape. Aldosterone concentrations can be elevated in
dogs with MMVD despite receiving an ACEI. This phenomenon is dependent on the dose of concomitant furosemide and has been attributed to incomplete inhibition
of ACE activity.

249

VetBooks.ir

250

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

Digoxin is commonly used to treat dogs with concomitant atrial fibrillation in order to control the heart rate.
There are no controlled studies in veterinary medicine
evaluating digoxin, but it is believed that its administration could improve clinical signs of heart failure in dogs.
In the author’s experience, most dogs can be managed
using a combination of furosemide, ACEI, pimobendan,
and spironolactone. Treatment should be individualized
for each patient and the goal is to keep the animal free of
clinical signs of CHF for as long as possible.
The Dog with Refractory Heart Failure (Stage D:
ACVIM Consensus)

Stage D includes dogs refractory to treatments for stage
C. Many of these dogs also have right‐sided heart failure,
which leads to congestion of the gastrointestinal tract
that can decrease absorption of oral medications.
Providing furosemide by subcutaneous injection may
help to restabilize the patient. Chronic use of furosemide
can also lead to furosemide resistance and it is likely that
many stage D patients develop this condition. In these
dogs the use of an alternative loop diuretic, such as
­torsemide, may represent a valid alternative. Adding a
diuretic with a different mechanism of action such as a
thiazide represents another alternative. The goal in these
cases is to induce “sequential nephron blockade” and
improve diuresis. Patients on high doses or combinations of diuretics should have their electrolytes and renal
function monitored closely.
Amlodipine at the dosage of 0.05–0.1 mg/kg q12h is
listed in the ACVIM consensus statement as a possible
treatment for dogs with stage D CHF in order to obtain a
more effective reduction in afterload and improve cardiac output. Arteriolar vasodilation associated with the
use of this drug can lead to severe hypotension. It is,
therefore, recommended to uptitrate the dosage of
amlodipine and monitor the blood pressure in order to
avoid hypotension. In the author’s experience, intravenous vasodilators, such as sodium nitroprusside, can
also help resolve an acute episode of pulmonary edema.

­Valvular Infectious Endocarditis
Etiology and Pathophysiology
Valvular infectious endocarditis (IE) is a severe acquired
valvular disease of dogs and cats that is frequently caused
by bacterial infections. The most common pathogens
associated with IE in the dog and the cat are Staphylococcus
and Streptoccoccus sp. Recently, Bartonella sp. has been
associated with IE, and has been considered responsible
for up to 28% of IE in the dog. Less commonly, IE has
been associated with fungi and Rickettsia spp. IE starts

with damage of the endothelium that triggers the coagulation process. IE requires ­bacteremia. The most common sources of bacteremia are discospondylitis,
prostatis, pneumonia, urinary tract infection, pyoderma,
and intravenous catheters. Circulating bacteria can bind
to the coagulum and induce inflammation that leads to
expression of integrins that further facilitate bacterial
adhesion to the damaged ­tissue. Some bacteria, such as
Staphylococcus sp., might increase their ability to bind to
the coagulum through increased expression of microbial
surface adhesive molecules. Vegetative lesions containing bacteria provide a protective barrier and obstacle to
antibiotic penetration. Moreover, bacteria can produce
enzymes that lead to further tissue damage.
The only cardiovascular disease associated with an
increased risk of IE is subaortic stenosis. Historically,
periodontal diseases have been thought to increase the
risk of bacterial endocarditis, but an association has
never been demonstrated.
Epidemiology
Infectious endocarditis is a rare condition in dogs and
cats. According to published data, prevalence of the
­disease varies from 0.005% to 0.09% in the dog. The
prevalence in cats has not been reported but IE is less
frequently noted in this species. A recent retrospective
study has suggested that IE is becoming more common.
This might be attributed to the increased recognition of
the disease due to the availability of echocardiography.
Large‐breed dogs are more commonly affected. A review
of published data shows that the mitral valve is most
commonly affected (60%) followed by the aortic valve
(29%). Both the aortic and mitral valves are affected in
5% of the dogs, whereas the pulmonic and tricuspid
valves are rarely affected in dogs (4%).
History and Clinical Signs
Clinical signs in patients with IE are various and nonspecific. Many patients show clinical signs related to the
underlying systemic disease that produced the bacteremia. Analysis of published case series including 183 dogs
with IE showed that the most common clinical sign is
lameness (67%), followed by anorexia (55%), lethargy
(55%), acute onset of respiratory distress (52%), and
­syncope/weakness (15%). Fever is reported in 48% of
cases. Presence of a murmur is reported in only 55% of
cases with a definitive diagnosis of IE. The reason for the
relatively low prevalence of murmurs may be similar to
what has been previously described for murmurs in
patients with MMVD. Moreover, when only the aortic
valve is affected, the murmur can be diastolic and
­difficult to recognize. The recognition of a new systolic

VetBooks.ir

25 Valvular Heart Disease

or diastolic murmur in a patient with a predisposing
condition should be considered suspicious for IE.
­
Patients with aortic IE and severe aortic insufficiency
may present bounding femoral pulses. Thirty‐seven
­percent of dogs with IE present with clinical signs of
CHF at the time of the diagnosis.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of IE is challenging. Antemortem diagnosis
involves blood cultures, preferably performed before antibiotic treatment is started. Three to four blood samples
should be collected aseptically from different venous sites
at least one hour apart and submitted for aerobic and
anaerobic culture. Blood samples should also be collected
and cultured for Bartonella spp. Recently, polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) has been proposed as an alternative
method for the diagnosis of Bartonella i­nfection. A complete blood count (CBC) and serum biochemistry profile
should be performed in all patients with suspected IE in
order to assess multiorgan involvement. Leukocytosis,
thrombocytopenia, anemia, hypoalbuminemia, increased
liver enzymes, and azotemia are the most commonly
reported laboratory findings in dogs with IE.
Echocardiography allows the identification of vegetative
valvular lesions and assessment of the severity of the valvular insufficiency and is complementary to blood cultures in
establishing the diagnosis of IE in the dog and cat. Typical
lesions are represented by an hyperchoic, mobile, irregular‐
shaped mass adherent to the valve (Figure 25.3).
Valvular insufficiency is a common finding. Patients
with chronic valvular IE and severe valvular regurgitation
may present with left ventricular eccentric hypertrophy.
Although the presence of typical valvular lesions strongly
supports the diagnosis of IE, small lesions on the mitral
valve can be difficult to differentiate from lesions due to
myxomatous degeneration.
The diagnostic criteria for IE in dogs and cats is modified from the human “Duke criteria”. Major criteria for
diagnosis are a positive echocardiogram, new valvular
insufficiency, and a positive blood culture (≥2 positive
cultures or ≥3 positive cultures with common skin contaminants). Minor diagnostic criteria are fever, medium
to large dog (>15 kg), subaortic stenosis, thromboembolic disease, immune‐mediated disease, positive blood
cultures not meeting major criteria, and Bartonella
serology ≥1:1024. A definitive diagnosis of IE involves

Figure 25.3 Echocardiographic long axis image of the aortic
valve. A hyperchoic, mobile, irregular‐shaped mass is present
adherent to the valve leaflet.

the presence of two major criteria or one major and two
minor criteria. The presence of one major and one minor
criteria or three minor criteria is suspicious for IE.
Treatment
Long‐term bactericidal antibiotics are the main therapy
for patients affected by IE. Broad‐spectrum combinations of antibiotics such as enrofloxacin and ampicillin
should be administered empirically if blood culture is
not available or pending. Treatment of Bartonella spp.
involves doxycycline, fluoroquinolones, or azithromycin.
In dogs requiring hospitalization, intravenous aminoglycosides such as amikacin have been recommended.
Ideally, antibiotic therapy is guided by results of culture
and sensitivity testing. Oral antibiotics are often continued for 6–8 weeks. Serial echocardiograms or blood
­cultures are used to monitor response to therapy. Patients
with heart failure secondary to IE should be treated with
standard CHF treatment.
Prognosis
Generally, patients with IE have a relatively poor prognosis. Outcome is related to the degree of valvular
regurgitation and nature of the underlying predisposing
cause. Dogs with aortic IE fare worse than dogs with
mitral IE (three days versus 476 days median survival
time).

­Further Reading
Atkins C, Bonagura J, Ettinger S, et al. Guidelines for the
diagnosis and treatment of canine chronic valvular heart
disease. J Vet Intern Med 2009; 23(6): 1142–50.

Borgarelli M. Crosara S., Lamb K, et al. Survival
characteristics and prognostic variable of dogs with
preclinical chronic degenerative mitral valve disease

251

VetBooks.ir

252

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

attributable to myxomatous degeneration. J Vet Intern
Med 2012; 26(1): 69–75.
Borgarelli M, Savarino P, Crosara S, et al. Survival
characteristics and prognostic variables of dogs with
mitral regurgitation attributable to myxomatous valve
disease. J Vet Intern Med 2008; 22(1): 120–8.
MacDonald K. Infective endocarditis in dogs: diagnosis
and therapy. Vet Clin Small Anim 2010; 40: 665–84.

Orton EC, Lacerda CMR, MacLea H. Signaling pathway in
mitral valve degeneration. J Vet Cardiol 2012; 14(1):
7–17.
Reynolds CA, Brown C, Rush JE, et al. Prediction of first
onset of congestive heart failure in dogs with
degenerative mitral valve disease: the PREDICT
cohort study. J Vet Cardiol 2012; 14(1): 193–202.

VetBooks.ir

253

26
Canine Myocardial Disease
M. Lynne O’Sullivan, DVM, DVSc, DACVIM (Cardiology)
Department of Companion Animals, Atlantic Veterinary College, University of Prince Edward Island, Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, Canada

Canine myocardial diseases are those that affect the heart
muscle, as opposed to valvular, endocardial, or pericardial diseases. Cardiomyopathies are the most common
myocardial diseases in dogs, and are a “heterogenous
group of diseases of the myocardium associated with
mechanical and/or electrical dysfunction” according to
the American Heart Association. They may be classified
clinically according to structural and functional phenotype: dilated, hypertrophic, restrictive, and arrhythmogenic right ventricular. Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)
is by far the most common cardiomyopathy in dogs.
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
(ARVC) is seen most commonly in the boxer, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is reported in dogs but is
rare. Restrictive cardiomyopathy is not recognized in
dogs. Other forms of canine myocardial disease include
myocarditis (infectious, inflammatory, toxic, traumatic),
infiltrative disease (neoplastic, storage diseases), ischemic
disease, myocardial disease secondary to systemic hypertension, and muscular dystrophies affecting the heart.
The focus of this chapter is the cardiomyopathies.

­Dilated Cardiomyopathy
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Dilated cardiomyopathy is a primary myocardial disease
characterized by dilation and systolic dysfunction of the
left or both ventricles, in the absence of valvular, pericardial, congenital, coronary artery, or hypertensive heart
disease. The DCM phenotype may be the result of various myocardial insults, which are often not identified,
rendering many cases idiopathic. In dogs, those “insults”
are in many cases genetic mutations leading to altered
cardiac protein structure and function, particularly in
the pure breeds predisposed to DCM. In humans,

30–50% of cases of DCM are familial or inherited, and
mutations involving over 50 cardiac genes have been
described to date. Mutations in two genes (PDK4 and
titin) have been associated with DCM in Doberman pinschers in North America, but do not account for all
cases. The PDK4 mutation was not significantly associated with DCM in a group of European Dobermans in
which DCM was linked to a different chromosome
­(candidate genes yet unidentified). This highlights the
complex nature of the role that genetics play in this disease and that multiple genetic factors are involved, even
within one breed. Juvenile DCM in the Portuguese water
dog has been linked to chromosome 8 and candidate
gene identification is ongoing.
Additional well‐recognized etiologies in dogs include
nutritional deficiencies (taurine, carnitine) and tachycardia induced (secondary to sustained tachyarrhythmia).
Infectious and toxic causes of myocarditis, characterized
by myocardial inflammation and necrosis, can produce a
DCM‐like phenotype (ventricular dilation, systolic dysfunction, arrhythmias) in the chronic phase, and may be
worth considering as the underlying “insult” in certain
clinical presentations or geographic areas. Examples
include bacterial (e.g. Borrelia burgdorferi, Bartonella),
viral (e.g., parvovirus, West Nile virus), protozoal (e.g.,
Trypanosoma cruzi [Chagas disease], Toxoplasma gondii), fungal (e.g., Aspergillus, Blastomyces, Coccidioides),
and toxic (e.g., anthracyclines) agents. The above‐­
mentioned nonfamilial, nonidiopathic causes make up a
very small percentage of the total DCM caseload, as
­idiopathic or familial cases are most common.
On a whole‐heart level, the primary abnormality is a
reduction in contractility. This results in a reduction in
stroke volume (the volume ejected) and an increase
in end‐systolic volume (the volume remaining in the
heart after ejection), in turn resulting in progressive
increases in end‐diastolic volume. A reduction in

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

254

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

blood pressure and tissue perfusion activates a number
of ­neuroendocrine and cytokine systems intended to
maintain stroke volume and blood pressure, primarily
through sodium and water retention and vasoconstriction. Stretch receptors and remodeling pathways are
triggered, leading to lengthening of individual myocytes
(eccentric hypertrophy) and chamber dilation, maladaptive extracellular matrix remodeling, and cell death.
Consequences of these alterations in cardiac structure
and function ­eventually include congestive heart failure
(CHF) and arrhythmias (see Chapter 18).
Epidemiology
The prevalence of DCM among canine referral populations has been reported to be 0.3–1% (equivalent to 1–3
cases per 300 patients examined). Underreporting of sudden death (SD) cases might result in underestimation of
any figure, thus the true prevalence in the general dog
population is unknown. Any prevalence data will be
heavily influenced by the distribution of breeds and ages
(prevalence increases with age) of the population under
study. The prevalence is high in certain breeds based on
retrospective studies and prospective screening studies.
One European study of Irish wolfhounds (IW) found a
prevalence of 24%. In the Great Dane, prevalence has
ranged from 12% to 36% in different geographic areas.
Prevalence in Dobermans has ranged from 45% to 60% in
various studies. Some studies report overrepresentation
of males, while in Dobermans there are gender differences in how the disease manifests and at what age, with
females having a higher incidence of ventricular arrhythmias as the sole abnormality and males manifesting echocardiographic abnormalities and CHF at an e­ arlier age.
The mode of inheritance is known for specific breed
groups. In the Doberman and the Newfoundland, DCM
is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with incomplete penetrance. Both X‐linked and autosomal dominant
patterns of inheritance have been suggested in the Great
Dane, whereas inheritance is autosomal recessive with
sex‐specific alleles in the IW. The juvenile form described
in the Portuguese water dog is autosomal recessive.
The natural history of the disease is such that dogs
experience a preclinical or occult phase during which
echocardiographic or electrocardiographic evidence of
the disease is present (see Diagnosis) but clinical signs
are absent (ACVIM stage B). The length of this phase is
variable and likely extends over months to years, depending on the breed. In the Doberman, previous retrospective work suggested a median preclinical phase of just
over a year whereas new prospective clinical trial data
suggest a median of two years with the use of pimobendan.
The preclinical phase can be quite prolonged in the IW,
averaging 48 months in one trial.

The overt phase follows, characterized by the onset of
clinical signs including syncope, SD, or those typical of
CHF (ACVIM stage C). In the Doberman, 25–30% experience SD before CHF. Survival time following the onset
of CHF or syncope is again breed and etiology dependent, with Dobermans and Great Danes experiencing the
shortest survival times among breeds (see Prognosis).
Risk factors for the development of DCM apart from
breed may include taurine deficiency (in cocker spaniels,
Labrador and golden retrievers, or nontraditional DCM
breeds), sustained tachyarrhythmias, myocarditis, or
chemotherapy (anthracyclines).
Signalment
Dilated cardiomyopathy occurs predominantly in middle‐aged to older, medium‐ to large‐breed dogs. The
most commonly reported breeds in North America and
Europe include the Doberman pinscher, IW, Great Dane,
Newfoundland, boxer, Labrador and golden retrievers,
cocker spaniel, Scottish deerhound, Afghan hound, St
Bernard, German shepherd, Old English sheepdog,
Airedale terrier, standard poodle, Rottweiler, and ­mastiff.
Small‐breed dogs are uncommonly affected but sporadic
cases can be found.
Age at diagnosis is typically between 4 and 8 years,
depending on breed. Much younger and much older
dogs may certainly be affected, regardless of breed.
Specific juvenile forms of DCM are described in the
Portuguese water dog, Doberman, and toy Manchester
terrier, resulting in rapidly progressive CHF or SD at
weeks to months of age. Sporadic cases in very young
dogs of other breeds may occur, and should prompt
­consideration of viral myocarditis or primary tachyarrhythmia as an underlying cause.
Many studies report a gender bias in males. While this
is not corroborated in all studies of individual breeds, it
is the case for the majority of studies involving multiple
breeds. Male Dobermans and IWs may be affected at an
earlier age than females.
History and Clinical Signs
History may be unremarkable and preclinical cases identified by an incidental abnormality on physical exam
(such as a heart murmur, gallop, or arrhythmia) or by
prospective screening in high‐risk breeds. Some of these
dogs in the preclinical stage may have surprisingly profound cardiac dysfunction in the absence of clinical signs.
More often, dogs are presented because of clinical signs
of a fairly acute nature. Respiratory signs are the most
common, including coughing and/or increased respiratory rate or effort due to pulmonary edema from left‐
sided CHF. With severe pulmonary edema, expectoration

VetBooks.ir

26 Canine Myocardial Disease

of pink‐tinged fluid may be noted. Pleural effusion from
right‐sided CHF can also produce increased respiratory
rate and effort. Other signs include exercise intolerance,
weakness, syncope, abdominal distension due to ascites,
weight loss, and reduced appetite or anorexia (see
Chapter 15). Sometimes SD is the first clinical sign noted.
The typical clinical signs exhibited may vary by breed.
For example, Dobermans tend to have a higher incidence
of syncope and SD and their pulmonary edema and
resultant respiratory signs are often quite severe, whereas
IWs and Newfoundlands frequently present with evidence of right‐sided CHF (ascites and pleural effusion).
The most common abnormalities detected on physical
examination are a soft systolic murmur over the mitral or
tricuspid area (often grade 1–3/6) and weak peripheral
pulses. However, various studies have reported murmurs
in as few as 33% and as many as 76%, so the absence of a
murmur does not rule DCM out, and physical examination may be normal in the early preclinical phase.
Additional findings may include a diastolic gallop (low‐
frequency third heart sound), an arrhythmia (ventricular
premature contractions and atrial fibrillation most
­common), pulse deficits (if an arrhythmia is present),
and jugular venous distension or pulsation. For dogs in
CHF, additional findings may include pale or cyanotic
mucous membranes, increased lung sounds or pulmonary crackles, tachycardia, tachypnea, dyspnea, hypothermia, and hepatomegaly (hepatic congestion) or a
fluid wave (ascites) on abdominal palpation.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of DCM involves a minimum of an
echocardiogram and electrocardiogram (ECG). Holter

recording (24‐hour ambulatory ECG) is the most appropriate form of ECG in breeds where ventricular arrhythmias are common or an early finding such as Dobermans,
for longer term heart rate (HR) assessment in atrial
fibrillation, or if a cause for syncope is sought. In cases
where echocardiography is not immediately available,
thoracic radiographs may be useful for detecting cardiomegaly, and plasma N‐terminal pro‐B‐type natriuretic
peptide (NT‐proBNP) level can be useful in Dobermans
for assessing likelihood of preclinical disease. For dogs
with suspected CHF, thoracic radiographs and serum
biochemistry should be performed. The role for blood‐
based tests including biomarkers, taurine levels, and
genetic tests is also discussed below. Screening should be
performed yearly in high‐risk breeds.
Electrocardiography

While arrhythmias are frequently reported on ECG
(89% of cases in one large retrospective study), they can
be very intermittent. Ventricular arrhythmias (VA)
­(ventricular premature contractions [VPCs] or ventricular tachycardia [VT]) and atrial fibrillation (AF) are most
common, but are not specific for DCM on their own
(Figures 26.1 and 26.2).
There are differences between breeds in arrhythmia
manifestation. VA are very common in Dobermans, boxers, and Great Danes, so their presence should always
raise suspicion of DCM in these breeds. In one study in
Dobermans, one or more VPCs on a 5‐min ECG was
almost 97% specific for detecting a level of VA on Holter
recording that would be suggestive of DCM. However,
the presence of VPCs on a 5‐min ECG alone is fairly
insensitive for detecting DCM. Studies report 44–64% of
affected Dobermans and 54% of affected Great Danes

Figure 26.1 Lead II ECG, 12.5 mm/s, 5 mm/mV. VPCs in a Doberman pinscher with DCM. A short run of VT is seen at the beginning of the
ECG followed by intermittent single monomorphic VPCs.

Figure 26.2 Lead II ECG, 25 mm/s, 5 mm/mV. Atrial fibrillation in a Golden retriever with DCM. Note the irregular rhythm, absence of
P‐waves, and presence of baseline undulations or fibrillation waves.

255

VetBooks.ir

256

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

had at least one VPC on a 5‐min ECG and during echo
exam, respectively, emphasizing that many affected dogs
will have a normal in‐hospital ECG.
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is more common in IWs and
Newfoundlands and is often an early finding in IWs
(found in 75% of occult DCM cases, >90% of overt DCM
cases). In other breeds it tends to be associated with
more advanced or overt disease. Importantly, giant‐
breed dogs can also have “lone” AF unassociated with
gross cardiac pathology, in which case the HR is often
normal. However, in the IW, it is hypothesized that AF
may be a precursor to DCM in many cases.
Additional ECG findings can include tall and wide
QRS complexes (lead II R‐wave >3.0 mV, QRS duration
>0.06 ms) associated with left ventricular (LV) enlargement, notched R‐waves associated with microscopic
ischemia, wide P‐waves (lead II P duration >0.04 ms)
associated with left atrial enlargement, and sinus tachycardia (particularly in CHF cases). Note that these ECG
findings are neither sensitive nor specific for DCM.

severe cases). The distribution of pulmonary edema is
often greatest in the caudodorsal lung fields, but can be
diffuse in severe cases (Figure 26.3).
In Doberman pinschers, the degree of radiographic
cardiomegaly is often surprisingly modest, even in the
(a)

Holter Recording

Given that arrhythmias apart from AF are typically intermittent and in‐house ECGs are relatively insensitive,
Holter recordings can be very useful for diagnosing and
quantifying arrhythmias, for seeking cause of collapse by
coupling clinical signs with rhythm analysis, and for
assessing therapeutic response to antiarrhythmics. In
Dobermans, the presence of >300 VPCs/24h, or two subsequent recordings within a year with 50–300 VPCs/24h,
may be suggestive of DCM. Coupling a Holter recording
with a NT‐proBNP level can increase sensitivity for initial screening (see Circulating Biomarkers). Whether
these Holter criteria are appropriate for breeds other
than Dobermans is not known, but in one study, 70% of
affected Great Danes had a similar degree of arrhythmia.
Holter monitoring is also useful for monitoring HR in
cases of AF as it yields a more accurate assessment of rate
control. Care should be taken to utilize Holter analyses
that have been manually edited and verified by qualified
personnel as purely automated analyses are notoriously
inaccurate.

(b)

Thoracic Radiography

Thoracic radiographs are relatively insensitive to detect
the mild cardiac enlargement typical of occult cases. In
instances of more severe disease, they can reveal varying
degrees of cardiomegaly (left‐sided or generalized).
Thoracic radiographs are always indicated if CHF is suspected. In addition to LV enlargement, findings in CHF
include left atrial and possibly right‐sided enlargement,
pulmonary venous distension and varying degrees of
pulmonary edema (interstitial changes in mild to moderate cases and alveolar opacities with air bronchograms in

Figure 26.3 Lateral (a) and VD (b) thoracic radiographs in a
Doberman with DCM and CHF. Note the cardiomegaly (including
left atrium), pulmonary venous distension, and diffuse interstitial
pulmonary infiltrates (worse caudodorsally but also present
cranioventrally).

VetBooks.ir

26 Canine Myocardial Disease

face of severe dilation on echocardiography. This
­phenomenon might be due to the Doberman’s relatively
deep chest conformation and the relative lack of right
heart involvement compared to other breeds. Breeds
with frequent right‐sided involvement such as IWs and
Newfoundlands often also have pleural effusion, as do
dogs that develop AF.
Echocardiography

Echocardiography is necessary for identification and
quantification of the characteristic structural abnormalities, including LV chamber dilation and systolic dysfunction, and equally important for ruling out other cardiac
causes apart from DCM for these findings (e.g., valvular
disease, congenital shunt) (Figure 26.4).
Increased LV end‐systolic dimension (LVESD) and/or
volume (LVESV) is noted, along with increased LV end‐
diastolic dimension (LVEDD) and/or volume (LVEDV).

Linear dimensions (diameters) are generated from an M‐
mode of the LV in a short‐ or long‐axis view immediately
below the mitral valve, and volumes are preferentially
generated by tracing the LV endocardium in a right parasternal long‐axis or left apical four‐chamber view and
using automated software for Simpson’s method of discs.
These parameters are often indexed to body weight (BW)
or body surface area (BSA) to normalize for differences in
body size and conformation. In Dobermans, volume
indices have been shown to be more sensitive in detection of LV dilation than diameters. Normal parameters
and breed‐specific criteria suggesting the diagnosis of
DCM from various studies are presented in Table 26.1.
The reader is referred to the Further Reading list for more
detailed information on the methods and views used.
Left ventricle wall motion is globally and symmetrically reduced in most cases, but some dogs may have
increased septal motion compared to the free wall owing

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 26.4 Two‐dimensional echocardiographic images (right parasternal long‐axis view) and M‐mode (right parasternal short‐axis
view) from a Doberman with DCM. The left heart is in the far field and right heart in the near field. (a) Note the dilated LV in this systolic
frame. (b) M‐mode shows reduced systolic septal and LV free wall motion. (c,d) LV volume measurement in diastole and systole by
Simpson’s method of discs.

257

VetBooks.ir

258

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

Table 26.1 Echocardiographic parameters in normal dogs and breed‐specific criteria suggestive of diagnosis of DCM
Parameter

Normal value

Normal parameters
a

LVEDD index = LVEDD ÷ BW0.294

1.27–1.85 (95% PI)

LVESD index = LVESD ÷ BW

0.71–1.26 (95% PI)

LVESV index (LVESV ÷ BSA)

<30 mL/m2 (note this value is likely overly conservative)

Parameter

Abnormal value

0.315a

Breed‐specific criteria for diagnosis of DCM
Dobermansb
LVEDD

>48 mm (M) or >46 mm (F)
Or >0.1749 × BW + 40.3 mm

LVESD

>36 mm (M or F)
Or > 0.1402 × BW + 35.0 mm

LVEDV index (LVEDV ÷ BSA)

>95 mL/m2

LVESV index (LVESV ÷ BSA)

>55 mL/m2

Irish wolfhoundsc
LVEDD

>61.2 mm

LVESD

>41 mm

LVESV index (LVESV ÷ BSA)

>41 mL/m2

Great Danesd
LVEDD

>56.1 mm (M) or >54.0 mm (F)

LVESD

>42.7 mm (M) or >41.7 mm (F)

LVESV index (LVESV ÷ BSA)

>44 mL/m2

a

Cornell CC, Kittleson MD, Della Torre P, et al. Allomettric scaling of M‐mode cardiac measurements in normal adult dogs.
J Vet Intern Med 2004; 18: 311–21.
b
Wess G, Domenech O, Dukes‐McEwan J, et al. European Society of Veterinary Cardiology screening guidelines for dilated
cardiomyopathy in Doberman pinschers. J Vet Cardiol 2017; 19(5): 405–15.
c
Vollmar AC. The prevalence of cardiomyopathy in the Irish wolfhound: a clinical study of 500 dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
2000; 36: 125–32.
d
Stephenson HM, Fonfara S, López‐Alvarez J, et al. Screening for dilated cardiomyopathy in great Danes in the United
Kingdom. J Vet Intern Med 2012; 26: 1140–7.
BSA, body surface area; BW, body weight in kg; DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy; F, female; LVEDD, left ventricular end‐
diastolic dimension; LVEDV, left ventricular end‐diastolic volume; LVESD, left ventricular end‐systolic dimension;
LVESV, left ventricular end‐systolic volume; M, male; PI, prediction interval.

to mitral regurgitation. Indices of ejection such as fractional shortening (FS) and ejection fraction (EF) are
reduced (EF <40%). FS, while easy to calculate and often
reported, is not a reliable measure of systolic function.
As a result, there is not a definitive cut‐off below which
is diagnostic of DCM and little emphasis should be
placed on this number alone. Having said that, in DCM
dogs with CHF, FS is often <15%.
Additional two‐dimensional findings can include left
atrial dilation with more advanced disease, reduced
mitral valve excursion, increased mitral valve E‐point to
septal separation, decreased LV sphericity index, and

right ventricular and atrial dilation with biventricular
disease.
Doppler findings can include secondary mitral regurgitation due to annulus dilation and papillary muscle
dysfunction, evidence of diastolic dysfunction (abnormal
transmitral flow patterns including impaired relaxation,
pseudonormal, and restrictive), reduced aortic velocities, and reduced myocardial tissue velocities.
Circulating Biomarkers

Cardiac biomarkers include hormones released by cardiac myocytes in response to stretch and other stimuli

VetBooks.ir

26 Canine Myocardial Disease

(NT‐proBNP), or substances released from myocardial
tissue in response to injury (cardiac troponin‐I [cTnI]).
Note that biomarker testing is never intended to be used
in isolation and should not replace gold standard testing
(e.g., echocardiography, thoracic radiography for CHF);
rather, it may be a tool to complement, and in some
instances justify, other indicated diagnostics. Diagnoses
and therapeutic recommendations cannot be made on
biomarker results alone.
The utility of NT‐proBNP in identifying likelihood of
occult disease has been examined in the Doberman. NT‐
proBNP >550 pmol/L had a sensitivity of 78.6% and
specificity of 90.4% for detecting echocardiographic
­
abnormalities in one study. It is more sensitive in the
detection of structural disease than arrhythmic disease.
Another study in Dobermans suggests that the combined
use of Holter monitoring and NT‐proBNP >457 pmol/L
(either being abnormal) yields increased sensitivity (94.5%)
and specificity (87.8%). A cTnI >0.22 ng/mL (Immulite®,
Troponin I, Diagnostics Products Corporation, Los
Angeles) yielded 79.5% sensitivity and 84.4% specificity for
detection of DCM in another study. Dobermans with
NT‐proBNP or cTnI greater than these values should be
evaluated with echocardiography.
For the differentiation of CHF from primary respiratory disease in dogs presenting with respiratory signs,
plasma NT‐proBNP >2447 pmol/L (using second‐­
generation assay) was 81.1% sensitive and 73.1% specific
in a study including 8% DCM cases in a variety of breeds.
This may have utility when physical exam and thoracic
radiography are ambiguous and echocardiography is not
available, but otherwise may not provide added value.
Plasma Taurine

Whole‐blood or plasma taurine should be measured
(using heparinized samples) in cocker spaniels, retrievers,
Dalmatians, any atypical DCM breed, or any case with a
history of lamb‐based diet, vegetarian diet, low‐protein
diet, grain‐free diet (currently being investigated), or any
unbalanced home‐made diet. Whole‐blood concentration
<150 nmol/mL or plasma concentration <40 nmol/mL
indicates significant taurine deficiency. Note that taurine
deficiency is not necessarily related to amounts of taurine
consumed, but may be due to abnormal absorption or
excretion of taurine or its precursor amino acids (methionine and cysteine), abnormal t­ aurine synthesis, or reduced
protein digestibility limiting availability of precursors.
Genetic Tests

Tests are available for two genetic markers associated with
DCM in Dobermans in North America (PDK4 and titin
mutations) through the Veterinary Genetics laboratory at
North Carolina State University (https://cvm.ncsu.edu/
nc-state-vet-hospital/small-animal/genetics/). Note that

these two mutations do not account for all DCM cases in
Dobermans, a negative test does not assure a dog will not
develop DCM, nor does a positive test assure the dog will
develop clinical disease. With this in mind, genetic testing
cannot replace standard clinical screening. Appropriate
sample types include EDTA whole‐blood or buccal swabs.
Results may be:
negative – individual does not carry that particular
mutation (but there may be other mutations so not
guaranteed to never develop DCM)
●● positive heterozygote – individual carries one copy of
the mutated gene and may or may not develop clinical
disease
●● positive homozygote – individual carries two copies of
the mutated gene and may or may not develop clinical
disease but if so, may be more severe.
●●

The greatest utility of genetic testing is determining suitability for breeding. It is recommended that homozygous
dogs not be bred, and heterozygous dogs should be bred
only to negative dogs and only so long as they do not
express the phenotype.
Therapy
Preclinical DCM (ACVIM Stage B)

Goals of therapy in preclinical cases include slowing systolic dysfunction, preventing ventricular remodeling and
disease progression, and delaying CHF or SD. Two drugs
for which there is evidence of these benefits are
pimobendan and angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEI). See Table 26.2 for all drug doses.
Pimobendan, a calcium sensitizer with positive inotropic and vasodilatory effects, delayed the progression
of preclinical disease in Dobermans in a multicenter,
placebo‐controlled, double‐blinded clinical trial. The
­
PROTECT trial enrolled 76 Dobermans with preclinical
DCM. The pimobendan group had a significantly longer
time to the composite endpoint of onset of CHF or SD
compared with the placebo group (63% increase in time
to endpoint, nine months longer). Additionally, the
pimobendan group had significantly longer overall survival time compared with the placebo group. There was
no increase in VA noted on one‐month recheck Holter
monitoring and no increase in SD in the pimobendan
group. It is important to note that all dogs in this study
had presence of echocardiographic systolic dysfunction,
so these results are not necessarily applicable to
Dobermans presenting with VA alone. Pimobendan was
also shown to prolong the time to CHF or SD in IWs with
preclinical DCM, AF, or both. The similarity in pathology and pathophysiology among different breeds would
suggest potential benefit in breeds other than Dobermans
and IWs, but specific studies are required.

259

VetBooks.ir

260

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

Table 26.2 Doses of commonly used cardiac medications in dogs
(see text for indications)
Drug

Dose

ACEI
Benazepril

0.25–0.5 mg/kg q12–24h PO

Enalapril

0.25–0.5 mg/kg q12h PO

Positive inotrope
Pimobendan

0.25–0.3 mg/kg q12h PO

Dobutamine

5–15 μg/kg/min IV CRI

Dopamine

1–5 μg/kg/min IV CRI

Diuretic
Furosemide

2–5 mg/kg q8–12h PO or IV
0.5–1 mg/kg/h IV CRI

Spironolactone

2 mg/kg q24h PO

Hydrochlorothiazide

0.5–2 mg/kg q12h PO

Antiarrhythmic
Sotalol

1–3 mg/kg q12h PO

Mexiletine

5–8 mg/kg q8h PO

Diltiazem

0.5–3 mg/kg q8h PO (for immediate
release formulation)
0.05–0.1 mg/kg IV slow bolus
followed by 1–5 μg/kg/min IV CRI

Digoxin

0.003–0.005 mg/kg q12h PO (to max
0.25 mg/dog q12hr)

Lidocaine

2 mg/kg IV bolus (max. 4 boluses)
followed by 30–70 μg/kg/min IV CRI

Beta‐blocker
Atenolol

0.25–1.0 mg/kg q12h PO

Carvedilol

0.1–0.5 mg/kg q12h PO

Vasodilator
Sodium nitroprusside

1–5 μg/kg/min IV CRI

Supplements
Taurine

500–1000 mg q12h PO (<25 kg)
1000–2000 mg q12h PO (>25 kg)

L‐Carnitine

50–100 mg/kg q8h PO

Omega‐3 fatty acids

78 mg eicosapentaenoic acid and 497 mg
docosahexaenoic acid per dog per day

ACEI, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor; CRI, constant rate
infusion; IV, intravenous; PO, by mouth (per os).

The role of the renin‐angiotensin‐aldosterone system
(RAAS) in maladaptive cardiac remodeling and progression of systolic dysfunction is well known. In addition to
their mixed vasodilatory and natriuretic properties, ACEI

exert benefit by antimyocardial remodeling effects. A retrospective study in Dobermans found that time to CHF
or SD was significantly prolonged with benazepril treatment, with a 55–64% reduction of risk of those outcomes
compared to no treatment. While the strength of evidence is not as strong as that for pimobendan, the author
advocates the use of ACEI in preclinical DCM based on
the collective evidence in the human and ­veterinary literature, unless there is a specific contraindication to this
class of drug. Evaluation of renal function one week after
initiation and periodically thereafter is recommended.
While there is good evidence in the human literature
that beta‐blocker therapy reverses LV remodeling,
improves LV systolic function and patient symptoms,
and prolongs life in chronic heart failure, clinical data are
lacking on the use and efficacy of beta‐blockers in canine
DCM. Concerns with beta‐blocker use typically include
hypotension or CHF due to bradycardia and negative
inotropy when first administering; therefore, they must
be used with caution and uptitrated slowly.
Taurine supplementation should be initiated in any
case suspected or documented to be due to taurine deficiency. L‐carnitine can be simultaneously added or initiated after three months if there is inadequate response
with taurine alone.
The patient with clinically significant VA is worthy of
separate consideration. In humans, the risk of SD increases
with declining systolic function or a history of syncope,
yet there is no clear evidence that any antiarrhythmic
(AA) drug is effective in preventing SD. In Dobermans,
increasing LVEDV, presence of VT, and VPCs yielding
instantaneous HR ≥260 bpm are associated with increased
risk of SD. There are no studies addressing the efficacy of
AA therapy in canine DCM. AA therapy may be considered in any DCM patient with frequent VPCs (>1 per
minute) or VA with higher ­complexity or rate (couplets,
triplets, or VT with instantaneous HR >180 bpm). Typical
choices for AA therapy include sotalol, a AA with both
beta‐blockade and K+ channel blockade properties (initiating low doses and titrating upwards is often advised due
to the beta‐blockade), mexiletine, a Na+ channel blocker,
or a combination of the two.
Monitoring the preclinical patient should include
physical examination, echocardiography, and ECG or
ideally Holter recording every 4–6 months. If AA therapy is initiated, it is best to monitor therapeutic efficacy
with Holter monitoring within 1–2 weeks of initiating
therapy. Due to a high degree of daily variability, an in‐
house ECG is an inadequate alternative.
Overt DCM (ACVIM Stage C, CHF): Outpatient
Therapy

Therapeutic goals in the CHF patient include resolution of clinical signs and improvement in quality of life

VetBooks.ir

26 Canine Myocardial Disease

in addition to delay in disease progression and prolongation of survival. Strategies include intravascular volume reduction to resolve pulmonary edema or decrease
cavitary effusions, improvement in hemodynamic
performance through decreased systemic vascular
­
resistance and improved contractility, neurohumoral
modulation, arrhythmia management, and nutritional
management.
The mainstay of treatment of edema and effusions
remains diuretics, with furosemide the most commonly
used agent. It may be administered orally or intravenously depending on the severity of CHF and whether
the patient is being treated as an inpatient or outpatient.
Following edema resolution, the dose may be lowered to
the effective dose that maintains the patient free of
­respiratory signs and edema. Given its relatively short
duration of action, dosing more than twice daily may be
more effective. Substantive pleural effusion or ascites
should be relieved with thoraco‐ and abdominocentesis,
respectively.
Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor is indicated
for RAAS blockade and vasodilatory effects, particularly
in the setting of furosemide use which heightens RAAS
stimulation. The results of veterinary clinical trials using
enalapril and benazepril report improved quality of life,
and although the improvements in survival did not reach
statistical significance for DCM dogs, there is clear
­evidence of mortality reduction in human patients and
ACEI use is considered standard therapy in dogs with
DCM and CHF.
Three placebo‐controlled trials have found significantly longer time to treatment failure or longer survival
time in DCM dogs treated with pimobendan in addition
to diuretics and ACEI, so pimobendan is considered part
of standard therapy for CHF due to DCM.
The aldosterone antagonist spironolactone significantly reduces morbidity and mortality in humans with
CHF and LV systolic dysfunction. While similar evidence
is lacking in dogs with DCM, a study in Dobermans with
CHF suggested a reduced risk of AF with spironolactone
therapy. Spironolactone is often used in the patient that
is still symptomatic despite use of triple therapy with
furosemide, ACEI, and pimobendan, whereas some,
including the author, advocate using it initially as part of
standard therapy. Spironolactone is licensed for use in
dogs with CHF in Europe.
Management of the overt DCM patient with VA
includes optimal management of congestion and hemodynamics to reduce sympathetic nervous system stimulation and improve perfusion. Specific AA therapy may
also be indicated. Patients with VA may be managed as
outlined above for the preclinical stage. DCM patients
with AF and in‐hospital HR >150 bpm are candidates for
rate control with AA therapy. While cardioversion to

sinus rhythm may be physiologically ideal, rate control is
much more feasible. Evidence suggests that the combination of diltiazem with digoxin is more efficacious for rate
control than either drug alone. A target mean HR
<125 bpm on Holter recording is ideal, and given higher
HR in hospital, target mean HR on in‐hospital ECG
should be <140–150 bpm. Alternative therapy choices
include a beta‐blocker or sotalol, though beta‐blockers
should not be initiated in the setting of acute or poorly
managed heart failure.
Cardiac cachexia is identified commonly in DCM CHF
patients and nutritional support is an important part of
therapy. Due to anorexia, increased energy requirements, and production of inflammatory cytokines, lean
muscle mass is lost in the chronic heart failure patient.
Management involves providing adequate calories and
protein, and there is evidence that supplementation with
omega‐3 fatty acids is beneficial. While diets restricted
in sodium are commonly advocated, the effects on quality of life or survival have not been assessed in dogs.
Overt DCM – Severe Life‐Threatening CHF

Parenteral means of decreasing intravascular volume,
increasing contractility, decreasing vascular resistance,
and treating arrhythmias may be necessary in cases of
severe CHF. Administration of oxygen by nasal prongs,
cannula or cage is indicated in the case of hypoxia.
Administration of intravenous (IV) furosemide by bolus
or constant rate infusion (CRI) is the single most important and effective strategy to initiate promptly. Multiple
boluses may be administered 30–60 minutes apart until
the respiratory rate drops 50% from initial presentation
or effort improves. If there is inadequate response after
three doses, CRI should be initiated. Alternatively, one
bolus followed immediately by CRI is preferred if the
patient has preexisting azotemia or is particularly severe.
Careful monitoring of volume status, renal function, and
electrolytes is required. Thoracocentesis is indicated if
substantive pleural effusion is contributing to dyspnea.
If rapid AF is present, initiation of IV diltiazem is indicated to reduce HR below 140–150 bpm. In cases of VA
in the setting of CHF, treatment may be warranted if VT
is present, signs of weakness or collapse are present, or
the patient is a breed with a high incidence of SD such as
Dobermans and boxers. IV lidocaine is typically the first
treatment of choice.
In the absence of arrhythmias, IV furosemide may be
enough to stabilize some patients whereas others will
require the addition of a parenteral positive inotrope +/−
vasodilator. Dobutamine CRI is the IV positive inotrope
of choice for treatment of severe edema and hypotension. Side‐effects include nausea/vomiting and exacerbation of VA, in which case the dose should be decreased.
It is important to note that if AF is present, IV diltiazem

261

VetBooks.ir

262

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

should be initiated for rate control before dobutamine to
avoid life‐threatening tachycardia. Dobutamine is typically administered for <72 hours due to the development
of receptor refractoriness. If dobutamine is not available
or feasible, then oral pimobendan should be started as
soon as possible.
Sodium nitroprusside is a potent mixed vasodilator
that may be added as a CRI for the treatment of severe
life‐threatening edema. Blood pressure must be monitored very frequently, preferably invasively and continuously. Side‐effects include hypotension (which can be
quickly resolved by stopping or decreasing the dose due
to its very short duration of action), and rarely cyanide
toxicity with high dose and prolonged use (>72 hours).
With the initiation of all of these infusions, careful attention must be paid to the volumes of fluids being administered, and solutions should be concentrated as much as
possible to reduce the total volume being administered.
Following stabilization, weaning of IV medications and
transition to the oral medications discussed above (as for
outpatient) is carried out.
For the refractory CHF patient (those with advanced
CHF that continue to have clinical signs despite standard
therapy – ACVIM stage D), management strategies
include confirming owner compliance with current
medications, identifying complicating concurrent conditions (poorly controlled or new arrhythmias, systemic
diseases such as hyperadrenocorticism, neoplasia, infectious or inflammatory conditions), and changing medication strategies. The latter can include an increase in
the frequency or change in route of furosemide administration (IV bolus or CRI for short periods), addition of
diuretics such as spironolactone or hydrochlorothiazide
(the latter should be accompanied by a reduction in furosemide dose), stricter sodium restriction, increase in
inodilator and/or ACEI dose, or short‐term parenteral
positive inotrope (dobutamine) or vasodilator (nitroprusside) administration as described above.
Follow‐up/Monitoring of Overt DCM

The focus of follow‐up is respiratory status (respiratory
rate and effort, degree of pulmonary edema or pleural
effusion on thoracic radiography), renal status and electrolyte balance (renal chemistry and electrolytes), body
condition and hydration (body weight, body condition
score [BCS]), HR and rhythm (auscultation, ECG or
Holter), and perfusion (body temperature, blood pressure, renal chemistry, electrolytes). These assessments
may be made as frequently as weekly at the initiation of
therapy to every 1–2 months once patients are stable.
While ACEI and pimobendan doses are often optimized
at the onset, diuretic doses are adjusted to balance pulmonary and renal/hydration needs. Following initiation
of or change in dose of AAs, recheck ECG or ideally

Holter is advised within 1–2 weeks to assess VA control
or rate control in the case of AF, and medications adjusted
accordingly. One cannot expect to eliminate VA but
rather a reduction of the frequency, complexity, and HR
is a reasonable goal (preferably reduction of >80%). In
the case of AF, HR targets must be individualized to what
appears to be optimal for the patient based on the assessments above, but a general guideline is a target mean HR
<125 bpm on Holter or <140–150 bpm in hospital.
Prognosis
Dogs with preclinical disease may go several years without clinical signs, so the diagnosis does not imply immediate risk of morbidity or mortality. Data on the length of
this phase are lacking for most breeds except the
Doberman and IW. Based on the PROTECT trial, the
median time to CHF or SD following diagnosis of occult
disease in Dobermans was 718 days in the pimobendan‐
treated group and 441 in the placebo group. IW may
have a very prolonged preclinical phase, with an average
of 48 months in a recent clinical trial.
Unless a reversible underlying cause is identified (e.g.,
taurine deficiency, primary tachyarrhythmia), the prognosis for DCM is often poor once overt clinical disease
(CHF) develops, with most survival times being in
months. The median survival time in a large retrospective study with mostly overt dogs was 19 weeks, with
one‐year and two‐year survival rates of 28% and 14%,
respectively. Fifty percent of dogs were euthanized for
their heart disease in this study, while 40% died from
their heart disease, and 3% died for other reasons,
emphasizing the almost inevitably terminal nature of
this disease. In the Doberman, one‐year survival rates of
10% or less have been reported, and treatment with triple therapy (ACEI, furosemide, pimobendan) yielded a
median survival time of 130 days. IW may have a better
prognosis once in CHF, with median survival time
of five months in those dying of their disease but
14 months in those still alive at the time of writing of
one study.
Factors associated with shorter time to CHF or SD in
the PROTECT trial included an increase in LVESD
index, increased baseline HR, and ≥4 VPCs on a 3‐min
ECG. Factors associated with negative prognosis in overt
DCM have included increased LVESV index, decreased
EF, presence of pulmonary edema on radiographs, presence of ascites, presence of VPCs on ECG, increased
serum creatinine, decreased plasma protein, Great Dane
breed, and restrictive transmitral flow pattern on
Doppler echocardiography. Factors associated with
increased risk of SD in Dobermans include larger LVEDV,
presence of VT, VPCs with instanteous HR ≥260 bpm,
and higher cTnI.

VetBooks.ir

26 Canine Myocardial Disease

­Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular
Cardiomyopathy
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy is a
progressive myocardial disorder characterized by partial
to complete replacement of the right ventricular (RV)
myocardium with fatty or fibro‐fatty tissue, presence of
ventricular arrhythmias, and risk of SD. The distribution
of pathologic changes is greater in the subepicardium, and
the left ventricle is not spared despite being a predominantly RV disorder. In humans, a majority of cases are
familial or inherited and genetic mutations in at least 20
genes encoding mostly proteins of the desmosome (region
of intercalated discs between myocardial cells involved in
mechanical and electrical coupling) have been implicated.
A few nondesmosomal genes, including the cardiac ryanodine receptor (RyR2, calcium release channel of the sarcoplasmic reticulum), have also been involved.
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy is
likewise a familial (inherited) disorder in the boxer. The
disease, once referred to as “boxer cardiomyopathy,” has
been reclassified as ARVC due to its similarities with
the human disease. To date, none of the mutations
described in people have been found in the boxer.

Rather, an 8‐base pair deletion in the striatin gene has
been linked to ARVC in some American boxers, though
its causal role has been challenged. Striatin is an intercalated disc ­protein that co‐localizes with three of the desmosomal proteins implicated in ARVC in people. There
is also some suggestion that the RyR2 is involved as
affected boxers have a deficiency of calstabin2, a RyR2
protein.
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy in
dogs manifests as ventricular tachyarrhythmias predominantly of RV origin (left bundle branch block [LBBB]
configuration) and patients are at risk of SD from
­ventricular fibrillation (Figure 26.5).
Supraventricular tachyarrhythmias may also occasionally be noted. In boxers, the hearts are most often structurally normal on gross examination, unlike in humans
where RV dilation, systolic dysfunction, and aneurysms
are common. A small percent of boxers experience s­ ystolic
dysfunction and heart failure, whereas this may be more
common in English bulldogs, another affected breed.
Epidemiology
The true prevalence of ARVC in the boxer is unknown,
but anecdotally it would appear to be quite common.
The prevalence in other breeds is very low.

Figure 26.5 Nine‐lead ECG, 25 mm/s, 5 mm/mV. Right ventricular VPCs (left bundle branch block configuration) in a boxer with ARVC.
There are periods of ventricular bigeminy (alternating VPCs and sinus beats) and several VPC couplets.

263

VetBooks.ir

264

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

The mode of inheritance in the boxer is autosomal
dominant with incomplete and age‐related penetrance
and variable expression. Dogs homozygous for the striatin mutation exhibit a more severe form of disease and
there may be association with myocardial failure.
The natural history of the disease in the boxer can be
quite variable. Frequently, dogs may present with
­incidental VA and remain asymptomatic for years. The
percentage of boxers that develop syncope has varied
from 33% to 68% in different studies. The percentage
that experienced SD in one prospective longitudinal
study was 31%. Less than 10% of boxers develop myocardial failure and CHF. In contrast, in a case series of 31
English bulldogs with ARVC, 52% had CHF (38% left‐
sided, 33% right‐sided, and 19% biventricular failure).
Risk factors for the development of ARVC apart from
breed are unknown. Risk of SD in boxers appears to be
higher with a previous history of syncope, more frequent
VPCs, more complex VA (couplets, triplets, runs of VT),
and more runs of VT. In humans, being a competitive
athlete has been linked with increased risk of SD,
suggesting the cardiac strain associated with intense
­
exercise can exacerbate VA.
Signalment
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy is
most common in the boxer breed. Males tend to be overrepresented. The average age at diagnosis is 5–7 years
but younger and older dogs may be affected. Multiple
cases are now also reported in the English bulldog.
Isolated cases of a similar RV cardiomyopathy have been
reported in a dachshund, bullmastiff, Labrador retriever,
Siberian husky, Shetland sheepdog, Dalmatian, and
Weimaraner.
History and Clinical Signs
Many boxers present without any clinical signs and are
detected incidentally through identification of an
arrhythmia on physical exam or through active screening programs. Roughly one‐third to two‐thirds may have
a history of syncope, and roughly one‐quarter experience exercise intolerance. Few present with respiratory
signs typical of CHF, whereas this appears to be more
common in English bulldogs. It is important to note that
there are other causes of syncope in the boxer apart from
ARVC.
Physical examination may be normal since the VA are
intermittent. Alternatively, intermittent premature beats
may be heard on auscultation, or rather the “pause” after
a premature beat may be more apparent than the premature beat itself. Bursts of tachycardia may also be noted
in more severely affected dogs. Dogs with arrhythmias

may have pulse deficits. Soft left base murmurs are
common in boxers and not specifically indicative of
­
myocardial disease.
Diagnosis
There is no gold standard for antemortem diagnosis of
ARVC in dogs. However, Holter recording is the most
valuable diagnostic tool, and should be performed in any
boxer with an auscultable arrhythmia, with a history of
exercise intolerance or syncope, for active screening in
any asymptomatic adult boxer especially with a family
history of ARVC or positive genotype (starting at >3
years of age), or for those in breeding programs.
Diagnostic criteria have yet to be clearly defined. Greater
than 100 VPCs per 24 hours of RV origin (LBBB configuration, “upright” orientation in lead II) is suspicious for
ARVC in the absence of another identifiable cause,
­particularly if there is increased complexity like couplets,
triplets, or VT, and >300 VPCs/24h is a more suggestive
threshold.
One study proposed three diagnostic criteria (>100
VPCs/24h, presence of couplets, and presence of R‐
on‐T phenomenon) with the presence of two out of
three possibly being a more robust way to identify the
disease. However, these or any other cut‐offs have yet to
be validated prospectively, and to rely solely on the total
VPC count may be erroneous. The complexity of the
arrhythmia and the complete clinical presentation
should be considered when making the diagnosis.
Holter recordings can have a high degree of day‐to‐day
variability (as much as 80%) and therefore may need to
be repeated in dogs with high suspicion yet equivocal
results.
Myocardial biopsy is not typically used for diagnosis
owing to anesthetic requirements and invasiveness, as
lesions may be missed given the epicardial and patchy
distribution of pathology, and the risk of adverse effects
including provocation of arrhythmias or cardiac
puncture.
Unlike in humans, imaging modalities including echocardiography have low diagnostic yield as they are often
normal. In few boxers will RV or LV dilation and systolic
dysfunction be appreciable whereas in a case series of
English bulldogs, 59% had subjective RV dilation. Cardiac
MRI may have utility in detecting the fatty infiltration
that characterizes the disease, but this remains to be
investigated thoroughly in dogs.
Circulating biomarkers including cTnI and NT‐
proBNP are not useful for detection of ARVC, based on
studies in boxers. While cTnI levels did correlate with
degree of arrhythmia, the degree of overlap with presumably normal boxers renders it an unsatisfactory
screening tool.

VetBooks.ir

26 Canine Myocardial Disease

A genetic test for the striatin mutation in boxers is
available through the Veterinary Genetics laboratory at
North Carolina State University (https://cvm.ncsu.edu/
nc- st ate- ve t-ho spit al/small-animal/gene tic s/).
Interpretation and breeding recommendations are as for
the DCM genetic tests outlined above, and genetic
screening cannot replace clinical screening.
Therapy
While AAs have been shown to reduce VA frequency and
syncope, it is uncertain whether they decrease risk of SD
because studies are lacking. Nevertheless, AA therapy
remains the mainstay of ARVC treatment. A consensus
on arrhythmia threshold necessitating treatment is lacking, and each patient must be approached on a case‐by‐
case basis. Even asymptomatic dogs may be at risk of SD,
but this must be balanced with proarrhythmic risk of AA
drugs and owner factors including commitment to long‐
term therapy. Suggested candidates for AA therapy
include dogs with a history of syncope, those with VT
regardless of total VPC number, those with >300 VPC/24h
and increased complexity including couplets, triplets, or
R‐on‐T (rapid VPCs), or those with >1000 VPC/24h.
For immediate treatment of VT or VA causing weakness or collapse, intravenous lidocaine is recommended.
The most common and effective oral AAs are sotalol,
mexiletine, or a combination of the two in more refractory cases (see Table 26.2). Note that therapy may be
indicated prior to Holter recording, as in instances where
there is a history of syncope and VT is identified on ECG.
Therapy should be monitored by Holter examination
within 1–2 weeks of AA initiation, and periodically
thereafter (every six months). Therapeutic efficacy is
supported by a >80% reduction in arrhythmia number
and complexity. An increase in syncope post treatment
may suggest a proarrhythmic effect and should be evaluated with Holter promptly.
There is some evidence that oral supplementation with
omega‐3 fatty acids may also be beneficial (see Table 26.2).
For the minority that experience CHF (left, right, or
biventricular), therapy with ACEI, pimobendan, and
­diuretics is indicated as described above for DCM, in
addition to AA therapy. L‐carnitine may also be added
given positive response in a small family of boxers.
Prognosis
While all dogs with ARVC are at risk of SD, many
remain symptom free for years. In one prospective

study of boxers, the median survival time after identification of >300 VPC/24h was just over four years, and in
fact overall survival of the affected group was not significantly different from the control boxer group (survival to 10–11 years of age), whereas a retrospective
study of boxers with more advanced disease suggested a
median survival time of 365 days (range 7–1971 days).
The probability of death within a year was almost five
times greater with a history of syncope, just over five
times greater with >10 000 VPCs/24h, and 20 times
greater with >200 runs VT/24h. In a case series of
English bulldogs, a median survival time of 8.3 months
was reported, but whether the prognosis is truly worse
in that breed is not known, as it is likely that these dogs
had more advanced disease at the time of diagnosis than
other boxer studies.

­Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a primary myocardial
disease characterized by symmetric or asymmetric concentric hypertrophy (thickening) of the LV in the
absence of a stimulus for hypertrophy (e.g., stenosis or
hypertension), leading to diastolic dysfunction and
arrhythmias that may result in CHF or SD. In humans,
50% or more of cases are related to familial genetic
mutations. While common in the cat, HCM is very rare
in dogs. Like in the cat, dynamic LV outflow tract
obstruction (LVOTO) caused by systolic anterior
motion of the mitral valve (SAM) is described in some
cases.
Many cases of canine HCM appear to be in young
dogs, with males overrepresented. This has raised the
question as to whether the disease may be congenital
and furthermore, whether LVOTO may represent a form
of mitral valve dysplasia predisposing to SAM and secondary hypertrophy. Many affected breeds have been
reported and include the pointer, golden retriever,
Rottweiler, German shepherd, and shih tzu, amongst
others. Cases are frequently evaluated for the presence
of an incidental murmur which may be dynamic.
Echocardiography is necessary for diagnosis. Treatment
is targeted at reducing dynamic LVOTO with beta‐­
blockade (atenolol), and treating CHF or arrhythmias in
severe cases. A number of cases in young dogs have been
noted to resolve with maturity, while others have
­persisted and resulted in CHF or SD. It is difficult to
­estimate prognosis based on the sparse reports of this
disease in dogs.

265

VetBooks.ir

266

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

­Further Reading
Meurs KM. Arrhythmogenic right ventricular
cardiomyopathy in the boxer dog: an update. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2017; 47(5):
1103–11.
Meurs KM, Stern JA, Reina‐Doreste Y, et al. Natural
history of arrhythmogenic right ventricular
cardiomyopathy in the boxer dog: a prospective study.
J Vet Intern Med 2014; 28(4): 1214–20.
Summerfield NJ, Boswood A, O’Grady MR, et al. Efficacy
of pimobendan in the prevention of congestive heart
failure or sudden death in Doberman pinschers with

preclinical dilated cardiomyopathy (the PROTECT
study). J Vet Intern Med 2012; 26: 1337–49.
Vollmar AC, Fox PR. Long‐term outcome of Irish
wolfhound dogs with preclinical cardiomyopathy, atrial
fibrillation, or both treated with pimobendan, benazepril
hydrochloride, or methyldigoxin monotherapy. J Vet
Intern Med 2016; 30(2): 553–9.
Wess G, Domenech O, Dukes‐McEwan J, et al. European
Society of Veterinary Cardiology screening guidelines
for dilated cardiomyopathy in Doberman pinschers.
J Vet Cardiol 2017; 19(5): 405–15.

VetBooks.ir

267

27
Feline Myocardial Disease
Virginia Luis Fuentes, MA, VetMB, PhD, CertVR, DVC, MRCVS, DACVIM (Cardiology), DECVIM (Cardiology)
Department of Clinical Sciences and Services, Royal Veterinary College, University of London, Hatfield, Herts, UK

Myocardial disease is extremely common in cats and will
be encountered regularly by any feline clinician, but can
be hard to recognize. Feline myocardial disease is very
heterogeneous in presentation, clinical findings, and
prognosis. Without skilled echocardiography, identifying the different subclassifications of cardiomyopathy is
usually difficult. Fortunately, this is not usually necessary, as the main priorities for the clinician are to identify
those cats with a specific treatable cause of myocardial
disease, and to identify cats at high risk of congestive
heart failure (CHF) or aortic thromboembolism (ATE).

­Etiology
The term “myocardial disease” includes a range of conditions with varied etiologies. Cardiomyopathies are
­usually classified according to a phenotype based on
­cardiac structure and function (Figure 27.1).
The myocardium can be affected by systemic conditions such as hyperthyroidism, systemic hypertension,
and anemia, where disturbances in hemodynamic loading conditions may alter cardiac structure and function.
The myocardium has a limited range of responses to
injury or insult, so that different underlying causes can
result in the same phenotype. For example, dietary
­taurine deficiency, an uncontrolled tachyarrhythmia or
doxorubicin toxicity can all result in an identical “dilated
cardiomyopathy phenotype” characterized by systolic
dysfunction and ventricular dilation. In other cats, no
obvious underlying cause is identified, although a genetic
predisposition is suspected in some.
Traditionally, feline cardiomyopathies have been classified according to contemporary human classifications, but
controversy currently exists over whether human myocardial disease should be classified according to etiology or
phenotype. The most commonly recognized phenotype is
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), characterized by

thickened left ventricular (LV) walls. Other phenotypes
include restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM), defined as
relatively normal LV walls but with atrial enlargement and
increased atrial pressures; dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM),
recognized by atrial and ventricular dilation with global
LV hypocontractility; and arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC), which is typically manifested by fibrofatty replacement of predominantly the
right heart. There is considerable overlap between phenotypes, so an additional category of “unclassified cardiomyopathy” or “non-specific phenotype” is sometimes
used to describe patients with a phenotype that does not
correspond with any of the above criteria.
Unless a causative systemic disease or myocardial
insult can be identified, the etiology is unknown for most
cats with myocardial disease, although familial HCM is
recognized. A genetic cause has been established for
HCM in Maine Coon and ragdoll cats, where two different genetic mutations have been identified in the myosin‐binding protein C gene. In contrast, an HCM
phenotype has been associated with over 1400 different
mutations in humans, although a genetic cause is not
identified in all human HCM patients.

­Pathophysiology
The functional disturbance and consequent pathophysiology vary according to type of cardiomyopathy and
severity of disease. With mild myocardial abnormalities,
affected cats may not experience any obvious adverse
consequences. With severe or advanced myocardial
­disease, congestive heart failure is the most commonly
recognized sign. Sudden death is also a potential sequela,
but the prevalence is unknown and probably underestimated. Systemic or arterial thromboembolism is recognized in many advanced cases of cardiomyopathy with
left heart involvement.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

VetBooks.ir

268

ARVC
RA, RV dilation

HCM
phenotype
Dietary taurine
deficiency

Increased LV wall thickness

Tachycardia-mediated
cardiomyopathy
End-stage
HCM

DCM

Systolic
phenotype
dysfunction Chamber dilation,
systolic
dysfunction

RCM
phenotype
Normal LV,
LA dilation

?Unclassified
Abnormalities not
fitting other
categories

Hypertension
Acromegaly

“Transient
myocardial
thickening”

Hyperthyroidism

Anemia

Figure 27.1 Myocardial disease phenotypes. There is overlap in the cardiac characteristics between the different “classic” forms of
cardiomyopathy, and it can be difficult to differentiate cardiomyopathies with a genetic or unknown etiology from cardiomyopathies
caused by systemic disease on the basis of cardiac characteristics alone. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is defined as left ventricular (LV)
hypertrophy in the absence of an obvious cause, but hypertension, acromegaly, “transient myocardial thickening,” and hyperthyroidism
can all result in a phenotype that is identical to classic HCM. A minority of cats with severe (primary) HCM develop systolic dysfunction,
and are described as “end‐stage HCM,” overlapping with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). A DCM phenotype can be produced by taurine
deficiency or a tachycardia‐mediated cardiomyopathy though no underlying cause is found in most cats with dilation of all four cardiac
chambers and global systolic dysfunction. The classic form of restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) is defined as normal LV dimensions with
biatrial enlargement, but there is overlap with the above phenotypes. Not all cats fit into one of the categories listed above. Those with
predominantly right heart enlargement without an obvious cause are usually presumed to be arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
(ARVC), but others do not fit any category and are sometimes called “unclassified cardiomyopathy” or “non-specific phenotype”.

HCM
Key pathologic features of HCM include increased LV
mass associated with myocyte disarray, interstitial myocardial fibrosis, and narrowing of small coronary arteries. Myocardial hypertrophy may result in delayed LV
relaxation, but this is usually well tolerated under normal
circumstances and is not likely to result in clinical signs.
Many cats with HCM will remain clinically stable provided they are not subjected to a sudden change in
hemodynamic load. Examples of such triggers include
the stress of a visit to the veterinarian, which increases
myocardial oxygen demand; general anesthesia, which
can reduce cardiac output; or intravenous fluid therapy,
which can result in volume loading. Any of these short‐
term hemodynamic stressors can cause a sudden increase

in left atrial (LA) pressures and acute pulmonary edema.
The cats with subclinical HCM that are most vulnerable
to these stressors are likely to be those with LA enlargement. Cats with massive LV hypertrophy may also be at
increased risk, but the relationship between LV wall
thickness and risk is not linear, and LA enlargement is a
better global indicator of advanced disease.
Many cats with well‐compensated HCM exhibit
dynamic LV outflow tract obstruction, which can be
either persistent or only induced by excitement/exertion.
Outflow tract obstruction is usually caused by systolic
anterior motion (SAM) of the mitral valve, where movement of the anterior mitral leaflet towards the interventricular septum during mid to late systole causes
obstruction to ejection of blood flow, as well as mitral

VetBooks.ir

27 Feline Myocardial Disease

regurgitation. Outflow tract obstruction can be severe
enough to result in a pressure gradient across the LV outflow tract of over 100 mmHg for much of systole. In
human HCM patients, the additional myocardial oxygen
consumption associated with outflow tract obstruction
can cause myocardial ischemia, which is further exacerbated by the concurrent narrowing of small coronary
arteries that is a feature of HCM in both humans and
cats. Clinical signs of outflow tract obstruction in human
HCM patients include exertional dyspnea and chest pain.
The exact clinical effect in cats is difficult to determine,
as chest pain could easily pass unnoticed by owners, and
the majority of affected cats appear to be subclinical.
Some owners report open‐mouth breathing during play,
despite an absence of documentable pulmonary edema.
With progression of HCM, diastolic filling of the LV
may be further impaired as interstitial fibrosis worsens,
and the LV myocardium becomes stiffer. Ischemic episodes can result in focal areas of myocardial damage,
resulting in replacement fibrosis. Neurohormonal activation adds to the problem by causing plasma volume
expansion through sodium and water retention, and
signs of chronic congestive heart failure become more
likely. Signs include pulmonary edema, pleural effusion
or both. Cats at this stage are also at risk of arterial
thromboembolism, as LA contractile function deteriorates with chronic LA enlargement. A minority of cats
will develop generalized LV systolic dysfunction, or large
areas of ventricular “scarring” with regional wall thinning and replacement fibrosis. Cats with increased wall
thickness but systolic dysfunction are sometimes
described as “end‐stage HCM” (ES‐HCM). Although
these cats may start with a nondilated hypertrophied LV,
over time the LV wall thickness may decrease and LV
diameter increases, so that ultimately they may bear little
resemblance to the classic HCM phenotype.
Occasionally, cats with HCM will present with acute
signs of cardiogenic shock, including hypotension, hypothermia, and, often, bradycardia. These low‐output signs
may or may not be accompanied by congestive signs.
RCM
Two forms of RCM have been reported: an endomyocardial form characterized by LV bridging scar (eRCM); and
a myocardial form where the LV appears structurally
normal but is poorly compliant (mRCM). Varying
degrees and distribution of myocardial fibrosis are common to both forms. Biatrial enlargement and increased
atrial pressures are also common to both. Cats diagnosed
with RCM usually demonstrate clinical signs, which can
include congestive heart failure, arrhythmias, arterial
thromboembolism, or low‐output signs. It is difficult to
differentiate RCM from the more advanced forms of

HCM with myocyte loss or ES‐HCM, and they may in
fact be part of the same wide spectrum of HCM.
DCM
This form of cardiomyopathy is now very uncommon in
cats, despite being the most common phenotype in dogs.
A DCM phenotype is characterized by systolic dysfunction with normal or reduced LV wall thickness and is
associated with an increase in diastolic and systolic ventricular dimensions. An association was identified in the
late 1980s between DCM in cats and dietary taurine bioavailability, and since that time, a change in pet food
manufacturing processes has resolved this problem.
Accordingly, most cats with a DCM phenotype are found
to have normal plasma taurine concentrations.
Congestive heart failure, arterial thromboembolism, and
low‐output signs are all common presentations for DCM.
Arterial Thromboembolism
All of the above forms of cardiomyopathy may lead to
intracardiac thrombus formation if disease is sufficiently
advanced (i.e., with left atrial enlargement and dysfunction). Arterial embolization of thrombus (ATE) into the
systemic circulation causes vascular occlusion and acute
ischemia of downstream tissues, resulting in severe pain,
electrolyte disturbances, acute renal injury, and for those
surviving the initial embolic episode, a high long‐term
risk of ATE recurrence or CHF. Nevertheless, a minority
of cats can survive for periods in excess of a year if they
recover from the acute crisis.
ARVC
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy also
occurs in humans and dogs, and is characterized by
fibrofatty replacement of myocytes. The extent and distribution of myocyte replacement are variable, and may
result in tachyarrhythmias and/or right atrial and right
ventricular dilation. Affected cats may be presented with
signs of syncope associated with tachyarrhythmias, but
can also develop right‐sided congestive signs with ascites.

­Epidemiology
The prevalence of HCM in cats is high; approximately
15% of apparently healthy cats are affected, with a prevalence increasing to nearly 30% of cats over 9 years of age.
The prevalence of RCM, DCM, and ARVC is harder to
gauge, but is likely considerably lower. HCM is the most
common type of feline cardiomyopathy, regardless of age,
breed or presenting signs. In the absence of longitudinal
epidemiologic studies, it is impossible to determine

269

VetBooks.ir

270

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

whether RCM is a separate form of cardiomyopathy or an
advanced stage variant of HCM.

­Signalment
There is a male predominance in cats with HCM. Most
cats with HCM are domestic nonpedigree cats, but a number of pedigree breeds are said to be predisposed, including
the Maine Coon, ragdoll, Persian, British shorthair, sphynx,
Cornish rex, and Norwegian forest cat. Siamese and
Oriental cats may be predisposed towards eRCM. Age at
diagnosis varies widely, as any age of cat can be affected
with HCM, including kittens and geriatric cats, but the
prevalence of LV hypertrophy increases with age.

­History and Clinical Signs
Cats with advanced myocardial disease are often perceived
by their owner to be healthy until shortly before the onset
of CHF, ATE, syncope or sudden death. Typical presenting
signs for CHF include respiratory distress and tachypnea,
whereas acute limb paralysis/paresis is the most common
presentation with ATE. Some cats may develop open‐
mouth breathing only with stress or exertion, and may be
found to have dynamic LV outflow tract obstruction.
Physical examination findings are varied. Murmurs are
common in cats with HCM but also in healthy cats with
normal hearts, so a murmur should not always be
assumed to indicate heart disease. Murmurs are less
common in the more severe forms of cardiomyopathy
than in well‐compensated HCM. A minority of cats with
cardiomyopathy have an audible gallop or arrhythmia,
and these auscultation findings are more likely to indicate advanced disease, though can also be detected in
some geriatric cats with only mild abnormalities.
A prominent apical impulse may be apparent in cats with
cardiomegaly or a hyperdynamic LV.
Physical exam findings in cats with congestive heart
failure will include tachypnea with increased respiratory
effort, crackles on pulmonary auscultation with severe
pulmonary edema, or absent breath sounds ventrally
with a pleural effusion. The presence of a gallop sound in
a cat with tachypnea and respiratory distress should
prompt treatment for congestive heart failure until further confirmatory tests are possible.

­Diagnosis
From the above descriptions, it is clear that establishing
a diagnosis of a particular type of cardiomyopathy in an
individual cat is challenging. To differentiate end‐stage

HCM, RCM, and UCM requires a high level of echocardiographic skill and experience. A precise diagnosis can
be challenging even for experienced cardiologists unless
a cat has a classic HCM or ARVC phenotype, due to poor
consensus on the definitions of each cardiomyopathy
type. Moreover, the labels “end‐stage HCM,” “RCM,” and
“UCM” might not actually reflect distinct disease entities
but rather different stages of a single condition. Instead,
diagnostic tests should be focused on confirming the
presence of heart disease; identifying any underlying
­systemic cause of cardiomyopathy that should be treated;
and identifying cats at high risk of CHF and ATE.
Is Heart Disease Present?
In practical terms, the clinician’s first priority when presented with a cat with clinical findings suggestive of heart
disease is to establish whether or not cardiac disease is
present. The approach will be different for cats with
­respiratory distress versus those that are asymptomatic.
Tachypneic Cats

Heart disease should always be considered in cats with
tachypnea, and the presence of a murmur, gallop or
arrhythmia should increase this suspicion (Figure 27.2).
Differentiation of congestive heart failure from other
causes of respiratory distress may require diagnostic
imaging, but the potential value of radiography or echocardiography must be weighed against the possible risk
of subjecting the patient to further stress that could
prove fatal. Ultrasound is generally better tolerated than
radiography, and has the advantage that patient positioning is less critical. Thoracic ultrasound can demonstrate pleural effusion and can even be used to indicate
pulmonary parenchymal changes as with pulmonary
edema (B‐line artifacts). If sufficient expertise is available, the most useful way to increase confidence of a cardiac cause of respiratory distress is to demonstrate LA
enlargement with echocardiography. Thoracic radiography can be used to identify pleural effusion, pulmonary
infiltrates, and assess cardiac size, but must be obtained
with great care to avoid compromising patient safety. A
point‐of‐care test is available to measure plasma NT‐
proBNP, providing a simple way to help differentiate
cats with respiratory distress due to heart failure versus
noncardiac causes.
Asymptomatic Cats

Myocardial disease should be considered in an otherwise
healthy cat when a murmur is detected, and should be
strongly suspected when a gallop or arrhythmia is auscultated (Figure 27.3). A very loud murmur (i.e., with a
precordial thrill) is usually associated with congenital
heart disease.

VetBooks.ir

27 Feline Myocardial Disease

Cat with tachypnea/suspected acute CHF
O2, (sedation?)
?Absent breath
sounds ventrally

Auscultation

Gallop or
Arrhythmia
Thoracocentesis

Normal or murmur

Pleural effusion

Normal or
equivocal LA

Obvious LA
enlargement

Fluid analysis,
cytology

Echo not available

“In-house” Echo

Congestive heart
failure likely

Additional tests

NT-proBNP

Furosemide

low

high

1–2 mg/kg IV to effect

Cardiomegaly &
pulmonary infiltrates

Consider
respiratory
disease
Thoracic
radiography
Normal heart

If BP <100 mmHg,
no murmur

Pimobendan
1.25 mg q12 h PO

Figure 27.2 Initial approach to the cat with tachypnea and suspected heart disease. Diagnostic tests are shaded in blue, therapy is
shaded in pink. A combination of auscultation, rapid and focused “in‐house” ultrasound examination, and other diagnostic tests can
provide information on probability that the cat’s tachypnea is due to congestive heart failure (CHF) or noncardiac disease. BP, blood
pressure; Echo, echocardiography; LA, left atrium.

Other common causes of a heart murmur in cats
include physiologic (or nonpathologic) murmurs, as well
as anemia, hyperthyroidism, and hypertension.

evaluate the potential risk of cardiac complications
such as CHF or ATE. Classifying cats as either “low
risk” or “high risk” facilitates management.

Is There an Underlying Systemic Cause
of Myocardial Disease?

Heart Disease Present; High Risk or Low Risk?

It is helpful to view feline myocardial disease in terms
of those with and without a specific systemic cause, as
treatment of any underlying cause is essential. It is
vital to identify hypertension, hyperthyroidism or
anemia, as specific treatment requirements will differ
for each. Blood pressure should be measured in all
cats with suspected heart disease, and T4 concentrations measured in older cats. Hematocrit should be
checked if there is any concern that anemia may be
responsible for a murmur. For those cats where no
cause is identified or can be treated, it is important to

One of the most useful prognostic indicators for cats
with cardiomyopathy is LA size. Cats with HCM and
normal LA size can be considered to be at low risk of
CHF and ATE. Cats with LA enlargement fall into a
higher risk category. If echocardiography is not available
to assess LA size, thoracic radiographs are reasonably
specific but poorly sensitive to detect LA enlargement.
ARVC is an exception, as LA size is an indicator of risk
for left heart disease and ARVC predominantly affects
the right heart. Plasma biomarkers such as NT‐proBNP
and troponin‐I can help provide an indication of the
severity of heart disease.

271

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

VetBooks.ir

272

Cat with suspected subclinical myocardial disease
Auscultation

ECG

Arrhythmia

Gallop

T4 (if > 7 years)
Tachyarrhythmia

Murmur

BP

PCV
PCV low

BP, PCV (T4) normal

“In-house” Echo
Normal LA, or
echo not available

Obvious LA
enlargement

Systemic
disease

BP high
T4 high

Consider anemia

Consider hypertension

Consider hyperthyroidism

Additional tests

NT-proBNP

Thoracic
radiography

High NT-proBNP

“High-risk”
heart disease

No cardiomegaly
Cardiomegaly

Low NT-proBNP

Normal or “Low-risk”
heart disease

Referral echo?
Annual re-test

Figure 27.3 Initial approach to the cat with suspected subclinical heart disease. Diagnostic tests are shaded in blue. Secondary systemic
causes of myocardial disease should be identified, as further specific testing may be indicated and therapy will be specific for the
underlying cause. A combination of auscultation, rapid “in‐house” echocardiography, biomarkers, and radiographs can be used to
differentiate cats at high risk of congestive heart failure and thromboembolism, versus those at low risk of these complications. More
advanced echocardiography can be considered for “high‐risk” cats to further characterize the myocardial disease and rule out congenital
heart disease. Cats with “high‐risk” cardiomyopathy may benefit from antiplatelet treatment, such as clopidogrel. BP, blood pressure;
echo, echocardiography; ECG, electrocardiogram; LA, left atrial; PCV, packed cell volume; T4, serum thyroxine concentrations.

Which Cardiomyopathy is This?
Echocardiography is a difficult technique in cats, and it
takes an experienced echocardiographer to differentiate
many of the more advanced cardiomyopathy phenotypes. Severe forms of ARVC may be easy to differentiate
from other cardiomyopathies, but hard to differentiate
from tricuspid dysplasia or conditions associated with
severe pulmonary hypertension. Milder or atypical forms
of any of the cardiomyopathies can be difficult to classify
on echocardiography, and can sometimes be challenging
even for cardiologists. At the other end of the spectrum,
it can be challenging to differentiate cats with mild HCM
from those with physiologic murmurs.
There are few clinical consequences in the short term
for incorrectly distinguishing normal cats from those
with mild HCM (apart from when screening prebreeding

pedigree cats for cardiomyopathy), providing these “low‐
risk” cats continue to be monitored over subsequent
years. The rate of progression from normal to mild
HCM, or mild HCM to “high‐risk” HCM is variable, so
such cats should be reevaluated at least annually.
Biomarkers can be helpful in this context, as low NT‐
proBNP concentrations should provide some reassurance that a cat continues to be low risk.

­Therapy
Cats with CHF
For cats with life‐threatening signs, therapy is focused
on relieving critical hypoxemia using a combination of
­parenteral furosemide, oxygen, and sedation as needed

VetBooks.ir

27 Feline Myocardial Disease

(butorphanol 0.3 mg/kg, IM or SC) for cats in distress.
Initially, furosemide should be given IV at 2 mg/kg, but
may be given IM until IV access can be secured.
Repeated doses are given every 30–60 minutes, to
effect. Response is assessed by monitoring respiratory
rate and effort, with the goal of returning respiratory
rates to normal (or at least <40 breaths/min). Renal
function and electrolytes should also be monitored, as
hypokalemia and elevations in BUN are common.
Although the effect of therapy on renal function and
electrolytes should be considered, the principal goal
should be the elimination of congestive signs.
Intravenous fluids should be avoided in the presence of
congestive heart failure, even in hypotensive cats (systolic blood pressure <100 mmHg). For hypothermic,
hypotensive cats without a heart murmur, pimobendan
(1.25 mg PO per cat) can be considered.
Hospitalized cats are often stressed, and once respiratory distress is controlled they may benefit from being
returned to their home environment.
Cats with “transient myocardial thickening” (TMT)
warrant a specific mention, as they have a better than
expected prognosis. The cause of TMT is unknown, but
affected cats are often young and have a history of a
recent stressful event. They usually present with CHF
associated with thickened LV walls, but if treated appropriately for their heart failure can make a full recovery,
with return to a normal cardiac phenotype.
For outpatient management, parenteral furosemide
can be replaced with oral furosemide. The goal of
long‐term management is to maintain control of congestive signs and to prevent ATE. Evidence‐based
selection of therapeutic agents for CHF management
in cats suffers from the absence of clinical trial data.
Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEI),
spironolactone, and pimobendan are all currently
used off‐label in the treatment of CHF in cats. ACEIs
have not been associated with any adverse effects in
­isease and in theory should
cats with cardiac d
counteract furosemide‐mediated activation of the
­
renin‐angiotensin‐aldosterone
system
(RAAS).
Spironolactone should also act on the RAAS and has
been reported to have favorable effects in experimental models of HCM, but its use was reported to result
in skin lesions in a small minority of cats. Pimobendan
is considered contraindicated in cats with HCM and
outflow tract obstruction, but is a logical choice for
treatment of cats with systolic dysfunction. Diltiazem
is rarely used, and beta‐adrenergic antagonists such as
atenolol are generally considered contraindicated in
the presence of congestive heart failure.
Cats with recurrent or persistent CHF despite appropriate doses of diuretics are generally managed by
increasing diuretic doses and adding medications

such as an ACEI and spironolactone. Cats that have
experienced an episode of CHF are likely to be at risk of
ATE, so should also receive antiplatelet treatment.
Clopidogrel is the first‐choice treatment for prevention
of ATE (18.75 mg per cat q24h PO), as aspirin (at either
5 mg/kg or 75 mg q72h) does not appear to be as effective, though is well tolerated.
Administering multiple medications is a problem with
many cats, so combining tablets in a single gelatine
­capsule can be helpful.
Asymptomatic Cats
Low‐Risk Cats

Many asymptomatic cats will have normal survival
times whether or not they receive treatment. It is debatable whether extending survival is possible in low‐risk
cats, although improving quality of life might be a
worthwhile aim. In human HCM patients, LV outflow
tract obstruction can be associated with chest pain and
exertional dyspnea, which can be relieved with atenolol
in some patients. Although atenolol does not seem to
confer an obvious survival benefit in cats with HCM
and LV outflow tract obstruction, there are anecdotal
reports that atenolol might improve activity levels in
some cats.
High‐Risk Cats

There are currently no therapies that are known to
reduce the risk of developing CHF in cats with myocardial disease, apart from treating hyperthyroidism, hypertension, and anemia when present. As high‐risk cats
are at risk of ATE, they should receive antiplatelet
treatment.

­Prognosis
Feline myocardial disease has a very varied prognosis,
ranging from a benign condition with minimal influence
on morbidity and mortality in many cats, to a disabling
and potentially fatal condition associated with respiratory distress, sudden death, and pain and paralysis.
Factors such as gallop sounds, arrhythmias, LA enlargement, and systolic dysfunction are indicators of a poor
prognosis and high risk of cardiac complications, and
absence of these factors is likely to indicate a more benign
outcome. Of these factors, LA enlargement is the most
important predictor and the ability to assess LA size with
echocardiography is extremely useful. By focusing on
potential risk, the complex issues of cardiomyopathy
classification are avoided and therapy can be directed at
cats that are in most need.

273

VetBooks.ir

274

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

­Further Reading
Borgeat K, Wright J, Garrod O, Payne JR, Luis Fuentes V.
Arterial thromboembolism in 250 cats in general
practice: 2004‐2012. J Vet Intern Med 2014; 28(1): 102–8
Fox PR, Basso C, Thiene G, Maron BJ. Spontaneously
occurring restrictive nonhypertrophied cardiomyopathy
in domestic cats: a new animal model of human disease.
Cardiovasc Pathol 2014; 23(1): 28–34.
Paige CF, Abbott JA, Elvinger Fo, Pyle RL. Prevalence of
cardiomyopathy in apparently healthy cats. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2009; 234(11): 1398–403.

Smith S, Dukes‐McEwan J. Clinical signs and left atrial size
in cats with cardiovascular disease in general practice.
J Small Anim Pract 2012; 53(1): 27–33.
Wagner T, Fuentes VL, Payne JR, McDermott N, Brodbelt
D. Comparison of auscultatory and echocardiographic
findings in healthy adult cats. J Vet Cardiol 2010; 12(3):
171–82.

VetBooks.ir

275

28
Pericardial Disease
Ashley B. Saunders, DVM, DACVIM (Cardiology) and Sonya G. Gordon, DVM, DVSc, DACVIM (Cardiology)
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA

The pericardium is a multilayered structure surrounding
the heart that isolates the heart from the remainder of the
thorax. It creates a potential space that can be filled by
fluid, tissue, or air/gas. While pericardial disease is relatively uncommon, it can lead to life‐threatening conditions
when intrapericardial pressure rises and cardiac output is
compromised. A combination of restricted filling, reduced
diastolic function, partial obstruction to inflow into the
atria, and reduced cardiac output can manifest clinically as
weakness, collapse, tachycardia, jugular venous distension,
and ascites. Pericardiocentesis is recommended to alleviate
clinical signs of pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade. Congenital and acquired pericardial diseases in cats
and dogs will be discussed in detail.

Signalment

­Congenital

Intrapericardial Cysts

Etiology/Pathophysiology
Peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia (PPDH)
occurs during development in dogs and cats when the
septum transversum does not form or fuse normally,
resulting in a communication that allows abdominal
contents to displace into the pericardial space. The tissues and organs herniated most often are omentum,
liver, gallbladder, and small intestine. Concurrent congenital abnormalities including portosystemic shunt are
often present in animals with PPDH.
Intrapericardial cysts have been rarely reported in dogs
and cats and in some cases were associated with PPDH.

Although these are congenital abnormalities, they can be
detected incidentally in adults so the age at presentation
can vary greatly.
History and Clinical Signs
PPDH

Clinical signs with PPDH depend on which abdominal
organs herniate. Up to 69% of animals have clinical signs
including tachypnea/dyspnea, cough, vomiting, anorexia,
and exercise intolerance. Common physical examination
abnormalities include muffled heart and lung sounds, borborygmus auscultated in the thorax, and heart murmur.
Symptomatic animals have presenting signs similar to
those with pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade
(see Pericardial Effusion section).
Diagnosis
Thoracic radiograph findings include enlarged or globoid cardiac silhouette and, in the case of PPDH, a loss of
distinction between the cardiac silhouette and diaphragm or abnormal densities (gas or fat) within the cardiac silhouette (Figure 28.1a,b). Ultrasound confirms the
presence of effusion and which organs have herniated.
The diagnosis of PPDH can be an incidental finding during diagnostic imaging for another reason.

Epidemiology

Therapy

The overall prevalence of PPDH at two veterinary institutions was 0.025%, with a greater prevalence in cats
than dogs.

Surgical repair of PPDH is recommended more often
for young animals (median age 1.1 years) and those
with clinical signs. Successful surgical management of

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

276

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 28.1 Lateral and dorsoventral thoracic radiographs in three dogs with pericardial disease. (a,b) A 4‐month‐old English bulldog with
a peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia seen as an abnormal gas pattern consistent with bowel loops within the cardiac silhouette.
(c,d) Severe enlargement of the cardiac silhouette with a large‐volume pericardial effusion in a dog that presented for cough. The trachea is
dorsally deviated. (e,f) The cardiac silhouette is enlarged with rounded borders in a dog with degenerative mitral valve disease. Left atrial
enlargement can be noted as straightening of the caudal aspect of the cardiac silhouette (arrows). The left atrium was severely enlarged on
echocardiography and a small‐volume pericardial effusion was documented that resolved with heart failure management.

VetBooks.ir

28 Pericardial Disease

pericardial cysts, with repair of a PPDH when present,
has been reported.
Prognosis
The majority of animals with clinical signs will improve
following surgical correction. The mortality rate following surgery for PPDH varies between 5.1% and 14%. The
mortality rate following surgical repair of PPDH is higher
if reexpansion pulmonary edema or hemorrhage occurs,
although improvements in anesthesia and postoperative
management have most likely improved the prognosis.

­Pericardial Effusion
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Accumulation of fluid within the pericardial space can
cause hemodynamic abnormalities depending on the
volume and rate of fluid accumulation as well as intracardiac filling pressures and compliance. The resulting
hemodynamic changes and decrease in cardiac output
create a clinical syndrome called cardiac tamponade,
where increased intrapericardial pressure equals or
exceeds intracardiac pressure, with the right side of the
heart most susceptible to compromise.
The most common causes of pericardial effusion in
dogs are neoplastic and idiopathic with rare cases of
infectious pericarditis (bacterial, fungal), coagulopathy,
left atrial tear, heart failure, foreign body, and uremia.
The most common causes of pericardial effusion in cats
are heart failure, neoplastic and infectious (viral) with rare
cases of coagulopathy, foreign body, and uremia.
Dogs
Neoplastic

Primary or metastatic neoplasia is the most commonly
reported cause of pericardial effusion in dogs. The incidence of hemangiosarcoma and aortic body tumors
(chemodectoma) is higher than mesothelioma with infrequent reports of thyroid carcinoma, myxoma, and others.
Hemangiosarcoma has a 10‐fold greater incidence
than aortic body tumors in dogs. They are typically
located in the right atrium/auricle and are highly malignant. The mean age at presentation is 9.8 years and mean
weight is 32 kg. Golden retrievers are overrepresented.
Survival times with combinations of pericardiocentesis,
pericardiectomy, tumor resection, and/or chemotherapy
are short.
Heart base tumors, most often chemodectoma or thyroid carcinoma, are located near the aorta and main
pulmonary artery. Chemoreceptor cells are found in
­
groups at the ventrolateral surface of the aorta and the

bifurcation of the carotid artery near the base of the heart.
The chemoreceptor system responds to changes in pH
and the partial pressure of arterial oxygen and carbon
dioxide in the blood. These tumors tend to be slow growing and locally invasive, causing compression or infiltration of adjacent structures. Chemodectomas can occur in
any breed but brachycephalic breeds appear predisposed
(boxer, bulldog, Boston terrier). Mean age at presentation
is 10 years. Heart base tumors are intimately associated
with vascular structures, making c­ omplete surgical excision and radiation therapy problematic. In dogs with
heart base tumors assumed to be chemodectomas and
clinically significant pericardial effusion, palliation with
pericardiectomy significantly extends survival. In the
absence of significant pericardial effusion, these tumors
can be an incidental finding in dogs undergoing an
echocardiogram for another indication.
Mesothelioma is a neoplasm of the pericardium and
serosal surfaces. It is relatively uncommon and is not
characterized by an easily identifiable discrete mass,
making it difficult to diagnose. Diagnosis of mesothelioma requires histopathology of the pericardium and is
therefore difficult to distinguish from idiopathic disease.
Mesothelioma can develop secondary to chronic effusions. The mean age at diagnosis is 9.5 years.
Idiopathic

A cause for pericardial effusion cannot be identified in
up to 23% of cases. Therefore, idiopathic is a diagnosis of
exclusion. Affected dogs are typically medium to large
breed and middle aged. The reported mean age is slightly
less than that reported for dogs with a neoplastic etiology. Of note, reports have identified small tumors on
necropsy and confirmed mesothelioma on histopathology of pericardial tissue in dogs initially diagnosed with
idiopathic effusions.
Infectious

Rare reports of systemic fungal disease (Coccidioides
immitis, Aspergillus niger), bacterial pericarditis (various
bacteria including botryomycosis) and protozoal infection with Leishmania chagasi have been associated with
pericardial effusion. In some cases, long‐term survival
can be achieved with a combination of surgical management and long‐term antibiotic or fungal therapy.
Other

A left atrial tear can occur in dogs with degenerative
mitral valve disease, most often resulting in acute clinical
decompensation. An echocardiogram performed at the
time may document evidence of a thrombus in the pericardial space. Pericardial effusion secondary to heart
failure is uncommon in dogs with heart disease and if it
does occur, the effusion is typically scant and does not

277

VetBooks.ir

278

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

result in tamponade. Additional rarely reported causes
of pericardial effusion in dogs include renal failure/­
uremia, coagulopathy, and migrating foreign bodies
including grass awns, porcupine quills, and gun pellets.
Cats
Heart Failure

The most common cause of pericardial effusion in cats,
it can develop with any significant underlying heart
disease including hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The
­
volume of effusion is typically small with heart failure
and resolves with heart failure management. Cats with
heart failure‐associated pericardial effusion have a
shorter survival time than cats with pericardial effusion
not caused by heart disease.
Neoplastic

This is a rare cause of pericardial effusion in the cat. The
most common tumors reported in cats with pericardial
effusion are lymphoma, thymoma, mesothelioma, and
adenocarcinoma. The clinical effects of cardiac tumors
are related principally to compression or obstruction of
adjacent cardiac structures, infiltration of the myocardium, and development of pericardial effusion.
Infectious

In the past, infection was considered the most common
cause of pericardial effusion in the cat related to the
historical prevalence of feline infectious peritonitis
­
(­coronavirus). The prevalence of pericardial effusion in
cats with feline infectious peritonitis (coronavirus) is
9.6–12.8%.
Other

Additional rarely reported causes of pericardial effusion in cats include renal failure/uremia, trauma, and
coagulopathy.
Signalment
Dogs

In general, dogs are middle aged to older and large breed
(golden retriever, German shepherd). Golden retrievers
are the most overrepresented breed presenting with pericardial effusion. They are also the most commonly
reported breed with hemangiosarcoma. Brachycephalic
breeds are predisposed to heart base tumors (chemodectoma). A young adult dog of any breed would be more
likely to have an infectious or idiopathic cause.
Cats

Irrespective of cause, the most reported breed is domestic shorthair although pure breeds can be affected.
Median age at presentation is 6.0 years.

History and Clinical Signs
Patients can be affected to various degrees, ranging from
no overt clinical signs to severe compromise. Clinical signs,
when present, are often nonspecific and can include lethargy, anorexia, collapse, cough, and vomiting. Respiratory
signs (tachypnea, dyspnea, cough) are common complaints
in cats. Abnormal physical examination findings that are
suggestive of pericardial effusion can include muffled or
distant heart sounds, weak pulses or variation in pulse
quality with respiration, and tachycardia. Signs of overt
right heart failure (abdominal ­distension from ascites) and
evidence of increased right heart pressures, including jugular venous distension, can also be present.
Diagnosis
A complete diagnostic work‐up is recommended to
assess clinical status and create a treatment plan.
Evaluation includes but may not be limited to a complete
blood count, biochemistries, coagulation testing, urinalysis, blood pressure, thoracic radiographs, electrocardiography, and echocardiography. In addition, point‐of‐care
ultrasound in the emergency setting is helpful for rapidly
detecting pericardial effusion. Infectious disease testing
may be indicated in endemic areas or if one is suspected.
Additional tests may be indicated depending on clinical
status or presenting signs.
Thoracic Radiographs

An enlarged, globoid cardiac silhouette suggests the
presence of pericardial effusion (Figure 28.1c,d). Small‐
volume pericardial effusions may not cause a rounded
appearance. Additional findings include dorsal deviation
of the trachea, caudal vena cava distension, and hepatomegaly. Some specific abnormalities indicative of the
underlying diagnosis include abnormal bulges at the
heart base suggestive of a mass, left atrial enlargement in
degenerative mitral valve disease (Figure 28.1e,f ), and
pulmonary metastasis. When present, pleural effusion
often impedes assessment of the cardiac silhouette.
Pulmonary edema is uncommon in dogs with pericardial
effusion but can be present in cats with heart failure.
Echocardiography

Echocardiography (cardiac ultrasound) provides a noninvasive means of imaging the heart and surrounding
structures, and is superior to conventional radiography
for identifying pericardial effusion, which appears as a
hypoechoic space surrounding the heart (Figure 28.2).
Additionally, echocardiography can identify the etiology
of pericardial effusion, such as neoplastic or underlying
heart disease. Pericardial effusion provides a source of
ultrasonic contrast that is helpful when attempting to

VetBooks.ir

28 Pericardial Disease

(a)

(b)

Figure 28.2 Transthoracic echocardiographic images of the left ventricle (LV) from a right parasternal short‐axis view. (a) A large‐volume
pericardial effusion in a dog. (b) A small‐volume pericardial effusion in a cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and congestive heart
failure. PE, pericardial effusion.

visualize cardiac tumors, but therapeutic pericardiocentesis should not be delayed for an echocardiographic
examination in an unstable patient. Tumors are most
often located in the right atrial or auricular wall in the
case of hemangiosarcoma or at the heart base associated
with the aorta or main pulmonary artery (Figure 28.3).
They can also be found, more rarely, within the right
ventricular myocardium and right ventricular outflow
tract. Hemangiosarcomas frequently appear cavitary.
Both the right and left imaging windows are recommended for identification and localization. In addition to
identifying pericardial effusion, echocardiography can
provide evidence of cardiac tamponade by documenting
diastolic collapse of the right atrium and ventricle when
intrapericardial pressures exceed right atrial or ventricular end‐diastolic pressures (Figure 28.4). Left ventricular
internal dimensions will measure small when pericardial
effusion inhibits preload of the heart.
Pericardial Fluid Analysis

Pericardial fluid is typically hemorrhagic in appearance,
although opaque fluid can be seen with chylous effusions and exudates. Most cardiac tumors do not exfoliate well, and for this reason pericardial fluid analysis
and cytology often are unrewarding for the identification of cardiac tumors. Careful cytologic evaluation is
required so that reactive mesothelial cells are not
­mistaken for neoplastic cells. Occasionally, lymphoma
or an infectious cause can be documented. Culture and
sensitivity are indicated for the identification of effusions secondary to infectious etiologies.
Electrocardiography

The most common finding is sinus tachycardia
(Figure 28.5a), which is a physiologic compensatory

mechanism to improve cardiac output. Low‐voltage
QRS complexes can be indicative of pericardial effusion in dogs (Figure 28.5b). It is important to recognize
that QRS complexes are typically small in cats, making
this an insensitive indicator of effusion. Electrical
alternans, identified as a beat‐to‐beat variation in the
QRS complexes, is highly suggestive of pericardial
effusion, although it is only identified in a small number of dogs (Figure 28.5c). Lastly, a change (depression
or elevation) in the ST segment associated with myocardial hypoxia (Figure 28.5d) may be documented.
Ventricular arrhythmias are not uncommon and
supraventricular arrhythmias can also occur. Most
ECG abnormalities will resolve shortly after the
removal of pericardial effusion.
Laboratory Work

Comprehensive laboratory evaluation including complete blood count, biochemical analysis, coagulation
panel, and urinalysis can provide information regarding underlying etiology and the patient’s clinical status. Abnormalities are not uncommon but are often
nonspecific. Cardiac troponin I concentrations can be
increased in dogs with hemangiosarcoma (>0.25 ng/
mL) when compared to other causes of pericardial
effusion.
Neoplastic Evaluation

Cardiac tumors are located adjacent to important vascular structures, making the diagnosis challenging.
Definitive diagnosis is often made during surgery or at
necropsy. Surgical excisional biopsy has been described
for the diagnosis of hemangiosarcoma of the right auricle
and for chemodectoma but is often not performed as a
consequence of the overall risk to benefit ratio.

279

VetBooks.ir

280

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

(a)

Advanced Imaging
Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging can provide additional information including
tumor location and the presence of metastatic
disease.
Therapy
The urgency of pericardiocentesis depends on the clinical status of the patient at the time of evaluation.
Acute Therapy

(b)

Critically ill animals require immediate stabilization
with intravenous fluid therapy to help restore cardiac
output, and pericardiocentesis to resolve tamponade.
Dyspneic patients may benefit from a combination of
oxygen supplementation and removal of pleural effusion
and/or ascites if the volume(s) are significant enough to
contribute to respiratory difficulty. Diuretic therapy with
furosemide is generally contraindicated because diuretics do not consistently remove free fluid from the pericardium and can contribute to further hemodynamic
compromise. One exception is the judicious use of
­furosemide in cats and dogs with pericardial effusion
secondary to congestive heart failure.
Pericardiocentesis

(c)

Figure 28.3 Transthoracic echocardiographic images from
dogs with cardiac tumors and pericardial effusion. (a) Images
obtained from the left cranial window document a mass (*) in
direct apposition with the aorta typical of heart base tumors.
(b) Right parasternal short‐axis view of the heart base
documenting a mass (*) near the aorta consistent with a heart
base mass. (c) Images obtained from the left cranial window
document a mass (*) within the right auricle, most likely a
hemangiosarcoma based on location. Ao, aorta; LA, left atrium;
RA, right atrium.

Pericardiocentesis is performed primarily in dogs and is
recommended when pericardial effusion is large volume
and/or contributing to hemodynamic compromise (tamponade). The majority of cats have small volume
­effusions secondary to heart failure that resolve with
heart failure management.
Several techniques for pericardiocentesis have been
described and the technique selected depends on the
clinical status of the patient, veterinarian comfort level
with the procedure, equipment availability, and technical
support. The objective of the procedure is to remove as
much pericardial fluid as possible. Complications can
occur during pericardiocentesis if the catheter contacts
the heart, resulting in arrhythmias, or lacerates lung or
other cardiac structures. Pericardial fluid removal typically provides an immediate clinical benefit noted by a
reduction in heart rate to a more normal range and an
improvement in pulse quality and blood pressure.
Equipment and Supplies

Over‐the‐needle catheter with a length appropriate for
the patient size (for example: 14 g × 5.25 inch, 16 g ×
3.25 inch).
●● Extension IV set.
●● Three‐way stopcock.
●● Syringe (20–60 mL).
●●

VetBooks.ir

28 Pericardial Disease

(a)

(b)

Figure 28.4 Echocardiographic images obtained from a right parasternal long‐axis view in a dog with pericardial effusion and
collapse of the right atrium (arrow) caused by elevated intrapericardial pressure. Ao, aorta; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle;
PE, pericardial effusion.

Scalpel blade.
Collection bowl and graduated cylinder or other
­volume measuring tool.
●● Red‐top
tube containing no anticoagulants or
preservatives.
●● Purple‐ or lavender‐top tube containing EDTA as an
anticoagulant.
●● Sterile gloves.
●● Local anesthetic block.
●● Continuous
ECG – recommended for detecting
arrhythmias generated by contacting the heart when
advancing the catheter into the pericardial space.
●● Echocardiogram/ultrasound machine – useful for
identifying a location on the right side of the thorax for
obtaining the most direct access to pericardial fluid.
●● Sedation – may be required to facilitate the procedure
in some cases.
●●
●●

Preparation

Prior to performing the procedure, gather the supplies
appropriate for the patient’s size, demeanor, and clinical
status. Putting together a prestocked kit that contains
the necessary supplies for pericardiocentesis is very useful, especially for immediate access in an emergency situation. Light sedation may be required to facilitate the
procedure in some cases. The local anesthetic block can
be drawn into a syringe, and the right side of the thorax
can be shaved in preparation for the procedure.
Procedure (Figure 28.6)

Pericardiocentesis is routinely performed on the right
side of the thorax to utilize an approach through the cardiac notch between lung lobes and to avoid damage to
the lung and coronary arteries.

1) For the procedure, the patient is positioned in sternal
or lateral recumbency with continuous ECG attached.
2) Identify the ideal position for introducing the catheter into the thorax, which is often around the fifth or
sixth intercostal space, mid‐thorax at the costochondral junction. It can be found by flexing the right front
limb and swinging the leg across the thorax and using
the intercostal space where the point of the elbow
crosses the costochondral junction (Figure 28.6a) or
with ultrasound guidance (Figure 28.6b). A permanent marker can be used to identify the spot for catheter entry or to mark multiple spots on the perimeter
of the shaved area to triangulate the position.
3) Following sterile preparation of the pericardiocentesis site, inject a local anesthetic block to the skin,
intercostal muscles, and pleura (Figure 28.6c). The
discomfort associated with the local block can limit
its value in some dogs that would otherwise benefit
from sedation. After approximately five minutes, use
a scalpel blade to make a small stab incision in the
skin to facilitate catheter insertion and advancement.
4) Attach the catheter to the extension set tubing with a
three‐way stopcock placed between the extension set
tubing and a syringe. At the predetermined ideal pericardiocentesis site, advance the catheter through the
skin, followed by the intercostal muscles, avoiding the
caudal aspect of the rib where the intercostal vessels
are located, and into the pleural space (Figure 28.6d).
An assistant applying gentle negative pressure on the
syringe may encounter pleural effusion that is typically straw colored in patients with right heart failure.
Continue advancing the catheter until a scratching
sensation is detected when the needle comes into
contact with the pericardium. Continue to advance

281

VetBooks.ir

282

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 28.5 Electrocardiogram recordings from dogs with pericardial effusion. (a) Sinus tachycardia. (b) Sinus rhythm with small QRS
complexes. (c) Sinus rhythm with electrical alternans, a beat‐to‐beat variation in R‐wave amplitude (arrows). (d) Predominantly
ventricular rhythm (V) with a single fusion beat (F). Sinus complexes have ST segment elevation (arrow). All traces are lead II recorded at
25 mm/s and 10 mm/mV.

the catheter into the pericardial space until fluid, typically hemorrhagic appearing (Figure 28.6e,f ), is withdrawn into the extension set tubing. Contact with the
heart will make the catheter move with the heartbeat
and induce arrhythmias (typically ventricular) as
noted on a simultaneous electrocardiogram. If either
is encountered, the catheter should be withdrawn
quickly. Alternatively, the catheter can be advanced
without being attached to the extension set tubing
and flash of hemorrhagic fluid will be detected when
the catheter is introduced into the pericardial fluid, at

which point the needle is removed and the extension
set tubing connected.
5) Once pericardial effusion is encountered, detach the
extension set tubing from the needle, remove the needle from the catheter, and reattach the extension set
tubing directly to the catheter. Removing the needle
prevents contact with the heart as the pericardial
fluid is removed.
6) Place the initial sample of pericardial fluid in serum
(red‐top) and EDTA (purple‐top) tubes for laboratory
analysis. Fluid can be reserved for culture and sensitivity,

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

VetBooks.ir

(a)

Figure 28.6 Pericardiocentesis in a dog. This dog had a history of biting and no clinical signs of dyspnea. A muzzle was placed as a
precautionary measure along with gentle restraint for the procedure. (a) Identify the ideal position for introducing the catheter into the thorax,
which is often around the fifth or sixth intercostal space near the costochondral junction. It can be found by flexing the right front limb and
swinging the leg across the thorax and using the intercostal space where the point of the elbow crosses the costochondral junction.
(b) Locating the ideal site for catheter entry using ultrasound guidance. (c) Following sterile preparation of the pericardiocentesis site, inject a
local anesthetic block into the skin, intercostal muscles, and pleura. After approximately five minutes, use a scalpel blade to make a small stab
incision in the skin to facilitate catheter insertion and advancement. Note multiple spots were marked on the perimeter of the shaved area to
triangulate the position for the anesthetic block and subsequent catheter entry site. (d) At the predetermined ideal pericardiocentesis site,
advance the catheter through the skin, followed by the intercostal muscles, avoiding the caudal aspect of the rib where the intercostal
vessels are located, and into the pleural space. Note the leads have been attached for monitoring the electrocardiogram during the procedure.
(e) The catheter was advanced until a scratching sensation was detected when the needle contacted the pericardium. Once pericardial effusion
was encountered, the extension set tubing was detached from the needle, the needle removed from the catheter, and the extension set tubing
reattached directly to the catheter. Removing the needle prevents contact with the heart as the pericardial fluid is removed. (f) Two extension
sets are connected with a three‐way stopcock. One extension set tubing is connected to the end of the catheter and the second is emptying
into a collection bowl. Note the fluid is hemorrhagic in appearance, characteristic of pericardial effusion.

VetBooks.ir

284

Section 3 Cardiovascular Disease

when indicated. The fluid in the red‐top tube should be
monitored for clotting, which could indicate inappropriate intracardiac placement of the catheter. Pericardial
fluid does not routinely clot. A packed cell volume
(PCV) on the effusion can be obtained to confirm that
the fluid is not blood.
7) Once pericardial effusion is no longer withdrawn,
ultrasound can be used to confirm the pericardial
effusion has been removed or has drained into the
thoracic cavity. Pleural effusion can be removed prior
to withdrawing the catheter from the thorax.
Monitoring and Follow‐Up

Pericardiocentesis often results in immediate clinical
improvement. Careful monitoring of the patient for further hemodynamic collapse or clinical improvement is
recommended following the procedure. Ideally, dogs
should not be sent home immediately after pericardiocentesis and are monitored in the hospital for 12–24 hours.
Rapid (minutes to hours) reaccumulation of pericardial
fluid and significant arrhythmias are possible following
pericardiocentesis. If pericardiectomy is not scheduled
(see Surgical Management for recommendations), recheck
within 2–4 weeks and consider pericardiectomy if the
pericardial effusion has reaccumulated.
Cancer Therapy
Palliative or definitive cancer therapy rarely is successful
with cardiac neoplasia. Complete surgical excision can
rarely be achieved because of tumor proximity to vital
structures. There are reports of a positive response to
chemotherapy for lymphoma and hemangiosarcoma.
Consultation with an oncologist is recommended for the
most current therapeutic strategies.
Surgical Management
Despite fluid removal and immediate clinical improvement, pericardial effusion is likely to recur in most
instances. Surgical pericardiectomy (partial or subtotal)
allows improved visualization for the surgeon to identify the underlying etiology and/or biopsy a tumor.
Echocardiography is very specific for identifying a tumor
but not 100% sensitive, particularly for small tumors that
may be readily identified by a surgeon. A small pericardial window provides palliation but can potentially lead
to constrictive pericarditis of the remaining pericardium
or allow herniation of a portion of the heart through the
pericardial opening. Pericardiectomy can be curative for
idiopathic and infectious etiologies and extend survival
for dogs with chemodectomas. Thoracoscopic pericardiectomy has the benefit of offering lower patient morbidity but requires a skilled operator to achieve optimum

results. Balloon pericardiotomy has been described as a
palliative procedure for neoplastic effusions.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends on the underlying cause of the effusion. Pericardiectomy can result in clinical improvement
or cure in idiopathic cases and in infectious cases when
combined with appropriate antibiotic or antifungal therapy. Pericardiectomy extends survival time in dogs with
heart base tumors and is associated with minimal
improvement with hemangiosarcoma and mesothelioma. In cats, prognosis with effusion secondary to heart
disease and heart failure is guarded to poor due to the
presence of severe underlying heart disease.

­Constrictive Pericarditis
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Constrictive pericarditis is characterized by a stiff,
fibrous pericardium that impairs ventricular diastolic
filling even if no fluid is present. Although considered
uncommon, the diagnosis is difficult to make and can
be overlooked. It is characterized by an absence of pericardial effusion though combined constrictive‐effusive
disease does occur. Chronic pericardial and pleural
effusion including chylous effusion and infectious pericarditis secondary to fungal organisms can result in
constrictive pericarditis.
Signalment
Similar to pericardial effusion.
History and Clinical Signs
Similar to pericardial effusion with a high incidence of
signs of elevated right heart pressures.
Diagnosis
Echocardiography

Pericardial effusion is often absent or small volume.
Tamponade may be documented with only a small volume of effusion. The pericardium can appear thickened.
Advanced Doppler studies show respiratory changes in
the peak velocities of mitral and tricuspid valve inflow
profiles highly suggestive of constrictive physiology.
Cardiac Catheterization

Characteristic patterns in atrial and ventricular pressure
profiles are indicative of constrictive physiology although
administering a fluid bolus may be required to generate

VetBooks.ir

28 Pericardial Disease

the pattern. Right atrial pressure traces are characterized
by a prominent Y descent. Right ventricular pressure
traces have a characteristic dip and plateau (square root
sign) with elevated end‐diastolic pressure.
Therapy
Surgical management with subtotal pericardiectomy to
remove the fibrotic pericardium is generally required to

resolve clinical signs. If the epicardium is involved, epicardial stripping is more difficult and associated with
important complications.
Prognosis
Prognosis is poor without surgical management and
associated with an increased rate of complications with
epicardial involvement.

­Further Reading
Burns CG, Bergh MS, McLoughlin MA. Surgical and
nonsurgical treatment of peritoneopericardial
diaphragmatic hernia in dogs and cats: 58 cases
(1999‐2008). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2013; 242(5): 643–50.
Davidson BJ, Paling AC, Lahmers SL, Nelson OL. Disease
association and clinical assessment of feline pericardial
effusion. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2008; 44(1): 5–9.
Hall DJ, Shofer F, Meier CK, Sleeper MM. Pericardial
effusion in cats: a retrospective study of clinical
findings and outcome in 146 cats. J Vet Intern Med
2007; 21(5): 1002–7.
Lisciandro GR. The use of the diaphragmatico‐hepatic
(DH) views of the abdominal and thoracic focused
assessment with sonography for triage (AFAST/TFAST)

examinations for the detection of pericardial effusion in
24 dogs (2011‐2012). J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2016; 26(1):
125–31.
MacDonald K. Pericardial diseases. In: Ettinger SJ,
Feldman EC, Cote E, ed. Textbook of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, 8th edn. St Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier,
2017, pp. 1305–15.
MacDonald KA, Cagney O, Magne ML. Echocardiographic
and clinicopathologic characterization of pericardial
effusion in dogs: 107 cases (1985–2006). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2009; 235(12): 1456–61.
Ware WA. Pericardial diseases and cardiac tumors. In:
Cardiovascular Disease in Small Animal Medicine.
London: Manson Publishing, 2011, pp. 320–37.

285

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

287

Section 4
Respiratory Disease

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

289

29
A Respiratory Pattern‐Based Approach to Dyspnea
Christopher G. Byers, DVM, DACVECC, DACVIM (SAIM), CVJ
CriticalCareDVM.com, Omaha, NE, USA

The initial approach to a patient with respiratory distress
is of the utmost importance as it can determine whether
these critical patients live or die. Classic clinical signs of
respiratory distress include tachypnea, head and neck
extension, open‐mouth breathing, anxiety, cyanosis,
nares flaring, abducted elbows, orthopnea, and paradoxical movement of the chest and/or abdomen. Overt signs
of respiratory distress are more commonly seen in dogs
than cats. Unfortunately, cats readily mask disease severity, and commonly the only evidence of respiratory dysfunction may be tachypnea and prominent respiratory
motions in sternal recumbency.
The first step in examining a patient with a respiratory
emergency is to perform a primary survey, efficiently
evaluating airway, breathing, and circulation (ABCs).
If the airway is not patent, it must be cleared of obstruction and immediate orotracheal intubation performed. If
an upper airway obstruction prevents orotracheal intubation, an emergency tracheostomy must be performed.
If there are no airway patency issues, a clinician should
evaluate the patient’s breathing pattern and work of
breathing. Particular attention should be given to the
phase of breathing affected, and effort should be made to
determine if the breathing pattern is obstructive or
restrictive.
Anatomical localization of the cause of respiratory distress is assessed through a “look, listen and feel” approach,
and may be a very powerful tool for assessing underlying
structural changes. Increased inspiratory effort is commonly associated with extrathoracic disorders while
increased expiratory effort is most often due to intrathoracic diseases. An obstructive breathing pattern indicates inappropriate movement of air into and/or out of
the lungs and is frequently associated with a slower respiratory rate and deeper breaths than normal. A restrictive breathing pattern is characterized by inadequate
expansion of the chest wall and/or lungs, resulting in

shallow tachypnea. The initial evaluation of a patient
should ideally begin from afar, as the breathing pattern
may change with manipulation. Making an accurate
assessment after handling can be far more challenging.

­Upper Airway
The upper respiratory tract, that includes the nares,
nasal cavity, pharynx, and larynx, is simply a conduit
from the nares to the glottis. Diseases of the upper respiratory tract are relatively common in both dogs and
cats (Table 29.1). Upon presentation, the owner may
report that a patient snores and/or has exercise intolerance, dysphagia, regurgitation, and/or posttussive retching. They may also report that these clinical signs
are associated with and/or exacerbated by excitement,
humidity, and/or elevated ambient temperatures.
Physical examination may identify referred upper airway
sounds, orthopnea, bilateral elbow abduction, restlessness, dysynchronous breathing, and cyanosis. Affected
patients commonly have abnormal respiratory sounds
and pattern of breathing; the classic upper airway breathing pattern is characterized by increased inspiratory
time and effort compared to expiration. Increased nasal
noise (stertor) and/or laryngeal noise (stridor) may also
be present, depending on the site of airflow turbulence.
Occasionally, pulmonary crackles that form due to
­noncardiogenic pulmonary edema may be auscultated.
Diseases of the upper airway commonly cause at least
partial airway obstruction that markedly reduces proper
airflow. The resultant turbulent airflow promotes the
formation of edema and inflammation that subsequently
increases the work of breathing and further narrows the
affected airway, creating a vicious cycle. Combined with
a reduced ability to effectively eliminate heat from the
body via evaporation, affected patients may readily

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

290

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

Table 29.1 Common diseases affecting the upper airway
Site

Examples

Nares

Stenotic nares

Nasal cavity Inflammation, neoplasia, infection (bacterial,
fungal, parasitic), granuloma, foreign body
Pharynx

Neoplasia, polyp, abscess, granuloma, elongated
soft palate, foreign body, stenosis/stricture

Larynx

Paralysis, collapse, neoplasia, abscess, granuloma,
everted saccules, foreign body

develop severe secondary hyperthermia. Patients
affected by upper airway disorders should always be handled with minimal restraint, as they may experience respiratory arrest with minimal manipulation.
Patients with upper airway diseases with partial obstruction should be given appropriate sedation and supplemental oxygenation as soon as possible in an effort to reduce
the work of breathing and anxiety. The least stressful
method of supplemental oxygen provision should be
employed, and viable options include flow‐by, facemask,
oxygen cage, nasal cannulation, modified Elizabethan collar (i.e., Crowe collar), and transtracheal catheterization.
A commonly used sedative protocol for cardiovascularly
unstable patients is the combination of a pure mu opioid
(i.e., fentanyl 2–4 μg/kg IV; oxymorphone 0.05–0.1 mg/kg
IV/IM; methadone 0.2–0.5 mg/kg IV; hydromorphone
0.1–0.2 mg/kg IV) with a benzodiazepine (i.e., diazepam
0.1–0.5 mg/kg IV; midazolam 0.2–0.4 mg/kg IV).
Acetylpromazine (0.02–0.1 mg/kg IV/IM) and butorphanol (0.1-0.2 mg/kg IV/SQ) may be appropriate for cardiovascularly stable patients.
While provision of sedation and supplemental oxygen is
sufficient to relieve clinical signs for many patients with
upper airway diseases, some will not meaningfully
respond. These patients must have their airways c­ aptured
via orotracheal intubation immediately, and the astute clinician must be prepared to perform an emergency tracheostomy for those patients with complete oropharyngeal
and/or laryngeal obstruction. Passive and active cooling
measures should be employed for patients with body temperatures greater than 40.5 °C (105 °F), but should be discontinued with body temperatures reach 39.4 °C (103 °F).
Once stable, a thorough physical examination should
be performed in an effort to determine the underlying
cause of the upper airways signs (if not obvious).
Diagnosis of specific airway abnormalities in an individual patient requires thorough evaluation of the nares,
oral and nasal pharynx, and larynx. Diagnostic investigation may include a sedated orolaryngeal examination,
aural and otoscopic examination, thoracic and cervical
radiography, tracheal fluoroscopy, and nasal computed

tomography with rhinoscopy. Arterial blood gas analysis
commonly identifies hypoxemia with hypercapnia.

­Lower Airway
The lower airway is composed of the intrathoracic
trachea, primary and lobar bronchi, and bronchiolar
­
arborization. Dogs may be affected most commonly by
intrathoracic tracheomalacia, bronchomalacia, and
chronic bronchitis, while feline patients are most commonly diagnosed with asthma. Foreign body obstruction
must be considered. While neoplasia may affect the
lower airway, they rarely induce acute dyspnea due to
their chronic, insidious nature. Owners may report a
chronic and/or progressive history of coughing that is
frequently productive although the sputum is most often
swallowed. Affected patients commonly have a respiratory pattern characterized by prolonged expiration
despite normal inspiratory time and effort; additionally,
a clinician may observe abdominal effort during expiration (abdominal push) and/or auscultate expiratory
wheezes. Patients may display orthopnea, and feline
patients may breathe with an opened mouth. A murmur
is not expected unless lower airway disease has contributed to the development of cor pulmonale. Tracheal
sensitivity may be noted in dogs with tracheobron­
chomalacia and chronic bronchitis.
Feline bronchial asthma is a common respiratory
­condition caused by altered immunosensitivity of the
respiratory tract to inhaled allergens. This hyperresponsiveness causes various structural and chemical changes
in the tracheobronchial tree, including adrenergic–­
cholinergic imbalance and abnormal mucus production.
No pathognomonic clinical signs and/or laboratory
assays have been identified, and definitive diagnosis is
based on history, physical examination findings, and
exclusion of other disease entities from the list of differential diagnoses.
The cause of canine chronic bronchitis is not definitively known, and is typically considered idiopathic in
nature. Establishment of a clear link between this disease
and environmental pollutants, hypersensitivity reactions,
and/or poor dental health has been challenging.
Accordingly, a definitive diagnosis is currently made with
documentation of lower airway inflammation and elimination of other potential causes. Tracheobronchomalacia
is characterized by progressive flaccidity of the tracheal
cartilages that results in collapse of the tracheal and/or
bronchial lumina. The definitive cause of this disease has
not yet been identified, and possible contributing factors
include airway allergies inducing chronic inflammation,
genetic predisposition, and cartilage matrix degeneration. During exhalation, the intrathoracic trachea and/or

VetBooks.ir

29 A Respiratory Pattern‐Based Approach to Dyspnea

bronchi collapse, contributing to common clinical signs,
most notably coughing. Definitive diagnosis is made via
imaging that may include thoracic and cervical radiography, fluoroscopy, and/or tracheobronchoscopy.
Clinicians should follow a standard and consistent
protocol for assessing and hopefully stabilizing a patient
suspected of having lower airway disease, focusing initially on performing an efficient primary survey. Patients
should be given appropriate sedation and supplemental
oxygenation as soon as possible in an effort to reduce the
work of breathing and anxiety. Minimal handling is
advocated, as the stress of manipulation may be lethal.
The least stressful method of supplemental oxygen provision should be employed, and viable options include
flow‐by, facemask, oxygen cage, nasal cannulation,
­modified Elizabethan collar (i.e., Crowe collar), and transtracheal catheterization.
A commonly used sedative protocol for cardiovascularly unstable patients is the combination of a pure mu
opioid (i.e., fentanyl 2–4 μg/kg IV; oxymorphone 0.05–
0.1 mg/kg IV/IM; methadone 0.2–0.5 mg/kg IV; hydromorphone 0.1–0.2 mg/kg IV) with a benzodiazepine (i.e.,
diazepam 0.1–0.5 mg/kg IV; midazolam 0.2–0.4 mg/kg
IV). Acetylpromazine (0.02–0.1 mg/kg IV/IM) and
butorphanol (0.1-0.2 mg/kg IV/SQ) may be appropriate
for cardiovascularly stable patients. Inhaled albuterol
(90–180 μg), a rapidly acting beta‐2 agonist, should be
administered; terbutaline (0.01 mg/kg SC) is a reasonable
alternative if a metered‐dose inhaler is not available.
Corticosteroids are commonly used for chronic management of feline asthma and canine chronic bronchitis, but
their use is not necessarily warranted in the initial management of these diseases; a brief (i.e., 7–10 days) tapering regime of antiinflammatory corticosteroid may be
beneficial in the acute management of tracheobronchomalacia to help break the cycle of coughing commonly present in affected patients.
Once stable, a thorough physical examination should
be performed in an effort to determine the underlying
cause of the lower airways signs. High‐quality, three‐
view thoracic radiographs are an essential part of the
diagnostic investigative process. Indirect visualization
via fluoroscopy and/or direct visualization of the lower
airways via tracheobronchoscopy may be invaluable, and
lower airway cytology and culture should be pursued to
rule out infectious diseases.

­Pleural Space
The pleural cavity is the potential space between the
parietal pleura associated with the body wall and visceral
pleura associated with lungs. When this potential space
is occupied by air, fluid, masses and/or viscera, the lungs

are unable to expand normally. As a result, intrapleural
pressure increases and ultimately exceeds the intrapulmonary pressure, effectively reducing tidal volume.
Accordingly, a patient must breathe rapidly to maintain
adequate minute ventilation. Classically, affected patients
manifest a restrictive breathing pattern characterized by
shallow tachypnea. With reduced tidal volume, alveoli
progressively collapse to cause hypoventilation and
hypoxemia due to ventilation–perfusion mismatch.
Thoracic auscultation varies depending on the nature
of the pleural disease. Pneumothorax may develop secondary to blunt or penetrating thoracic trauma, but may
also occur spontaneously due to primary pulmonary
parenchymal disease. A patient with pneumothorax has
lung sounds that are most audible ventrally. Pleural effusion may occur secondary to accumulation of blood
(hemothorax), infectious exudate (pyothorax), neoplasia,
chyle (chylothorax), and heart failure; hypervolemia and
hypovolemia are rare causes of pleural effusion. A patient
with pleural effusion commonly has dull ventral lung
sounds with audible and possible increased lungs sounds
dorsally. Borborygmi may be heard in those patients with
a congenital or traumatic pleuroperitoneal diaphragmatic
hernia. A cardiac murmur and/or dysrhythmia may be
auscultated in those living with heart disease.
Patients with pleural disease should be provided supplemental oxygenation as soon as possible via the least
stressful method. Sedation should also be administered,
ideally prior to thoracocentesis; this is not always feasible
if imminent respiratory arrest is anticipated. A commonly used sedative protocol for cardiovascularly unstable patients is the combination of a pure mu opioid
(i.e., fentanyl 2–4 μg/kg IV; oxymorphone 0.05–0.1 mg/
kg IV/IM; methadone 0.2–0.5 mg/kg IV; hydromorphone
0.1–0.2 mg/kg IV) with a benzodiazepine (i.e., diazepam
0.1–0.5 mg/kg IV; midazolam 0.2–0.4 mg/kg IV).
Diuretic therapy is not indicated for the emergency management of pleural space disease.
Thoracocentesis should generally be performed prior
to thoracic radiography if pleural space disease is suspected. A thoracocentesis is typically performed at the
seventh to ninth intercostal space. If a pneumothorax is
suspected, the site of pleural puncture is perpendicular
to the body wall just ventral to the thoracic hypaxial
musculature; the level of the costochondral junction is
the site of pleural puncture for those patients with suspected or confirmed pleural effusion. If available, thoracic focused assessment with sonography for trauma,
triage and tracking (tFAST3) may be used to confirm
pneumothorax and pleural ­effusion, help determine site
of pleural puncture, and may be performed in lateral or
sternal recumbency. Thoracocentesis has been uncommonly associated with hemorrhage, pulmonary parenchymal injury, and iatrogenic infectious disease

291

VetBooks.ir

292

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

transmission. Rapid and fatal reexpansion pulmonary
edema may rarely occur in patients with chronic pleural
effusion. Ideally, pleural fluid and/or air should be
removed until negative p
­ ressure is achieved, but this is
not always possible. If negative pressure cannot be
achieved, if more than two thoracocenteses are required
in a one‐hour period, or more than three thoracocenteses are required in a 24‐hour period, a thoracostomy
tube should be placed.
Once stable, a thorough physical examination should
be performed in an effort to determine the underlying
cause. Traumatic pneumothorax commonly resolves
without surgical intervention, but injuries may require
several days to heal. The presence of pneumothorax without a history of trauma should always prompt a search for
pulmonary parenchymal disease. Pleural e­ ffusion should
be immediately evaluated in‐house for obvious sepsis
and/or neoplastic cells, and one should submit samples
(i.e., pleural fluid sample in EDTA‐containing tube,
unstained slide, fluid sample on appropriate culture
media) to a veterinary reference laboratory for evaluation
by a board‐certified veterinary clinical pathologist.
Echocardiography and cardiac biomarker (i.e., NT‐
proBNP) measurement may be helpful in those patients
suspected of living with cardiac disease, and diaphragmatic hernias should be surgically repaired as soon as the
patient is cardiovascularly and metabolically stable.

­Pulmonary Parenchyma
The pulmonary parenchyma may be affected by a number of diseases, and a thorough history will help the
astute clinician develop an appropriate diagnostic investigation and therapeutic interventions. Dogs frequently
have a history of a cough that may or may not be productive, but cats rarely manifest this clinical sign. A history
of laryngeal paralysis or recent vomiting should raise
concern for aspiration pneumonitis, and patients with
trauma may develop pulmonary contusions and/or noncardiogenic pulmonary edema. Recent generalized
seizure activity, electrocution, traumatic brain injury,
­
and/or strangulation should also raise concern for noncardiogenic pulmonary edema that develops secondary
to endothelial injury and vascular leakage into alveoli.
Conversely, patients with primary cardiac disease are at
risk for developing cardiogenic pulmonary edema.
Performing a complete physical examination is invaluable for patients with suspected pulmonary parenchymal
disease. Affected patients do not have a specific respiratory pattern, and frequently manifest respirations that
are rapid and deep. They may be presented with cyanosis
and dyspnea, and increased abdominal effort is relatively
common. Auscultation commonly reveals end‐inspira-

tory crackles, adventitious lung sounds that represent
the sudden opening of fluid‐filled alveoli. Alveolar fluid
may be blood, purulent exudate or transudate. Alveolar
hemorrhage may occur secondary to trauma and/or
coagulopathy. A patient with cardiogenic pulmonary
edema secondary to left‐sided heart disease may have a
systolic murmur and hypothermia while a patient with
pneumonia or aspiration pneumonitis may have pyrexia.
Patients should be efficiently examined for evidence of
ecchymoses, obvious soft tissue and/or orthopedic injury
and thermal injury (i.e., lingual or oral commissure).
Patients should be given appropriate sedation and supplemental oxygenation as soon as possible in an effort to
reduce the work of breathing and anxiety. The least
stressful method of supplemental oxygen provision
should be employed. A commonly used sedative protocol
for cardiovascularly unstable patients is the combination
of a pure mu opioid (i.e., fentanyl 2–4 μg/kg IV; oxymorphone 0.05–0.1 mg/kg IV/IM; methadone 0.2–0.5 mg/kg
IV; hydromorphone 0.1–0.2 mg/kg IV) with a benzodiazepine (i.e., diazepam 0.1–0.5 mg/kg IV; midazolam 0.2–
0.4 mg/kg IV). A single dose of furosemide (dogs: 2 mg/kg
IV/IM; cats: 1 mg/kg IV/IM) may be provided to those in
which primary heart disease is suspected to be contributing to clinical signs until a definitive diagnosis is made.
While provision of sedation and oxygen is sufficient to
relieve clinical signs, some will not meaningfully respond;
these patients must have their airways captured via orotracheal intubation immediately and mechanical ventilation should be initiated. Provision of positive end‐expiratory
pressure (PEEP) at a level of 3–5 cmH2O may promote
recruitment of collapsed alveoli.
Diagnostic imaging should be performed once the
patient has been appropriately stabilized. Commonly
employed thoracic imaging modalities include tFAST3,
veterinary bedside lung ultrasound examination
(VetBLUE), and thoracic radiography. A tFAST3 evaluation may be used to detect chest wall, lung, pleural and/
or pericardial pathology, and may be performed in lateral
or sternal recumbency. Five points are evaluated, and fur
is not shaved but rather is simply parted with alcohol or
sonographic gel (Table 29.2). Patients with pulmonary
parenchymal disease may have B‐lines (aka: comet tail
artifacts, lung rockets) that suggest interstitial disease or
interlobar edema is present; thus a clinician should be
suspicious of pulmonary edema (cardiogenic and noncardiogenic) and pneumonia/pneumonitis. A VetBLUE
scan is similar to a tFAST3, as it is performed rapidly in
sternal recumbency, measures the presence of B‐lines
and does not require hair coat shaving; in contrast, eight
locations (four per hemithorax) are evaluated during the
scan (see Table 29.2). The absence of B‐lines in all evaluated lung fields rules out pulmonary edema and suggests
a nonrespiratory cause of distress.

VetBooks.ir

29 A Respiratory Pattern‐Based Approach to Dyspnea

Table 29.2 Areas evaluated during tFAST3 and VetBLUE examination
tFAST3

VetBLUE

Right hemithorax

Left hemithorax

Right hemithorax

Left hemithorax

Chest tube site (CTS)

Chest tube site

Caudodorsal lung lobe (CdLL)

Caudodorsal lung lobe

Pericardial site (PCS)

Pericardial site

Perihilar lung lobe (PHLL)

Perihilar lung lobe

Middle lung lobe (MDLL)

Middle lung lobe

Cranial lung lobe (CrLL)

Cranial lung lobe

Diaphragmatic‐hepatic (DH)

Table 29.3 Common etiologies based on thoracic radiographic
patterns of distribution
Pattern of distribution

Common underlying etiology

Cranioventral

Pneumonia, aspiration pneumonitis

Perihilar

Cardiogenic pulmonary edema (dogs)

Caudodorsal

Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema,
hematogenous pneumonia

Nodular

Pulmonary mycoses, neoplasia

One must understand that VetBLUE and tFAST3 scans
do not replace the diagnostic utility of thoracic radiography
when evaluating patients with pulmonary parenchymal disease. Indeed, evaluation of soft tissue parenchymal patterns
may be uniquely helpful in determining the underlying disease process (Table 29.3). Interstitial, interstitial‐to‐alveolar,
and alveolar patterns are most commonly reported in
patients with pulmonary parenchymal diseases.
Animals with primary left‐sided cardiac disease may
have cardiomegaly, left atrial enlargement, and pulmonary
venous dilation. While a perihilar radiographic distribution is highly suggestive of cardiogenic pulmonary edema
in dogs, cats do not have classic radiographic patterns for
most parenchymal diseases. The choice of additional diagnostic investigation should be based on patient history
and physical examination. Tracheal washing or bronchoalveolar lavage for airway cytology and culture (bacterial & fungal) may be appropriate for patients with
suspected infectious pneumonia or aspiration pneumonia/pneumonitis. Metastatic screening via abdominal
radiography and/or ultrasonography may be indicated for
those patients suspected of living with neoplasia, and fungal urine antigen and serology should be performed in
those with suspected pulmonary mycoses. Definitive
treatment is based on a patient’s ultimate diagnosis.

­Pulmonary Thromboembolism
Pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE) occurs when
venous thrombi formed in large, deep veins travel

through the right side of the heart and lodge in the
­pulmonary arterial bed. The caudal lung lobes are more
likely to be involved as they receive most of the right
­ventricular output. Consequences of PTE include hypoxemia, bronchoconstriction, ventilation–perfusion (V–Q)
mismatch, and hyperventilation. With time, further
complications arise, including atelectasis, pulmonary
edema, and pleural effusion. Hemodynamic complications from PTE depend on the extent to which the
­pulmonary vasculature is occluded and the amount of
preexisting cardiac and pulmonary compromise. If pulmonary vasculature reserve capacity is exceeded, pulmonary vascular resistance increases to augment right
ventricular afterload and ventricular oxygen demand.
If the oxygen supply is exceeded, ischemia, ­dysrhythmias,
and/or right ventricular failure may occur. Decreased
cardiac output is caused by reduced pulmonary venous
return induced by pulmonary blood flow obstruction.
Diagnosing PTE is difficult. Clinical signs commonly
include tachypnea, dyspnea, and hypoxemia, none of
which is pathognomonic for PTE. Initial assessment
should include thoracic radiography, abdominal ultrasonography, arterial blood gas analysis, a complete blood
count, biochemical profile, urinalysis and heartworm
testing. Reported radiographic abnormalities associated
with PTE are pleural effusion, regional oligemia, alveolar
infiltrates, cardiomegaly, hyperlucent lung regions, and
enlargement of the main pulmonary artery. While the
majority of patients with PTE will have radiographic
abnormalities, radiographs may also be normal in 9–27%
of dogs and 7% of cats with PTE. Arterial blood gas
(ABG) analysis is frequently a very useful diagnostic tool.
In one canine PTE study, hypoxemia was documented in
80% of affected patients and increased alveolar‐arterial
(A‐a) gradients on room air in all dogs. Basic blood and
urine testing is performed in an effort to identify predisposing conditions, including hyperadrenocorticism, protein‐losing nephropathy, protein‐losing enteropathy,
hypothyroidism, and/or diabetes mellitus.
If these tests fail to identify an underlying disease process, echocardiography and measurement of prothrombin and partial thromboblastin times may be helpful.

293

VetBooks.ir

294

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

Echocardiography may show a right‐sided thrombus or a
thrombus in the main pulmonary artery, or may also
demonstrate changes suggestive of pulmonary hypertension. A normal echocardiogram does not rule out PTE.
Measurement of D‐dimers may have diagnostic utility in
patients with PTE. A 2003 study determined that D‐
dimer concentrations >500 ng/mL were 100% sensitive
for predicting thromboembolic disease but specificity
was 70%; conversely, D‐dimer concentrations greater
than 1000 ng/mL had 80% sensitivity and 94% specificity.
The sensitivity of D‐dimer in the diagnosis of PTE is
more important than specificity, as false negatives may
have fatal consequences. Tests for hypercoagulability,
such as antithrombin, fibrinogen, and thromboelastography, should also be considered. Advanced imaging
such as V–Q scans, spiral computed tomography, and/or
pulmonary angiography might ultimately be required for
definitive diagnosis of PTE.
Pulmonary thromboemboli dissolution may begin
without treatment within hours of formation and completely dissolve within days. Nevertheless, a prothrombotic tendency persists to promote continued formation
of pulmonary thromboemboli. Goals of treatment are
reversal of the prothrombotic state and correction of
hemodynamic and pulmonary changes responsible for
morbidity and mortality. Treatment usually consists of
supportive care, oxygen supplementation, and anticoagulant therapy; systemic or locally delivered thrombolytic
agents may be used, but the benefits must be weighed
against potential serious risks. Oxygen administration
aims to correct hypoxemia caused by V–Q mismatch,
alveolar hypoventilation, and/or diffusion impairment.
However, the response to oxygen depends on the degree
of vascular obstruction; pulmonary shunt occurs when
more than 50% of the circulatory bed surface area is
occluded, yielding venous admixture and decreased oxygen responsiveness. Resolution of the underlying disease
process should always be the primary goal.

­Chest Wall
The chest wall is composed of bone and soft tissue structures, including skeletal muscles, external fascia, costal
parietal pleural nerves and vasculature; all play structural and functional roles in respiration. The craniodorsal external intercostals and parasternal intercostals
promote inspiration by pulling ribs in a cranial direction.
The interosseous portion of the internal intercostals and
the caudalmost external intercostals contribute to
­expiration by pulling the ribs caudally. Given the normal
negative pressure within the pleural space, it is potential
in nature with the parietal pleura held in constant contact with the visceral pleura in the absence of disease.

As thoracic cavity dimensions are increased in response
to respiratory muscle action, the lungs expand because
of the constant negative intrapleural pressure.
Common thoracic wall injuries include blunt trauma,
penetrating trauma, and flail chest. Blunt trauma may
cause crush and shear injuries to both soft tissues and
skeletal structures; advantageously, the skeletal structures of the chest wall are relatively resistant to blunt
force trauma. However, muscle is uniquely sensitive to
crushing injury, and when damaged in low‐velocity accidents may become edematous and inelastic, and may
lose the ability to efficiently and effectively contract.
Accordingly, thoracic wall compliance decreases and
work of breathing subsequently increases. This may
manifest as tachypnea but breaths may be shallow or
deep; subsequent hypoxemia and/or hypoventilation are
relatively common. High‐velocity accidents are also
associated with shearing injury. While soft tissue damage to the thoracic wall rarely contributes to patient
morbidity, energy may be readily transmitted to intrathoracic organs to induce both crush and shearing injuries
at these sites. Additionally, a blunt force applied laterally
to the thoracic wall may cause rib fractures. However,
pressure applied dorsoventrally to the thoracic cage
infrequently results in rib and/or sternebrae fractures
but such injuries may contribute to reduced thoracic
compliance.
Penetrating injuries to the thoracic wall are relatively
common in domestic dogs and cats, and common examples include bite injuries and missile (i.e., bullet, arrow)
trauma. These wounds readily induce stretching and
crushing of tissues in the direct path of penetration.
While the actual chest wall penetration is frequently a
minor issue in affected patients, one must be acutely
aware of the potential underlying pleural and intrathoracic injuries caused by the penetrating trauma. The type
and severity of injury directly influence how a patient is
presented, and the medical team must be prepared to
­triage a patient in profound respiratory distress that is in
need of immediate orotracheal intubation and intrathoracic stabilization.
Flail chest results from the segmental fracture and/or
dislocation of two or more adjacent ribs. This type of
injury is uncommon in dogs and cats because of the
inherent compliance and anatomic shape of the thoracic
cage. Blunt trauma and bite injuries are the most common causes of flail chest, and concurrent pulmonary
damage, most notably pulmonary contusions and direct
injury from costal fractures, is a major contributor to
morbidity associated with this condition; these contusions may lead to decreased pulmonary compliance,
hypoventilation, and shunting, all of which cause
­hypoxemia. The pathognomonic respiratory pattern is
paradoxical movement of the unstable ribs (flail
­

VetBooks.ir

29 A Respiratory Pattern‐Based Approach to Dyspnea

segment) during respiration. Splinting due to pain
­
­associated with respiration leads to a decreased cough
reflex, hypoventilation, hypoxemia, and atelectasis.
Several techniques for stabilization of flail chest have
been reported, but the primary focus should be on oxygen supplementation, underlying intrathoracic injuries,
and multimodal analgesia.

­Diaphragm
As a major respiratory muscle responsible for the creation of subatmospheric intrathoracic pressure, the diaphragm is essential for adequate oxygen and ventilation.
Many conditions may induce partial or complete
­diaphragmatic paralysis, including pleuroperitoneal hernias, botulism, and phrenic nerve damage or degeneration. The classic respiratory pattern of a patient with a
dysfunctional or ruptured diaphragm is tachypnea with
marked inspiratory excursion of the cranial half of the
thorax. Paradoxical abdominal movement is also common, and may be due to either thoracic displacement of
abdominal viscera during vigorous inspiration or an inability to maintain abdominal girth during inspiration.

­Nonrespiratory Causes
There are multiple causes of tachypnea and dyspnea that
do not directly arise from the respiratory tract. Perhaps
the most common example is nonpyogenic hyperthermia which may be the sole cause of respiratory signs or
be secondary to a concurrent medical condition.
Accordingly, measurement of body temperature is essen-

tial in patients presented with respiratory signs, and
appropriate cooling measures should be implemented
when hyperthermia is documented.
Intracranial diseases may directly stimulate the respiratory center located in the medulla. Patients with traumatic brain injury, intracranial neoplasia, and/or
inflammatory/infectious central nervous system diseases
may have abnormal respiratory patterns. Neurological
examination typically identifies other deficits that may
aid in determining a definitive diagnosis. Pain and acid–
base disorders may also induce tachypnea without
hypoxia in patients. Distension of the abdominal cavity is
another common cause of tachypnea and dyspnea in
dogs and cats, chiefly through elevation of intraabdominal hypertension and development of abdominal
compartment syndrome; specifically, intraabdominal
­
hypertension impairs diaphragmatic contraction,
thereby impeding the ability to generate subatmospheric
intrathoracic pressure. Additionally, pulmonary parenchyma may be compressed, leading to decreased oxygen
transport across the pulmonary capillary membrane,
increased alveolar dead space, and alveolar atelectasis.
Common examples of intraabdominal pathology that
may cause and/or contribute to respiratory compromise
include severe paralytic ileus, marked abdominal discomfort inducing splinting of abdominal musculature,
large‐volume peritoneal effusion, intraabdominal neoplasia, and gastric dilation‐volvulus. Whenever possible,
abdominal decompression should be performed, and
possible decompression methods include peritoneocentesis, therapy for ileus and capillary leak, adequate analgesia to allow for abdominal muscle relaxation, and
surgical decompression.

­Further Reading
Algren JT, Price RD, Buchino JJ, et al. Pulmonary edema
associated with upper airway obstruction in dogs.
Pediatr Emerg Care 1993; 9: 332–7.
Amis TC, Kurpershoek C. Pattern of breathing in
brachycephalic dogs. Am J Vet Res 1986; 47: 2200–4.
Baker JL, Havas KA, Miller LA, et al. Gunshot wounds in
military working dogs in Operation Enduring Freedom
and Operation Iraqi Freedom: 29 cases (2003–2009).
J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2013; 23: 47–52.
Byers CG, Dhupa N. Feline bronchial asthma:
pathophysiology and diagnosis. Compend Contin Educ
Pract Vet 2005; 27: 418–25.
DeTroyer A, Kirkwood PA, Wilson TA. Respiratory actions
of the intercostal muscles. Physiol Rev 2005; 85: 717–56.
Giggs R, Benigni L, Fuentes VL, et al. Pulmonary
thromboembolism. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2009; 19: 30–52.

Hackner SG. Pulmonary thromboembolism. In: King LG,
ed. Textbook of Respiratory Disease in Dogs and Cats. St
Louis, MO: Saunders, 2004, pp. 526–41.
Johnson LR, Lappin MR, Baker DC. Pulmonary
thromboembolism in 29 dogs: 1985–1995. J Vet Intern
Med 1999; 13: 338–45.
Krebs A, Marks SL. Brachycephalic airway syndrome.
Standards Care Emerg Crit Care Med 2007; 9(6): 9–15.
Lamb CR, Parry AT, Baines EA, et al. Does changing the
orientation of a thoracic radiograph aid diagnosis of rib
fractures? Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2011; 52: 75–8.
Lisciandro GR. Abdominal (AFAST) and thoracic
(TFAST) focused assessment with sonography for
trauma, triage, and tracking (monitoring) in small
animal emergency and critical care. J Vet Emerg Crit
Care 2011; 21(2): 104–19.

295

VetBooks.ir

296

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

Lisciandro GR. Lung ultrasound: The vet blue: case‐based
applications of vet blue “L” lung scan for trauma,
triage, and tracking (monitoring). Proceedings of
International Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care
Symposium, 2012.
Lisciandro GR, Lagutchik MS, Mann KA, et al. Evaluation
of a thoracic focused assessment with sonography for
trauma (TFAST) protocol to detect pneumothorax and
concurrent thoracic injury in 145 traumatized dogs.
J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2008; 18: 258–69.
Lodata DL, Hedlund CS. Brachycephalic airway syndrome:
pathophysiology and diagnosis. Compend Contin Educ
Pract Vet 2012; 37: E3.
McKiernan BC. Diagnosis and treatment of canine chronic
bronchitis. Twenty years of experience. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 2000; 30: 1267–78.

Nelson OL, Anderson C. The utility of plasma D‐dimer to
identify thromboembolic disease in dogs. J Vet Intern
Med 2003; 17: 830–4.
New HL, Byers CG. Pulmonary thromboembolism.
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 2011; 33: E1–7.
Olsen D, Renberg W, Perrett J, et al. Clinical management
of flail chest in dogs and cats: a retrospective study of
24 cases (1989–1999). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2002; 38:
315–20.
Padrid P. Canine and feline pleural disease. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 2000; 30: 1295–307.
Ristic J, Herrtage M. Chronic bronchitis in dogs. Vet Rec
2001; 148: 320.
Venema CM, Patterson CC. Feline asthma: what’s new and
where might clinical practice be heading. J Feline Med
Surg 2010; 12: 681–92.

VetBooks.ir

297

30
Feline Bronchial Asthma
Christine M. Serafin, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)
The Animal Surgical Center of Michigan, Flint, Michigan, USA

Feline bronchial asthma is one of the most commonly
recognized diseases of the lower respiratory tract of cats
and is estimated to affect up to 5% of the cat population.
The broad range of clinical manifestations that characterizes this condition, its similarities to the human form
of the disease, the challenges inherent to its diagnosis,
and the necessity for life‐long treatment warrant significant consideration of feline bronchial asthma in both
human and veterinary respiratory medicine.

­Etiology and Pathophysiology
Feline bronchial disease is a general term that has been
applied to inflammatory disease of the lower airways
that does not have an apparent etiology. Feline asthma is
considered to be a specific form of bronchial disease
that is distinguished from other inflammatory airways
diseases by reversible airflow limitation. This airflow
obstruction is caused by smooth muscle hyperreactivity
and hypertrophy, increased mucus production, inflammation, and permanent airway remodeling. Airflow
restriction reverses either spontaneously or in response
to pharmacological intervention. Intermittent bronchoconstriction, predominantly eosinophilic lower airway
inflammation, and an allergic immunopathogenesis
differentiate feline asthma from chronic bronchitis,
­
which is typified by neutrophilic airway inflammation in
response to a previous insult. Accordingly, asthma is
recognized by its three hallmark features: airway
­
eosinophilic inflammation, hyperresponsiveness, and
­
permanent remodeling.
Although the exact etiopathogenesis has not been
determined, type I hypersensitivity response is widely
accepted to be the basis for the development of feline
bronchial asthma. This response begins with dendritic
cells within the airways that process inhaled allergen.
These cells migrate to the regional lymph nodes and

­present the antigen, bound to major histocompatibility
complex class II receptors, to naïve CD4+ T helper cells,
triggering these cells to differentiate into T helper 2 cells.
T helper 2 cells, in turn, produce interleukins (IL) 4, 5,
and 13. IL‐4 in particular induces B cells to switch from
production of immunoglobulin (Ig) G to antigen‐specific
IgE that then binds to Fc receptors on the surface of mast
cells. Allergen particles that are subsequently inhaled
cross‐link IgE molecules on the surface of mast cells,
­initiating an intracellular cascade of events that culminates in mast cell degranulation. Histamines and leukotrienes released from degranulating mast cells promote
increased vascular permeability, smooth muscle contraction, and mucus production, generating the clinical
manifestations associated with asthma. IL‐4, IL‐5, and
IL‐13 that are also released by mast cells recruit eosinophils to the airways. Major basic protein, eosinophil
­peroxidase, and cationic proteins released by degranulating eosinophils induce the tissue damage that characterizes asthma.

­Epidemiology
Cats of any age can develop asthma but young to
middle‐aged cats are most often affected. A predilection
for the Siamese breed has been proposed.

­History and Clinical Signs
A wide spectrum of clinical signs characterizes feline
asthma. Acute manifestations arise from bronchoconstriction and can include severe dyspnea, orthopnea,
tachypnea, cyanosis, open‐mouth breathing, and wheezing. Episodes of dyspnea may occur on a daily basis or as
infrequently as once or twice yearly. Chronic manifestations are typified by paroxysmal episodes of coughing.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

298

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

The cough is usually described as harsh and “gagging”
and results from activation of bronchial cough receptors
by inflammatory debris, mucus, and smooth muscle
spasm. Inhalation of mechanical or chemical irritants
can trigger cough, leading to the sporadic nature of the
clinical signs. Further, acute exacerbations may be
observed in patients with chronic signs, which can result
in periodic wheezing or dyspnea in patients with a long‐
standing history of occasional cough. Clinical signs referable to the upper airways, including sneezing, nasal
discharge, and stertor, have been anecdotally reported in
asthmatic cats. In fact, histopathologic inflammatory
changes have been documented in the nasal passages of
cats with experimentally induced asthma. Inspiratory
stridor and dyspnea associated with dynamic upper airway obstruction have also been described in an asthmatic cat. Signs of systemic illness, including inappetence,
lethargy, and depression, are not typically reported.
Physical examination findings in asthmatic cats are
likewise variable. Due to the intermittent nature of the
clinical signs, physical examination may yield no abnormalities. Alternatively, observation of the respiratory
pattern may reveal an end‐expiratory “push” as air
trapped within the lungs following inspiration is
forcefully expelled through narrowed airways during
­
expiration. In severely affected patients, air trapping can
lead to lung hyperinflation, resulting in decreased
­compliance of the thoracic wall and, subsequently, a
“barrel‐shaped” appearance to the thorax. Tachypnea
with prolongation of the expiratory phase may be
observed at rest. Resistance to airflow caused by reduced
intraluminal airway diameter results in turbulence,
which is exhibited clinically as wheezing that may be
audible with or without a stethoscope. Inspiratory crackles, increased bronchial sounds, and/or rhonchi may also
be identified on thoracic auscultation, or no abnormal
sounds may be appreciated. In some patients, palpation
of the trachea elicits cough. Stress associated with
restraint can greatly exacerbate the clinical signs.

­Diagnosis
In human patients, asthma is definitively diagnosed on
the basis of pulmonary function testing such as spirometry that requires a voluntary expiratory maneuver. Since
such maneuvers are not feasible in feline patients, there
remains at present no gold standard diagnostic test by
which feline asthma is diagnosed.
Currently, clinical diagnosis relies on compatible clinical signs, pathology noted on thoracic radiography,
­airway cytology abnormalities, and exclusion of other
causes of similar findings. In an acute setting, conditions such as congestive heart failure and pleural space

disease can lead to respiratory distress that resembles
signs of severe asthma on initial evaluation. Plasma
­levels of N‐terminal pro‐brain natriuretic peptide (NT‐
proBNP) can be used to differentiate between congestive heart failure and primary respiratory disease in cats
with acute dyspnea when specific cut‐off values are
used. Parasitic bronchitis caused by Aelurostrongylus
abstrusus, Capillaria aerophila, Paragonimus kellicotti,
or pulmonary migration of Toxocara cati is characterized by eosinophilic lower airway inflammation and can
be associated with clinical signs that mimic chronic
manifestations of asthma. Heartworm‐associated respiratory disease complex should also be considered a
differential diagnosis for feline bronchial asthma.
Specific testing (i.e., Baermann fecal examination, fecal
flotation, heartworm antibody testing) should be performed to exclude these conditions before a diagnosis of
feline asthma is reached.
Laboratory abnormalities seen with feline asthma are
nonspecific but can include a peripheral eosinophilia,
occurring in 20–57% of patients. A peripheral neutrophilia can also be noted in moderately to severely affected
cats. Hyperproteinemia due to hyperglobulinemia may
develop consequent to chronic inflammation. Results of
serum biochemistry analysis are typically unremarkable.
Thoracic radiography is standardly employed in the
diagnostic evaluation of suspected asthmatics. However,
thoracic radiography should not be solely relied upon for
diagnosis, as findings can be variable and nonspecific.
A bronchial pattern is most commonly seen, consistent
with airway inflammatory infiltrates. Interstitial, alveolar,
and mixed patterns have also been documented in asthmatic patients. Consolidation of the right middle lung
lobe may be observed and results from obstruction of the
bronchus by mucus plugging that preferentially occurs in
this lung segment due to its perpendicular orientation to
the mainstem bronchus. Hyperinflation of the lungs,
identified by flattening of the diaphragm, is also consistent with asthma. Importantly, no pulmonary abnormalities may be detected in as many as 25% of cases.
Bronchoscopy provides additional information that
can be used to support a diagnosis of feline asthma. The
most common bronchoscopic finding identified in cats
with lower airways disease is airway obstruction by
mucus. Nodular irregularities of the epithelium, airway
hyperemia, static or dynamic airway collapse, and
­bronchial stenosis are also frequently seen. As with radiography, these findings are not specific for feline asthma.
Complications ranging from hemoglobin desaturation to
pneumothorax have been documented in up to 24% of
cats undergoing bronchoscopy. Pretreatment with terbutaline has been associated with a lower incidence of
these complications. When the necessary precautions
are taken, bronchoscopy can be performed safely in

VetBooks.ir

30 Feline Bronchial Asthma

­asthmatic cats and can provide evidence that is crucial
in reaching a diagnosis.
Airway cytology remains the most definitive means of
diagnosing feline bronchial asthma after other conditions
are excluded. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) can be
accomplished with bronchoscopic guidance to collect
samples from specific segments of the lower airways for
cytologic analysis. Alternatively, BAL can be performed
using an unguided technique in patients with diffuse distribution of disease when bronchoscopy is not available
or feasible. The procedure is performed under general
anesthesia that is induced and maintained with short‐­
acting injectable anesthetic agents such as propofol. Prior
to inducing anesthesia, the patient is preoxygenated for
5–10 minutes with flow‐by or mask oxygenation methods. The procedure is performed with the patient in sternal or lateral recumbency with the most diseased side
positioned ventrally. While avoiding oropharyngeal contamination as much as possible, the patient is intubated
with a sterile endotracheal tube. A sterile red rubber or
polypropylene catheter is then inserted through the
lumen of the endotracheal tube and advanced until resistance is met, indicating that the catheter is wedged within
a distal airway. Using a syringe, a 5 mL/kg bolus of
warmed, sterile 0.9% saline or phosphate buffered saline
is instilled through the catheter followed by a 5 mL bolus
of air. The empty syringe is then used to aspirate the fluid
from the airways. This may be repeated twice to obtain an
adequate sample. Retrieval of 46–68% of the total infusate
has been reported. The caudal half of the patient may be
elevated during aspiration to facilitate retrieval of fluid.
Supplemental oxygen is administered postprocedurally
for 5–10 minutes. Samples reserved for cytologic analysis
should be kept on ice and processed within one hour of
collection to avoid deterioration of cells. Hypoxemia is a
significant complication associated with BAL but can
usually be reversed with oxygen supplementation.
Bronchospasm may also occur as a consequence of BAL
and can be managed with bronchodilators.
Increased numbers of eosinophils are classically noted
in cytologic samples collected from the airways of
asthmatic cats. However, a significant neutrophilic
­
­component has also been reported in cats with both naturally occurring and experimentally induced asthma.
Discrepancy exists regarding the percentage of eosinophils considered abnormal within feline airway cytology
samples. Eosinophil proportions ranging from 16% to
28% have been documented in airway samples collected
from healthy cats. As such, cytologic findings must be
interpreted in light of other diagnostic results in order
for a diagnosis of asthma to be verified.
Bacterial culture of airway lavage samples collected
from cats with lower airways disease produces variable
results. Bacterial growth has been found in airway

­samples collected from healthy cats, though growth of
Mycoplasma spp. has not been documented. Therefore,
a diagnosis of secondary bacterial infection in an asthmatic patient must be based on growth of a large number
of colonies of a single organism or intracellular bacteria
seen cytologically. Organisms that have been detected on
airway samples collected from cats with bronchopulmonary disease include Pasteurella multocida, Streptococcus
spp., Staphylococcus spp., Mycoplasma spp., Moraxella
spp., and Bordetella spp.
Due to the degree of invasiveness, lung biopsies are not
routinely performed in the diagnostic evaluation of cats
with lower airways disease. Histopathology of postmortem lung samples from cats with experimentally induced
asthma revealed epithelial hypertrophy and hyperplasia,
marked smooth muscle hypertrophy of the terminal and
respiratory bronchioles, and mucous cell metaplasia.
Pulmonary function testing, though not employed
standardly in clinical settings, has been investigated as a
means of assessing asthmatic cats. Specifically, barometric whole‐body plethysmography (BWBP) has been
employed to assess airway responsiveness in cats with
experimentally induced asthma. This noninvasive technique measures pressure changes generated by an
awake, spontaneously breathing cat in a transparent,
ventilated chamber. Pause and enhanced pause are
­variables used to estimate lung resistance. These values
have been shown to increase significantly following
bronchoprovocation in healthy cats and cats with artificially induced asthma. Tidal breathing flow‐volume
loops have also been utilized to assess lung resistance in
cats with bronchial disease. These loops are generated
in awake cats using a facemask attached to a pneumotachograph to assess airflow. Cats with bronchial disease
have reduced expiratory flows and tidal breathing expiratory volumes and prolonged expiratory time compared
to healthy cats. Additionally, ventilator‐acquired
mechanics have been used to measure airway resistance,
positive end‐expiratory occlusion pressure, and end‐
expiratory breath hold pressure following bronchoprovocation in anesthetized cats with experimentally
induced asthma.
Advances in the diagnostic approach to feline asthma
have included the development of minimally invasive
methods that may have utility in a future clinical setting.
In particular, exhaled breath condensate (EBC) can be
collected from nonanesthetized cats briefly housed
within an acrylic chamber and analyzed for hydrogen
peroxide, a marker of oxidative stress. The concentration
of hydrogen peroxide in the EBC of artificially sensitized
cats has been shown to correlate with the degree of
eosinophilic lower airway inflammation, suggesting that
analysis of EBC may prove to be a useful screening tool
for suspected asthmatics.

299

VetBooks.ir

300

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

Identifying the allergens responsible for inciting the
asthmatic response in individual cats is a critical step in
devising targeted therapies. Methods have been developed to detect IgE that is specific for the allergens used
in sensitization in the serum of cats with experimentally
induced asthma. Moreover, intradermal skin testing, a
practice most often used in the diagnosis of atopic
­dermatitis, has been shown to be a sensitive means of
detecting aeroallergen sensitization in experimental
models of asthma. Other minimally invasive immunodiagnostic methods that have been investigated in asthmatic patients include the use of flow cytometry to
detect ­proliferation of allergen‐specific T lymphocytes in
the peripheral blood.

­Treatment
Supplemental oxygen, stress reduction, and bronchodilation are the tenets of therapy for the asthmatic
cat in acute crisis. For the patient presenting with
dyspnea and cyanosis, supplemental oxygen should be
provided immediately at a FiO2 of 40%. This can be
effectively accomplished by placing the patient in an
oxygen cage, which also minimizes restraint and handling that can exacerbate dyspnea, with fatal outcomes
in some instances.
Beta‐2‐adrenergic agonists such as terbutaline are
most commonly used to induce bronchodilation in an
acute setting. Bronchodilation results from airway
smooth muscle relaxation triggered by stimulation of
beta‐2‐adrenergic receptors. Activation of these receptors triggers adenylyl cyclase to increase production of
cAMP, which sequesters intracellular calcium, thereby
reducing smooth muscle contraction. Other potentially
beneficial effects of these agents include inhibition of
mast cell mediator release and airway microvascular
leakage, increased mucociliary clearance, decreased
neutrophil activation and endothelial adhesion, and
induction of neutrophil apoptosis. Adverse effects associated with beta‐2‐adrenergic agonist therapy include
tachycardia, CNS stimulation, hypokalemia, and tremors. For this reason, these agents should be used with
caution in patients with co‐morbid cardiac disease,
hypertension, hyperthyroidism, seizure disorders, and
diabetes mellitus. Beta‐2‐adrenergic agonists can interact with tricyclic antidepressants such as amitriptyline
and clomipramine and should be used with caution in
patients receiving these medications. Terbutaline sulfate can be administered IM or SC at an initial dose
of 0.1 mg/kg to induce bronchodilation in an acute
­setting. Decreased respiratory rate is expected within
15–30 minutes of dosing, and repeated doses can be
administered as needed.

Albuterol sulfate is a beta‐2‐adrenergic agonist that
may be administered in inhalant form to cats presenting
with severe, acute dyspnea. A metered dose inhaler is
used to deliver the medication into a chamber device
attached to a facemask (Aerokat® Feline Aerosol
Chamber, Trudell Medical International). This apparatus facilitates inhalation of the aerosolized particles into
the lower airways. An initial dose of one 90 μg puff can
be administered to dyspneic patients that will tolerate
having the facemask held over the nose and mouth for
the 7–10 seconds necessary for the complete dose to be
inhaled. This dose may be repeated every 30 minutes for
up to four hours. Albuterol can also be dispensed for
at‐home administration as a “rescue inhaler” for management of acute exacerbations in established asthmatics until veterinary care can be provided. However,
chronic use of racemic albuterol should be avoided as
the S‐enantiomer in this mixture has been shown to
cause airway inflammation in healthy and experimentally asthmatic cats.
Status asthmaticus is defined in human medicine as
severe, acute asthma that is refractory to repeated doses
of beta‐agonists. Severely dyspneic feline asthmatics that
do not respond to bronchodilators and supplemental
oxygen may stabilize only after initiating antiinflammatory therapy with a rapidly acting glucocorticoid such as
dexamethasone sodium phosphate. An initial dose of
0.25–2 mg/kg can be administered IM or IV to quickly
reduce airway inflammation if necessary.
Lifelong glucocorticoid therapy is the key to chronic
management of feline asthma. Because the aeroallergen
that provokes the asthmatic response usually cannot be
identified or completely removed, avoidance of the
offending allergen is often impossible in feline patients.
Thus, it is postulated that lower airway inflammation is
continually present in asthmatic cats, even in the absence
of clinical signs. Lower airway inflammation has been
shown to persist in feline asthmatics treated with high‐
dose glucocorticoid therapy despite resolution of clinical
signs. To minimize the permanent airway remodeling
that ensues from long‐standing inflammation, continuous antiinflammatory therapy is necessary.
Glucocorticoids are the most effective antiinflammatory agents used in the management of feline asthma.
They exert their antiinflammatory effects by binding to a
cytosolic receptor, then translocating to the nucleus
where the glucocorticoid–receptor complex binds to a
glucocorticoid response element on the genes that regulate production of inflammatory cytokines such as IL‐3
and IL‐5. Glucocorticoids also increase vasoconstriction
to reduce airway edema; decrease airway hyperresponsiveness over time; decrease mucus secretion; inhibit
macrophages, T cells, eosinophils, and mast cells;
increase the synthesis of secretory leukocyte protease

VetBooks.ir

30 Feline Bronchial Asthma

inhibitor to reduce airway remodeling; and prevent the
downregulation of beta‐adrenergic receptors.
Orally administered glucocorticoids are used in the
initial management of stable asthmatics. Prednisolone is
preferred over prednisone in cats because of impaired
hepatic bioconversion of prednisone. No standardized
dosing regimen and tapering schedule exists for the use
of glucocorticoids in the management of feline bronchial asthma. Patients are typically started on therapy at
doses near or at the immunosuppressive range (1–2 mg/
kg PO q12h). Long‐term therapy with systemic glucocorticoids can be associated with numerous undesirable
effects such as polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, weight
gain, alopecia, thinning of the skin, increased susceptibility to infections, and the development of diabetes
mellitus. Systemic steroids can also exacerbate underlying cardiac disease. To minimize these complications,
the initial prednisolone dose is tapered by 25–50% once
clinical signs have resolved and after at least seven days
of therapy.
Inhaled glucocorticoids are associated with negligible
adverse effects compared to those seen with systemic
therapy and are a very effective means of managing
feline asthma long term. Inhaled steroids are minimally
absorbed into the systemic circulation and undergo
extensive first‐pass metabolism. Fluticasone propionate
is the most commonly prescribed inhaled glucocorticoid in veterinary medicine. It has the longest receptor
residency time and greatest lipophilicity of the inhaled
glucocorticoids as well as a high therapeutic index.
Treatment with inhaled fluticasone has been shown to
reduce airway inflammation and hyperresponsiveness
in cats with naturally occurring lower airways disease
and in cats with experimentally induced asthma.
Suppression of the hypothalamic‐pituitary‐adrenocortical axis has been demonstrated in healthy cats following
treatment with inhaled glucocorticoids, but significant
suppression of the systemic immune response was not
noted. Fluticasone doses of 44 μg, 110 μg, and 220 μg
q12h were shown to reduce airway inflammation in
experimental models of feline asthma with similar efficacy. Fluticasone is available in a metered dose inhaler
formulation and can be administered to cats using a
chamber and facemask as with inhaled albuterol.
Systemic steroid therapy should be continued during
the first 14 days of treatment with fluticasone to allow
the inhaled glucocorticoid to reach full effect. The oral
glucocorticoid dose can then be gradually tapered and
eventually discontinued while inhalant therapy is continued long term. Inhaled budesonide (400 μg q12h) has
also been evaluated in asthmatic cats and has been
shown to reduce airway responsiveness while causing
suppression of the hypothalamic‐pituitary‐adrenal axis
in a subset of treated cats.

Methylxanthine bronchodilators can be used in
­conjunction with antiinflammatory therapy for chronic
management of refractory disease. Theophylline is the
methylxanthine derivative that has been studied most
extensively in cats. The mechanism by which methylxanthines induce bronchodilation is postulated to be
related to inhibition of phosphodiesterase, which leads
to increased intracellular cAMP and, subsequently,
smooth muscle relaxation. However, theophylline does
not inhibit phosphodiesterase at therapeutic concentrations. Inhibition of adenosine or interference with
intracellular calcium levels may instead explain the
­
bronchodilatory effects of these agents. Theophylline
also prevents mast cell degranulation, reduces microvascular leakage, and increases respiratory muscle
strength. When administered in the evening, sustained‐
release theophylline achieves higher peak plasma concentrations compared to morning administration. The
recommended dose of slow‐release preparations is
20–50 mg/kg PO q24h. Adverse effects associated with
methylxanthine derivatives include central nervous
­system stimulation, tachyarrhythmias, increased gastric
acid secretion, and diuresis. Because of this, methylxanthines should be used cautiously in patients with preexisting cardiac disease, seizure disorders, hyperthyroidism,
and gastric ulcers. Long‐acting bronchodilators such as
theophylline should be used adjunctively with steroid
therapy to achieve improved control of clinical signs in
patients that do not completely respond to glucocorticoid therapy alone.
Ciclosporin has been promoted for management of
feline asthma that is refractory to glucocorticoid and
bronchodilator therapy. A calcineurin inhibitor, ciclosporin inhibits T cell activation and proliferation by interfering with the transcription of genes related to cytokine
production, particularly IL‐2. In an experimental model
of feline asthma, treatment with ciclosporin prior to and
during chronic antigen challenge decreased the amount
of IL‐2 secreted from peripheral blood l­ymphocytes,
prevented an increase in airway hyperresponsiveness
­
after chronic antigen stimulation, and resulted in reduced
airway smooth muscle thickness and mucosal eosinophil
infiltration histologically compared to untreated cats.
Following acute antigen challenge in the same model,
pretreatment with ciclosporin did not prevent mast cell
degranulation or an increase in lung resistance. Despite
this, tracheal smooth muscle harvested from these artificially sensitized cats did not contract in response to antigen exposure when incubated with ciclosporin in vitro.
Given these differential findings, ciclosporin should be
reserved for patients with a poor response to standard
asthma therapies. An initial dose of 10 mg/kg PO q12h is
recommended with the goal of achieving blood trough
levels of 500–1000 ng/mL. Adverse effects associated

301

VetBooks.ir

302

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

with ciclosporin use in cats include anorexia and gastrointestinal upset. Nephrotoxicity and hepatotoxicity may
develop at high blood levels.
Antiserotonergics, antileukotrienes, and antihistamines have been investigated for use in feline asthma to
reduce airway inflammation while circumventing the
adverse effects associated with systemic glucocorticoid
therapy. Serotonin released during mast cell degranulation mediates airway smooth muscle contraction in cats.
Cyproheptadine, a serotonin receptor antagonist, has
been shown to attenuate constriction of airway smooth
muscle from antigen‐sensitized cats in vitro. In live cats
experimentally sensitized to aeroallergen, cyproheptadine did not uniformly diminish airway responsiveness,
degree of airway eosinophilic inflammation, plasma or
BAL fluid serotonin concentrations, or serum content of
allergen‐specific IgE following allergen challenge.
Similarly, cysteinyl leukotrienes are produced by mast
cells as well as eosinophils and contribute to many of the
pathophysiologic processes underlying asthma, including bronchoconstriction, smooth muscle proliferation,
mucus production, and inflammatory cell influx. The
leukotriene receptor antagonist zafirlukast was evaluated in an experimental model of feline asthma and was
demonstrated to have no effect on airway eosinophilia,
airway reactivity, or serum levels of allergen‐specific IgE
compared to placebo. In another study, urine concentrations of cysteinyl leukotrienes in allergen‐sensitized cats
did not increase after allergen challenge. These results
suggest that leukotrienes may not be a critical factor
in the generation of the feline asthmatic response.
Histamine plays a crucial role in inducing bronchoconstriction in human asthmatics, though its importance in
mediating the feline asthmatic response remains questionable. Cetirizine is a second‐generation histamine 1
receptor antagonist that has been evaluated in cats with
experimentally induced asthma and was shown to have
no effect on eosinophilic airway inflammation or plasma
histamine concentrations. Until additional studies are
conducted, pharmaceutical agents that inhibit serotonin,
leukotrienes, and histamine are not recommended as
monotherapy in the management of feline asthma.
Allergen‐specific immunotherapy holds promise as
the only potentially curative therapy for feline asthma.
This form of therapy, which is most commonly employed
in veterinary medicine in the management of atopic dermatitis, is proposed to alter the immune response so as
to reestablish tolerance to a specific allergen. In particular, rush immunotherapy (RIT) is a modified version of
allergen‐specific immunotherapy that involves subcutaneous administration of gradually increasing doses of a
specific antigen over an accelerated period of time, generally a couple of days or less. The immunomodulatory
effects of RIT are hypothesized to be related to production

of IgE‐blocking antibodies, induction of T cell
­unres­ponsiveness, shift from a T helper 2 to a T helper
1 cell response, elaboration of immunosuppressive
cytokines such as IL‐10 from T regulatory cells, and
decreased lymphocyte proliferation in response to allergen. In cats experimentally sensitized to Bermuda grass
allergen (BGA), RIT significantly decreased eosinophilic
airways inflammation, induced lymphocyte hyporesponsiveness to BGA, increased mRNA transcription of IL‐10
in BAL fluid, and decreased mRNA transcription of IL‐5
in BAL fluid. Adverse effects associated with RIT in this
model included localized swelling around the injection
site, increased heart and respiratory rate, hyperthermia,
vomiting, agitation, and systemic anaphylaxis noted in
one cat. These adverse effects were less severe when RIT
was adjuvanted with CpG oligodeoxynucleotides, immunostimulatory DNA sequences that induce a polarized
Th1 response. Intranasal administration of RIT has also
been evaluated in an experimental model of feline
asthma and was shown to be equally effective in reducing the degree of eosinophilic airway inflammation as
subcutaneously administered RIT, although subcutaneous RIT more consistently abolished the clinical signs
induced by aeroallergen challenge. Both antiinflammatory and immunomodulatory therapy may be necessary
in severely affected cats. When administered concurrently with RIT, oral glucocorticoid therapy has been
shown to dampen the long‐term effectiveness of RIT,
which may limit the benefits of RIT as monotherapy in
patients with severe disease.
The challenge in applying RIT to cats with naturally
occurring asthma lies in elucidating which antigen is
triggering the asthmatic response. Intradermal skin testing has been employed to identify the inciting antigens in
veterinary patients with atopic dermatitis. This method
has been shown to be highly sensitive in detecting a
known inciting antigen in cats artificially sensitized to a
specific allergen. Concurrently, detection of allergen‐
specific IgE in the serum of experimentally sensitized
cats was shown to be highly specific in identifying the
antigen used for sensitization. When evaluated in cats
with naturally occurring small airway disease, significantly more positive allergen reactions on serum IgE
testing and intradermal skin testing were noted compared to cats without airways disease, though the clinical
relevance of these allergens could not be determined.
Even though isolating the specific inciting antigen is the
ideal means of guiding immunotherapy, RIT using antigens that did not completely match those used to induce
the asthmatic phenotype in experimental feline models
was shown to reduce eosinophilic airways inflammation.
Immunotherapy is likely to play a prominent role in the
management of feline asthma in the future, but additional studies in patients with naturally occurring disease

VetBooks.ir

30 Feline Bronchial Asthma

are necessary before allergen‐specific immunotherapy
can be employed standardly in clinical practice.
Several novel therapies have been investigated using
cats with experimentally induced asthma and may be
applicable to the management of patients with naturally
occurring disease. Specifically, the antiinflammatory
effects of omega‐3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (ω3
PUFAs) extracted from New Zealand green‐lipped mussel have been evaluated in artificially sensitized cats.
Airway responsiveness but not eosinophilic inflammation decreased following treatment, suggesting that ω3
PUFAs may have some benefit as adjunctive therapy in
the management of feline asthma. Masitinib, a tyrosine
kinase inhibitor, has been demonstrated to reduce eosinophilic airway inflammation and improve respiratory
compliance in cats with experimental asthma and may
emerge as an effective treatment strategy for patients
with glucocorticoid intolerance or refractory disease.
Stem cell therapy has also been investigated as a means of
reducing airway remodeling, one of the hallmarks of
feline asthma. Administration of allogenic mesenchymal
stem cells to cats experimentally sensitized to a common
aeroallergen resulted in attenuation of changes consistent
with chronic lung remodeling based on computed tomography. Nebulized lidocaine has been evaluated in cats
with experimentally induced asthma and was shown to
reduce airway hyperresponsiveness without adverse
effects, indicating that it may be effective as palliative
therapy when used in combination with glucocorticoids.
Monitoring
Response to therapy is most effectively evaluated by
assessing clinical signs. Due to the intermittent nature of
clinical signs in some patients, overall improvement in
clinical condition should be judged after at least a few
weeks of therapy. Decreased frequency of episodes of
coughing and/or dyspnea is the expected outcome of successful treatment. A more objective assessment of clinical

improvement involves “cough counts” performed by
owners at home prior to and after starting therapy. Due to
permanent airway remodeling, radiographic manifestations of asthma may not change significantly with treatment, limiting the use of repeated thoracic radiography to
monitor response to therapy. The exception is radiographic evidence of atelectasis of the right middle lung
lobe, which is expected to resolve with antiinflammatory
and mucolytic therapy. The limited availability of pulmonary function testing prohibits its practical application as
a means of assessing response to treatment, but it may
prove useful for this purpose in the future.

­Prognosis
Most asthmatic patients that receive appropriate treatment demonstrate a favorable response with a good
long‐term prognosis. However, continuing antiinflammatory therapy for life is crucial to prevent further permanent airway remodeling unless the inciting allergen
can be identified and exposure prevented. Severe, refractory forms of feline asthma do exist and can present
management challenges. Moreover, even patients with
apparently well‐controlled asthma are at risk for potentially life‐threatening episodes of severe, acute bronchoconstriction. The adverse effects associated with
systemic glucocorticoid therapy can complicate prognosis and lead to the development of life‐limiting complications, including congestive heart failure and diabetes
mellitus. Long‐term treatment can be further impaired
by patients that will not tolerate oral administration of
medications or placement of the facemask required for
administration of inhalant therapy. In addition, the
expense associated with inhaled medications may prevent their use in some patients. Despite these challenges,
feline asthma is a readily manageable condition, and successful treatment can prevent acute death and significantly improve quality of life in the majority of patients.

­Further Reading
Bay JD, Johnson LR. Feline bronchial disease/asthma. In:
King LG, ed. Textbook of Respiratory Disease in Dogs and
Cats. St Louis, MO: WB Saunders, 2004, pp. 388–95.
Cocayne CG, Reinero CR, DeClue AE. Subclinical airway
inflammation despite high‐dose oral corticosteroid
therapy in cats with lower airway disease. J Feline Med
Surg 2011; 13(8): 558–63.
Corcoran BM, Foster DJ, Fuentes LV. Feline asthma
syndrome: a retrospective study of the clinical presentation
in 29 cats. J Small Anim Pract 1995; 36: 481–8.

Dye JA, McKiernan BC, Rozanski EA, et al.
Bronchopulmonary disease in the cat: historical,
physical, radiographic, clinicopathologic, and pulmonary
functional evaluation of 24 affected and 15 healthy cats.
J Vet Intern Med 1996; 10: 385–400.
Reinero CR. Advances in the understanding of
pathogenesis, and diagnostics and therapeutics for feline
allergic asthma. Vet J 2011; 190(1): 28–33.

303

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

305

31
Canine Chronic Bronchitis
Kevin Kumrow, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)
Orchard Park Veterinary Medical Center, Orchard, Park, NY, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology

­History and Clinical Signs

Canine chronic bronchitis (CCB) is the most common
cause of a chronic cough. It is characterized by a cough
that is present for at least two months, inflammation in
the airways, and a lack of an identified underlying disease that may cause a cough. There is some evidence that
environmental pollutants, second‐hand smoke or other
inhaled noxious chemicals may be contributors to the
etiology. A specific role of bacteria in CCB has not been
established. The diagnosis of CCB is largely through
exclusion, and treatment is based on a patient’s clinical
history, diagnostic results and response to therapy.
Canine chronic bronchitis airway inflammation is neutrophilic, and there is an increase in the production of
mucus. The inflammatory response perpetuates the
coughing cycle, which in turn stimulates continued
inflammation. This positive feedback sets up a vicious
cycle that ultimately leads to permanent changes in the
airways, including hyperplasia of mucous glands and goblet cells, hypertrophy of smooth muscle, and fibrosis of the
lamina propria. These changes are often accompanied by
obstruction of small airways and airway collapse. Some
cases of chronic bronchitis can progress to permanent
dilation of the bronchi and destruction of the structural
integrity of the bronchial walls. This condition is known
as bronchiectasis. Cocker spaniels have an increased risk
of bronchiectasis. Left unidentified and untreated, the
aforementioned changes to the airway can contribute to
a progressive decline in lung function. Box 31.1 gives a list
of many of the common differentials for CCB.

The history and clinical signs of patients with CCB are
similar to those presenting for collapsing trachea and
mitral valve insufficiency. Patients with collapsing trachea
have a chronic cough associated with narrowing of the airway combined with chronic tracheal inflammation, and a
perpetual dry honking cough. Mitral valve insufficiency
can lead to enlargement of the left atrium and subsequent
compression of the mainstem bronchi that stimulates a
chronic coughing reflex. CCB is less commonly diagnosed
in large‐breed dogs. Exhaustive consideration of alternative causes of a chronic cough in these patients should
occur. For example, a Doberman with a history of cough
should be thoroughly evaluated for dilated cardiomyopathy, and heart failure should be suspected until proven
otherwise. A 12‐year‐old Labrador with a history of cough
should be evaluated for laryngeal paralysis with intermittent aspiration pneumonia or pulmonary metastatic
­disease. It is imperative that the clinician be astute in differentiating between the potential causes of chronic cough
as a misdiagnosis could result in inappropriate treatment
and a worsening of the patient’s condition.
A thorough history can assist in the differentiation of
CCB from other causes of chronic cough. Patients that
have had exposure to other dogs in any setting for any
period of time should be suspect for canine infectious
respiratory disease (CIRD). Commonly, exposure occurs
at a groomer, boarding facility, doggie day‐care, or dog
park, or via a visiting family pet or a new puppy in the
household; however, any known interaction, even limited, should raise suspicion. These patients can be any
age or breed, and can have clinical signs that range from
a mild dry‐hacking cough to systemic illness. Pets with
evidence of systemic disease that have a history of cough
are unlikely to have CCB as their primary ailment, and

­Epidemiology
The most common signalment for CCB is middle‐aged
to older, small‐breed dogs.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

306

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

Box 31.1 Common differential diagnoses for CCB
Bacterial pneumonia – Escherichia coli, Klebsiella,
Pasteurella, Pseudomonas sp., Streptococcus, and
Staphylococcus are commonly associated with pneumonia in dogs.
●● Canine infectious respiratory disease complex – Bordetella
bronchiseptica, canine influenza, Mycoplasma, etc.
●● Congestive heart failure
●● Fungal pneumonia – histoplasmosis, blastomycosis,
and coccidiomycosis.
●● Interstitial lung disease.
●● Parasitic pneumonia – Aelurostrongylus sp., Capillaria
aerophila, Crenosomavulpis, Filaroides hirthi, and
Paragonimus kellicotti. Oslerus osleri can result in
coughing, but is found in the trachea rather than the
lower airways. Dirofilaria immitis (heartworm disease)
also results in cough.
●● Pleural effusion.
●● Protozoal
infections – Neospora caninum and
Toxoplasma gondii.
●● Pulmonary neoplasia.
●● Tracheal collapse.
●● Upper airway dysfunction (laryngeal paralysis).
●●

attention should be focused on investigating their
­systemic illness. Questions about weight loss, anorexia,
lethargy, and other behavior changes could lead to the
detection of a systemic illness. A clinical history should
also include questions that discuss potential exposure to
passive (second‐hand) smoke, the presence of excessive
environmental odors/perfumes, and prior prescriptions
or home remedies and their clinical effect on the cough.
Physical examination of most patients with CCB is relatively unremarkable. Patients tend to be systemically well,
with the only major clinical sign being coughing. Patients
are often seen due to an acute exacerbation in their coughing secondary to exposure to environmental irritants or
allergens, secondary development of a bacterial infection,
or the unveiling of an unrelated concurrent disease. Some
dogs will present with tachypnea or increased expiratory
effort (labored breathing). Physical examination should
focus on the cardiopulmonary system and signs of systemic illness (weight loss or gain, anorexia, lethargy, etc.).
Careful auscultation of the lungs can provide clues to lower
airway disease, and the presence or absence of a murmur
should be noted. Although heart disease and CCB can co‐
exist, the presence of a sinus arrhythmia supports the airway/pulmonary system as the primary cause of coughing.
Sometimes a cough can be elicited with palpation of
the trachea due to nonspecific inflammation of the airways. This may assist with characterization of the cough
by the clinician and exclude other conditions such as

Box 31.2 Recommended laboratory tests
Complete blood cell count (CBC)
Biochemistry profile
●● Urinalysis
●● Heartworm antigen test
●● Fecal Baermann and flotation
●● NT pro‐BNP
●●
●●

reverse sneezing or other upper airway noises that may
be mistaken for a cough. Whether a cough can or cannot
be produced during physical examination, a descriptive
history should be gathered from the owners – is it dry or
productive, paroxysmal or intermittent, is there a relation to eating or certain activities, does it occur at specific times during the day/night, has there been any voice
change or reluctance to bark? Some dogs may have syncopal events associated with coughing. This is known as
the cough‐drop syndrome, which is most likely associated with high vagal tone.

­Diagnosis
Diagnostic evaluation should be tailored to the individual patient, and prioritized with regard to clinical assessment and history.
Recommended laboratory tests can be found in
Box 31.2. These diagnostic evaluations are typically normal in patients with CCB but they assist with the general
assessment of the patient’s health. A CBC may be suggestive of an infectious component to the cough, while
appropriate fecal evaluation may lead to the identification of lungworm larva or eggs, and a NT‐proBNP has
been shown to be useful in the identification of left atrial
enlargement/congestive heart failure.
Thoracic radiographs are essential in the evaluation of
a coughing dog. In patients where diagnostic testing is
limited, thoracic radiographs have been shown to be the
most useful test. Patients with CCB may show findings
consistent with bronchial thickening, evidenced by
increased “donuts and tramlines” (Figure 31.1). Additional
findings consistent with CCB include hyperinflation
and bronchiectasis. Although radiographs are relatively
insensitive for the diagnosis of CCB, they provide the
benefit of assisting with the exclusion of other conditions
that result in coughing, such as cardiomegaly, lung
masses, pleural effusion, and interstitial lung disease. It is
important to remember that normal chest radiographs do
not exclude a diagnosis of CCB.
Fluoroscopy may be useful in evaluation for tracheal
and bronchial collapse, but does not typically provide
benefit for evaluation of chronic cough unless concurrent

VetBooks.ir

31 Canine Chronic Bronchitis

Figure 31.1 Thoracic radiographs with a diffuse bronchial pattern
evidenced by increased “donuts and tramlines.”

airway collapse is suspected. Ultrasound of the thoracic
cavity may assist with diagnostic sampling of isolated
lesions that are observed on radiographs (masses or consolidation), or when pockets of pleural effusion are identified; however, it does not assist in the diagnosis of CCB.
Computed tomography (CT) is widely used in people
with airway disease, and is becoming more popular in
veterinary medicine for the evaluation of canine bronchial disease. The increased resolution of CT compared to radiographs and the ability to perform 3D
reconstructions may prove to be more sensitive for the
diagnosis of CCB, and allow earlier detection and
treatment of the disease (Figure 31.2). Diagnostic CT
scanning in veterinary medicine does require brief
general anesthesia, and if permissible should be combined with evaluation of laryngeal function, collection
of airway cytology samples, and bronchoscopy for a
complete airway evaluation.
If available, bronchoscopy is the preferred technique to
evaluate and visualize the airway. A recent study showed
that patients with CCB often demonstrate an irregular
mucosal surface without the glistening seen in healthy
airways. Most airways were also noted as having a granular mucosal appearance with a roughened texture,
increased amounts of mucus, hyperemia of mucosal vessels, and partial collapse of larger airways during expiration secondary to weakened walls. Bronchial dilation in
patients with bronchiectasis can also be noted in CCB
patients. Bronchoscopy is also beneficial for the diagnosis or exclusion of some other large airway diseases such

Figure 31.2 Computed tomography slice of the thorax showing a
“ground‐glass” appearance.

as collapsing trachea/bronchi, obstructive intraluminal
masses or granulomas caused by some parasites, and foreign bodies.
Transtracheal washes, endotracheal washes, and blind
or visualized bronchoalveolar lavages are very useful in
characterizing the type of inflammation present in the
airways, and for the diagnosis of CCB. Samples should be
submitted for bacterial cultures and cytology (fungal cultures should be submitted when appropriate). The airway sampling technique chosen often reflects clinician
preference, and availability of supplies and equipment
(see Box 31.3 for a detailed description of techniques).
Cytologic samples should be immediately placed into
EDTA tubes, and processed promptly to avoid changes
in cell counts and appearance. In cases where analysis
will be delayed, a small portion of the sample should be
centrifuged, decanted, and a direct smear of the supernatant and precipitation should be prepared. Evaluation of
respiratory cytology from dogs with CCB typically
reveals a predominant neutrophilic infiltrate with excessive mucus (Figure 31.3), small numbers of lymphocytes,
eosinophils, goblet cells, ciliated and epithelial cells, and
a variable number of alveolar macrophages. Samples that
show a marked eosinophilia should be suspected of having an eosinophilic bronchopneumonopathy, rather than
CCB. Bacterial cultures should be submitted in all cases;
however, the role of bacteria is unclear, as colonization is
common, but may not reflect a clinical infection.
Pulmonary function testing is widely used in human
medicine to better characterize the severity of and ­specific

307

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

VetBooks.ir

308

Figure 31.3 Photomicroscopy from a patient diagnosed with
chronic bronchitis showing a typical cytologic representation
with abundant mucus and neutrophils, and prominent
“Curschmann spirals.” Source: Image courtesy of Eric J. Fish,
DVM, DiplACVP.

defects associated with chronic bronchitis. Although
tidal breathing flow‐volume loops have been described in
veterinary medicine, they are not widely used due to lack
of patient cooperation. Forms of pulmonary function
testing that are more practical and may be used in dogs
include the collection of arterial blood gas samples, the
measurement of oxygen saturation with pulse oximetry,
and use of the six‐minute walk test (6MWT). Arterial
blood gas analysis may document hypoxemia (PaO2
<80 mmHg) or an increased alveolar‐arterial (A‐a) gradient (>15), although due to difficulty with technique and a
lack of necessary equipment, this is not commonly performed in the clinical setting. Pulse oximetry is widely
available in practice, and may be used to estimate arterial
saturation with a value of >97% considered normal. Pulse
oximetry may also be assessed after a short walk, as desaturation may be more commonly observed after exercise
in patients with more mild compromise to their airway
function. The 6MWT formally measures the distance
that a dog can walk over six minutes; distances less than
400 meters are supportive of significant lung disease. The
6MWT may also be combined with pre‐ and post‐walk
pulse oximetry to evaluate for exercise‐induced oxygen
desaturation.

­Treatment
Due to the lack of a definitive treatable etiology for CCB,
the treatment options are limited to therapy to ameliorate known clinical signs and co‐morbid conditions.
Primary treatment focuses on limiting inflammation,
limiting cough, and improving exercise stamina.

Possible environmental causes should be identified
and eliminated. Owners should be advised not to smoke
indoors, or in closed environments with affected pets.
Any air‐borne irritants should be eliminated such as perfumes, incense, scented detergents, and aerosolized
cleaners. Owners should also be encouraged to remove
as much dust from the environment as possible. Cloth
furniture should be cleaned or removed, carpets cleaned
or removed, and frequent vacuuming/dusting should be
encouraged. If extensive remodeling is planned that is
likely to produce potentially noxious fumes or a large
amount of aerosolized particles then plans should be
made for CCB patients to stay with friends or family.
Exposure to potentially sick puppies should be avoided
as well as trips to dog parks, grooming parlors, and
boarding facilities. If a patient is obese, an appropriate
weight loss program should be established. Activities
that incite excess barking or strenuous exercise should
be curtailed. The importance of replacing neck collars
with harnesses should be emphasized.
Antiinflammatory medications are typically employed
to assist with reducing inflammation in the airway,
and glucocorticoids are still the mainstay of treatment.
Reducing inflammation can limit cough and assist in
reducing the positive feedback cycle that perpetuates
CCB. Glucocorticoids may be administered orally or via
inhalation. Prednisone is the most commonly used glucocorticoid. Initial dosing of prednisone is 1–2 mg/kg/
day though it should be tapered to the lowest effective
dose that controls clinical signs. Inhaled glucocorticoids
have been widely used in people, and there is growing
frequency of their use in veterinary medicine. Inhaled
steroids are delivered via a spacer chamber and facemask designed specifically for dogs (e.g., AeroDawg,
wwww.trudellmed.com). Inhaled glucocorticoids are
more expensive than oral steroids, but the benefits
include a directed therapy approach that limits systemic
absorption and subsequent steroid side‐effects. One
study demonstrated benefits of therapy with fluticasone
at 125 μg q12h.
Bronchodilators are commonly prescribed for dogs with
CCB and evidence supports an improvement in clinical
signs in approximately half of treated dogs. Theophylline
(extended release, 10 mg/kg PO q12h) has been shown to
have nonspecific effects that may benefit patients with
CCB. These include decreasing diaphragmatic fatigue,
increasing mucociliary clearance, and enhancing the efficacy of glucocorticoid activity. Beta‐2‐agonists, such as
terbutaline, may be less effective due to the lack of reversible bronchoconstriction in some patients. The use of
theophylline versus beta‐2‐agonists is still a clinical preference. It should be noted that beta‐2‐agonists might
cause some anxiety and restlessness when initiated
although these signs often resolve within a few day.

VetBooks.ir

31 Canine Chronic Bronchitis

Box 31.3 Airway sampling techniques
Cytologic samples can be obtained from the airway via a
tracheal wash, blind bronchoalveolar lavage, or with
bronchoscopy.
Transtracheal wash (TTW) is best suited for tolerant
medium‐ or large‐sized dogs. This technique should be
avoided in brachycephalic breeds, and obese patients
where easy palpation of the trachea is limited.
TTW is performed in unsedated or lightly sedated dogs.
●● After aseptic preparation of a small area over the cervical
trachea or larynx and a local anesthesia block is performed, a through‐the‐needle catheter is passed through
the cricothyroid ligament or between tracheal rings; the
catheter is fed down the trachea (beveled edge down).
●● Two to three aliquots of 5–10 mL 0.9% sterile saline are
flushed into the trachea, and promptly retrieved. Retrieval
volume is typically about 50%, and the remaining fluid is
rapidly absorbed from the airway.
●● Collection of a diagnostic sample is facilitated by a
patient’s ability to cough resulting in an increased likeli●●

hood in retrieving a representative cytology from more
areas of the airway.
Endotracheal wash (ETW) is commonly performed in
smaller patients, patients that are less amenable to restrain,
brachycephalic breeds, and obese patients.
ETW is performed by briefly anesthetizing the dog with
propofol then performing a clean intubation with a sterile
endotracheal tube. Lubricating gel should not be used.
●● In a sterile fashion, a 5–8 Fr catheter is fed through the
endotracheal tube and sterile saline is infused and
reaspirated. Alternatively, a modified technique using
suction, a Lukens specimen container, a three‐way stopcock, and a red rubber or Argyle feeding tube can be
used (Figure 31.4a,b).
●● 0.9% saline aliquots of 3, 5, and 10 mL are used for dogs
<5 kg, 5–15 kg, and >15 kg, respectively.
●● A sterile collection cup may be used to collect any additional samples that may be expectorated.

●●

(a)

(b)

Figure 31.4 Equipment set‐up for a modified technique to perform bronchoalveolar lavage or endotracheal tube lavage using
suction, a Lukens specimen container, a three‐way stopcock, and a red rubber or Argyle feeding tube.

309

VetBooks.ir

310

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

●●

Supplemental oxygen should be available during this
procedure and for recovery.

Blind bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) is performed similarly
to an ETW with the exception of the following.
The flexible catheter is advanced until it is lodged in the
lower airways.
●● A larger volume of 0.9% saline is used, dependent on the
patient’s size.
●●

Antibiotics are warranted in dogs with an acute exacerbation of their clinical signs of CCB, or in those with
evidence of an infection on airway cytology and/or culture. Doxycycline and azithromycin have antiinflammatory and antimicrobial properties, and should be
considered in CCB patients with no specific bacterial
culture and sensitivity data. Clinician preference is
often influenced by cost, formulation, and availability
of products. Fluoroquinolones are also a good choice
for patients with CCB due to their high airway tissue
concentrations although it is important to remember
that concurrent administration of fluoroquinolones
and theophylline may results in theophylline toxicity. If
simultaneous administration of both drugs is necessary
then the theophylline dose should be reduced by
approximately 30–40%.
Cough suppressants are typically used to reduce the
positive feedback cycle of cough begets inflammation
and inflammation begets cough, and to improve the
quality of life of the patient and owners. Over‐the‐counter cough suppressants are rarely effective in dogs.
Narcotic cough suppressants are the most effective, with
hydrocodone (0.22–0.5 mg/kg PO q6–12h) the most

●●

A simple technique using a modified stomach tube has
been used successfully.

Bronchoscopic bronchoalveolar lavage can be used to
­collect samples via bronchoscopy by flushing sterile 0.9%
saline through the chamber of a sterilized scope and
reaspirating it back through the biopsy channel.

widely used. Butorphanol (0.5 mg/kg PO q6–12h) may
also be considered as a primary cough suppressant. A
human study has recently reported on the efficacy of
gabapentin for control of cough in humans though data
in dogs are lacking.

­Prognosis
The clinical course of CCB is highly variable. In the
majority of patients, permanent changes are present in
the airways at the time of diagnosis, and as a result treatment is not curative. Appropriate medical management
can typically help ameliorate the clinical signs and palliate the disease by stopping or slowing progression of
bronchial damage. Periodic relapse of cough is not
uncommon, and will frequently respond to temporary or
permanent adjustment in the therapeutic regimen, or
treatment of a developed concurrent illness such as
pneumonia. As techniques are developed to screen for
and diagnose CCB at earlier stages and more directed
medical therapy is established, the prognosis for and
probability of cure of CCB will improve.

­Further Reading
Amis TC, Kurpershoek C. Tidal breathing flow‐volume
loops analysis for clinical assessment of airway
obstruction in conscious dogs. Am J Vet Res 1986;
47(5): 1002–6.
Bexfield NH, Foale RD, Davison LJ, et al. Management of
13 cases of canine respiratory disease using inhaled
corticosteroids. J Small Anim Pract 2006; 47: 377–82.
Bolongin M, Kirschvink N, Leemans J, et al. Characterization
of the acute and reversible airway inflammation induced
by cadmium chloride inhalation in healthy dogs and
evaluation of the effects of salbutamol and prednisolone.
Vet J 2009; 179(3): 443–50.
Brownlie SE. A retrospective study of diagnosis in 109
cases of canine lower respiratory disease. J Small Anim
Pract 1990; 31: 371–6.

Chandler JC, Lappin MR. Mycoplasmal respiratory
infections in small animals: 17 cases (1988–1999). J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 2002; 38: 111–19.
Creevy KE. Airway evaluation and flexible endoscopic
procedures in dogs and cats: laryngoscopy,
transtracheal wash, tracheobronchoscopy, and
bronchoalveolar lavage. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2009; 39: 869–80.
Hawkins EC, Berry CR. Use of a modified stomach tube for
bronchoalveolar lavage in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1999; 215(11): 1635–9.
Hawkins EC, Basseches J, Berry CR, et al. Demographic,
clinical, and radiographic features of bronchiectasis in
dogs: 316 cases (1988‐2000). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003;
223(11): 1628–35.

VetBooks.ir

31 Canine Chronic Bronchitis

Hawkins EC, Clay LD, Bradley JM, et al. Demographic and
historical findings, including exposure to environmental
tobacco smoke, in dogs with chronic cough. J Vet Intern
Med 2010; 24: 825–31.
Johnson EG, Wisner ER. Advances in respiratory
imaging. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2007;
37: 879–900.
Light RW, ed. Pleural Diseases. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2007, p. 73.
Lux CN, Archer TM, Lunsford KV. Gastroesophageal
reflux and laryngeal dysfunction in a dog. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2012; 240(9): 1100–3.
Mantis P, Lamb CR, Boswood A. Assessment of the
accuracy of thoracic radiography in the diagnosis of
canine chronic bronchitis. J Small Anim Pract 1998;
39: 518–20.

Oyama MA, Singletary GE. The use of NT‐proBNP assay
in the management of canine patients with heart disease.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2010; 40: 545–58.
Padrid P. Chronic lower airway disease in the dog and cat.
Probl Vet Med 1992; 4(2): 320–44.
Padrid PA, Hornof WJ, Kurpershoek CJ, et al. Canine
bronchitis: a pathophysiologic evaluation of 18 cases.
J Vet Intern Med 1990; 4: 172–80.
Ryan NA, Birring SS, Gibson PG. Gabapentin for refractory
chronic cough: a randomized, double‐blind, placebo‐
controlled trial. Lancet 2012; 380(9853): 1583–9.
Singh MK, Johnson LR, Kittleson MD, et al.
Bronchomalacia in dogs with myxomatous mitral valve
degeneration. J Vet Intern Med 2012; 26(2): 312–19.
Swimmer RA, Rozanski EA. Evaluation of the 6‐minute
walk test in pet dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2011; 25: 405–6.

311

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

313

32
Pulmonary Thromboembolism
Robert Goggs, BVSc, PhD, DACVECC, DECVECC
Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine Companion Animal Hospital, Ithaca, NY, USA

Pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE) refers to obstruc­
tion of a pulmonary vessel or vessels by a thrombus and
encompasses both in situ thrombus formation and
embolization from elsewhere in the vasculature. In small
animals, PTE is the preferred term because these mecha­
nisms are difficult to differentiate clinically and both
share a common pathophysiology. PTE is associated
with numerous diseases and disorders in small animals
(Table 32.1) and many patients with PTE have more than
one predisposing condition. These underlying condi­
tions can be categorized by how they affect Virchow’s
triad, although formation of thrombi in vivo typically
involves more than one such effect.
The true incidence of PTE in dogs and cats is
unknown but it is probably more common than the lit­
erature suggests. Difficulties definitively diagnosing
PTE antemortem, limited numbers of postmortem
examinations being performed, and rapid postmortem
fibrinolysis mean some cases are missed. In a retro­
spective case series of 29 dogs with confirmed PTE,
there was antemortem suspicion in less than 40% of
dogs in which it was subsequently identified at nec­
ropsy. This study suggested a prevalence of PTE in dogs
of 0.9% over a 10‐year period. In cats, PTE was sus­
pected in ~25% cats with respiratory signs and in only
14% of cats in which it was subsequently diagnosed
postmortem. Subsequently, a 24‐year prevalence of
0.06% was reported for PTE in cats.

­Pathophysiology
Pulmonary thromboembolism frequently results in
hypoxemia, hyperventilation, and dyspnea. Arterial
hypoxemia in patients with PTE is secondary to abnor­
mal ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) ratios within affected
lungs, potentially complicated by diffusion impairment

due to interstitial and alveolar edema. The V/Q mis­
matches occur due to small airway constriction, reduced
surfactant production, and development of pulmonary
edema and atelectasis. Small airway constriction occurs
in both nonperfused and nonembolized areas of lung,
which may lead to airway closure and alveolar collapse.
Surfactant production is reduced in dogs with experi­
mental PTE, leading to fluid transudation into alveoli
(pulmonary edema). Edema may also develop in nonem­
bolized regions due to increased hydrostatic pressure
combined with increased microvascular permeability
resulting from neutrophil activation. Rarely, pulmonary
infarction and pleural effusion may result from complete
occlusion of distal pulmonary vascular branches.
The cardiovascular consequences of PTE are depend­
ent upon the extent of vessel occlusion. There is substan­
tial reserve capacity in the pulmonary vasculature, which
likely accounts for the subclinical nature of many PTE
events. In healthy dogs, >60% of the pulmonary vascula­
ture must be occluded before alterations in pulmonary
vascular resistance (PVR) reduce pulmonary arterial flow.
Reflex vasoconstriction secondary to alveolar hypoxia,
humoral factors such as serotonin released from acti­
vated platelets, and neurogenic reflexes may also contrib­
ute. Significant pulmonary vascular occlusion leads to
pulmonary hypertension and increased right ventricle
(RV) afterload. Severe, acute changes in RV afterload
result in dilation and dysfunction. As the RV dilates, the
interventricular septum shifts leftward, impairing filling
and reducing diastolic distensibility, a concept known as
ventricular interdependence. Consequent reductions in
left ventricular filling decrease cardiac output and may
lead to signs of forward failure (hypotension, cardiogenic
shock). If the patient survives an acute crisis but has
residual pulmonary hypertension, then clinical signs of
backward failure (hepatomegaly, ascites, pleural effusion)
may develop over the medium to long term.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

314

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

Table 32.1 Recognized risk factors for PTE disease processes with a known association with thromboembolic disease in the dog. Those
conditions also associated with an increased risk in the cat are marked by an asterisk. Proposed mechanisms for these risk factors are
included

Disease process risk factor

Hypercoagulable
state

*Corticosteroid administration

✓

Diabetes mellitus

✓

Dirofilariasis

✓

*DIC (secondary to other disease)

✓

Endocarditis
(tricuspid/pulmonic)

✓

✓

*Feline infectious peritonitis

✓

✓

Hyperadrenocorticism

✓

Hypothyroidism

✓

*IMHA

✓

*Indwelling venous catheters

Vascular flow
abnormalities/stasis

Endothelial injury/
dysfunction

✓

?
✓

✓
✓

Myocardial disease

✓

✓

*Neoplasia

✓

✓

*Pancreatitis

✓

*Protein‐losing enteropathy

✓

*Renal amyloidosis/PLN

✓

*Sepsis

✓

*Surgery/trauma

✓

✓

✓
✓

✓

Source: Adapted from Goggs et al. [1].
DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; IMHA, immune‐mediated hemolytic anemia; PLN, protein‐losing nephropathy.

­Clinical Signs
The clinical signs of PTE are variable, inconsistent, and
nonspecific. The degree of physiologic impairment and
thus the severity of clinical signs reflect both the mag­
nitude of the PTE and the patient’s ability to compen­
sate. The most common signs are dyspnea, tachypnea,
and depression. Other signs include coughing, hemop­
tysis, cyanosis, syncope, collapse, and sudden death. In
dyspneic patients, physical examination may reveal
harsh lung sounds and crackles suggestive of pulmo­
nary edema. Occasionally, lung and heart sounds may
be muffled due to pleural effusion or in very rare cases
pneumothorax. In eupneic patients, lung field ausculta­
tion will likely be normal. On cardiac auscultation,
tachycardia with a split second heart sound may be
noted or, more commonly, a loud second heart
sound associated with pulmonary hypertension. Signs
compatible with backward heart failure (jugular disten­
sion or pulsation, ascites) or forward heart failure (poor
peripheral pulse quality, pallor, prolonged capillary
refill time) may be present. Complicating the picture

may be clinical signs attributable to the predisposing
intercurrent disease.
Clinicians should suspect PTE in patients with no
history of cardiopulmonary disease who develop res­
piratory distress acutely, particularly where known risk
factors exist.

­Diagnosis
Suggested Diagnostic Approach
Pulmonary thromboembolism is commonly suspected
but infrequently conclusively diagnosed, probably
because of variability in clinical signs, low test specific­
ity, and limited availability of definitive diagnostics.
Establishing a clear diagnosis of PTE remains a challenge
in veterinary medicine, even with a logical approach. In
human medicine, where definitive diagnostics are widely
available, the major challenge is to identify which patients
to prioritize for definitive imaging studies. This need has
driven the development of clinical prediction rules and
diagnostic algorithms.

32 Pulmonary Thromboembolism

VetBooks.ir

Clinical signs consistent with PTE

Known predisposing condition

No known predisposing condition

Thoracic radiography

Has investigation of underlying
disease been undertaken?

No
Normal

Consistent with but
not definitive for PTE
CBC/Chem/UA
Echo/Abdo US/LDDT
Arterial BG analysis

Yes

No
predisposition
identified

Alternative
diagnosis
made

Other appropriate diagnostic tests

Normal

Hypoxemia
Hypocapnia
High A-a gradient

Predisposing
condition
identified

Definitive for PTE:
Regional oligemia
Westermark sign

Treat
accordingly

Diagnose
PTE

Echocardiography

D-dimer or
TEG or
AT Level

Treat
accordingly
RV dilatation
RV hypokinesis
Septal deviation
Pulmonary hypertension

RVOT/PA
Thrombus

Normal D-dimer
or
Normal TEG
or
Normal AT Level

Consistent with other disease

Arterial BG
analysis

High D-dimer
or
Hypercoagulable TEG
or
Reduced AT Level

D-dimer or
TEG or
AT Level

Normal

High D-dimer
or
Hypercoagulable TEG
or
Reduced AT Level

Diagnose
PTE

Normal D-dimer
or
Normal TEG
or
Normal AT Level

Treat
symptomatically
Treat
symptomatically

V/Q
Scanning

Pulmonary
angiography

Diagnose
PTE

CT pulmonary
angiography

Normal

Consistent with other disease

Treat
symptomatically

Treat
accordingly

Figure 32.1 A possible diagnostic algorithm for the investigation of small animals with suspected PTE.

Patients at high risk must be identified for expedited
diagnostic evaluation. A possible diagnostic schema for
small animals is proposed in Figure 32.1. All patients
with consistent clinical signs should undergo thoracic
radiography, ideally in combination with arterial blood
gas analysis. Occasionally, thoracic radiography will be
diagnostic but most patients will require additional
tests, particularly if arterial blood gas analysis is con­
sistent with PTE. Echocardiography is a reasonable
next step. It is noninvasive, can be performed bedside,
and eliminates key differentials, clarifying which
patients require advanced imaging. Cardiac biomarkers
may also contribute to decision making. In patients
with clinical signs but without known risk factors,
coagulation testing with D‐dimers, antithrombin (AT)
activity, or thromboelastography (TEG) may help
identify patients with evidence of thrombin activa­
­
tion, AT depletion or hypercoagulability, respectively.
Recognition of a dyspneic, hypercoagulable patient
should prompt reevaluation for predisposing condi­
tions and mandates imaging studies for PTE.

Initial Diagnostics
Survey Thoracic Radiography

Up to 30% dogs with PTE have normal thoracic radio­
graphs, but most small animals in the literature with
confirmed PTE had abnormalities visible. This finding
might reflect an inability to detect small emboli, as
abnormal thoracic radiographs might only occur in
severe PTE. It has therefore been suggested that PTE
should be suspected in all markedly dyspneic patients
with normal thoracic radiographs. Similarly, where risk
factors are present, PTE should be considered as the
cause of unexplained pulmonary infiltrates on thoracic
radiographs.
Various radiographic abnormalities can be seen in
PTE. Pulmonary infiltrates are the most common
­finding and are typically alveolar or alveolar‐interstitial
in appearance, present focally or multifocally. These
infiltrates likely represent edema, atelectasis, hemorrhage
or infarction and often have indistinct borders.
Hypovascular lung areas are hyperlucent regions

315

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

VetBooks.ir

316

Figure 32.2 A lateral thoracic radiograph from a dog with
pulmonary thromboembolism showing an area of regional
oligemia (Westermark sign) affecting the right caudal lung field.

­representing zones of reduced blood flow distal to sites
of vascular occlusion. This finding, known as the
Westermark sign (Figure 32.2), is rare but pathogno­
monic for PTE. Pulmonary infarcts appear as distinct
pleural‐based, wedge‐shaped densities. Other potential
abnormalities include uneven vessel diameter, pulmonary
arterial enlargement, lobar vein or artery attenuation,
pleural effusion, and right‐sided cardiomegaly.
Arterial Blood Gas Analysis

Typical blood gas abnormalities associated with PTE in
dogs are hypoxemia, hypocapnia, and an increased A‐a
gradient. In some cases, this hypoxemia may respond
poorly to oxygen therapy due to intrapulmonary shunt.
These findings are not specific for PTE, however, and
should be interpreted in light of other data. Similarly,
normal blood gas values do not rule out PTE. Using the
A‐a gradient may be more sensitive than solely looking
for hypoxemia, since the degree of hypoxemia is propor­
tional to the extent of thromboembolic occlusion. Arterial
blood gas analysis may be useful in assessing disease
severity, monitoring response to therapy, and determin­
ing prognosis. The ratio of PaO2:PaCO2 in PTE patients
was highly predictive of outcome in a recent human study.
Blood gas values in cats with PTE have not been reported
to date but are expected to mirror those in dogs.
Risk Profiling
Antithrombin and D‐Dimers

Antithrombin inhibits coagulation factors IIa, IXa, Xa,
XIa, and XIIa. In patients with active thrombin produc­
tion, plasma AT activity is reduced by consumption and
urinary AT loss has been linked to the hypercoagulable
states associated with protein‐losing nephropathy and

hypercortisolemia. Measuring patient levels of AT
activity may allow thrombosis risk stratification. Based
on extrapolations from humans, reductions of AT
­activity between 50% and 75% moderately increase risk,
while activities below 30–50% markedly increase
thrombosis risk.
Increased plasma D‐dimer concentrations indicate
plasmin‐mediated cleavage of factor XIII cross‐linked
fibrin. Since D‐dimers require activation of both throm­
bin and plasmin for their formation, they are consid­
ered more specific for thrombosis than fibrin
degradation products (FDPs). Rapid, accurate, bedside
D‐dimer assays are integral to decision making in
humans with possible PTE. People with high clinical
probability scores (previous TE disease, deep vein
thrombosis, dyspnea) undergo thoracic imaging with­
out a D‐dimer test. For all other people presenting with
compatible clinical signs, rapid, quantitative D‐dimer
enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) are
performed prior to selection of further diagnostic test­
ing. Positive D‐dimer tests prompt thoracic imaging,
while negative tests suggest no further investigation for
PTE is required.
Similar guidelines for small animals cannot be formu­
lated currently because we lack sufficient data and, more
fundamentally, a convenient and highly accurate D‐
dimer assay is not available for small animals. Although
semiquantitative latex agglutination D‐dimer assays per­
form well for disseminated intravascular coagulation
(DIC) in dogs, their sensitivity and specificity for throm­
bosis vary widely depending on the cut‐off used. As such,
this assay may be best suited to testing patients with a
high index of suspicion for PTE, and a cut‐off of >1000 ng/
mL to minimize false positives. Unfortunately, the latex
agglutination assay has limited availability and is labora­
tory based.
Point‐of‐care (POC) tests allow determination of ana­
lyte values at the bedside, enabling them to be used for
clinical decision making in unstable patients. Several
canine D‐dimer POC tests have been evaluated for the
detection of D‐dimers in patients with thromboembolic
disease. Of these, the NycoCard system performed the
best, but all of these assays suffer from a lack of specific­
ity for thromboembolic disease. Irrespective of the assay
chosen, D‐dimers should be evaluated within 1–2 hours
of the suspected embolic event because in experimental
canine PTE, D‐dimers were increased by 30 minutes,
peaked at >2000 ng/mL at 1–2 hours before falling back
to control levels after 24 hours.
Viscoelastic Coagulation Testing

Whole‐blood tests of coagulation such as thromboelas­
tography (TEG), thromboelastometry (ROTEM),
and the Sonoclot system graphically represent the

VetBooks.ir

32 Pulmonary Thromboembolism

Figure 32.3 Tissue factor‐activated
thromboelastography tracings from a
patient with PTE secondary to PLE. The
black tracing is a markedly
hypercoagulable TEG run at the time of the
patient’s PTE. Note the shortened reaction
(R) and clot formation (K) times and the
increased alpha angle (α), maximum
amplitude (MA), and clot elasticity (G)
values. The patient was treated with low
molecular weight heparin, which
significantly prolonged the R and K times
and reduced the alpha and MA values
(green tracing). A baseline (pink) is
displayed for comparison. After stabilizing
on therapy, a normal‐looking TEG tracing
was produced (orange tracing).

10 millimeters

Events at time of trace
At time of PTE

R time
(min)
3.0–8.0

K time
(min)
3.1–6.7

α angle
(°)
28.0–58.9

2.3

0.8

MA
(mm)
38.8–59.0

G
(d/s)
3.2–7.2 k

78.6

77.1

16.8 k
2.1 k
5.3 k

On LMWH

7.2

9.5

26.1

29.8

PLE stable on Tx

4.2

2.8

54.9

51.4

­viscoelastic properties of clotting blood during clot for­
mation and lysis. These different systems produce com­
parable but not interchangeable results. These
techniques have been validated in small animals and are
now commonly used in veterinary medicine. Using
TEG/ROTEM, hypercoagulability has been identified
in multiple settings in veterinary patients.
Hypercoagulable patients produce characteristic
TEG/ROTEM tracings (Figure 32.3). These patients
typically have short reaction and clot formation times,
steep alpha angles, and large maximum amplitudes. In
people, MA values derived from conventional TEG and
from a rapid‐TEG assay have been demonstrated to
predict thrombotic risk in human surgical patients, and
risk of PTE following trauma. It is unclear which (if any)
of these parameters best relates to thrombotic risk in
veterinary patients. It is also essential to recognize that
preanalytical variables such as patient hematocrit and
fibrinogen concentration in addition to sample han­
dling and assay parameters contribute to the final TEG/
ROTEM tracings.
To date, only one study has reported viscoelastic coag­
ulation testing in small animal PTE. That study did not
identify any correlation between TEG variables and PTE,
but the sample size was limiting. A recent study evalu­
ated TEG in dogs with thrombosis in various anatomic
locations. This study found that although the TEG G‐
values of dogs with thrombosis were significantly greater
than controls, half of the dogs’ TEG tracings were clas­
sified as normocoagulable, suggesting that TEG may not
have the discriminant power necessary to diagnose
PTE. These tests likely have a place in the diagnostic
work‐up of possible PTE patients, but more work is
needed to identify which test protocols and which

parameters are most predictive of thrombotic risk. The
ability of these tests to identify hypercoagulability at the
point of care suggests they help identify at‐risk patients
who require further investigation, particularly once
properly integrated into diagnostic algorithms.
Plasma‐Based Coagulation Assays

Tests including the prothrombin time (PT), activated
partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), activated clotting
time (ACT), and fibrinogen concentration are of limited
value in PTE because they may be normal, and any
abnormalities are nonspecific. Similarly, abnormalities
of FDPs have not been widely identified in small animals
with PTE. These molecules indicate plasmin‐mediated
degradation of fibrinogen or fibrin has occurred.
Increased FDP concentrations are present in thrombo­
sis, but also occur in liver failure, dysfibrinogenemia,
excessive fibrinolysis, and DIC, making FDPs less spe­
cific than D‐dimers.
Complete Blood Counts/Serum Biochemistry

These tests are not discriminating for PTE, but serum
biochemical testing may help identify predisposing con­
ditions such as hyperadrenocorticism, protein‐losing
nephropathy, diabetes mellitus, or hypothyroidism.
Complete blood counts may help identify a nonspecific
inflammatory leukogram or myeloproliferative disor­
ders such as polycythemia or essential thrombocytosis
that can predispose to thrombosis. Secondary thrombo­
cytosis does not predispose to PTE, although primary
essential thrombocythemia may, particularly if other
risk factors exist. Thrombocytopenia or schistocytosis,
as markers of DIC, may increase the index of suspicion
for PTE.

317

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

artery (PA). To date, RV hypokinesis (apical sparing) has
not been confirmed in dogs or cats with PTE.

VetBooks.ir

318

Cardiac Biomarkers

Figure 32.4 Long‐axis four‐chamber echocardiographic view
showing a pendulous thrombus (arrowhead) adherent to the roof
of the right atrium in this patient. LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle;
RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle.

Cardiac Function Testing
Echocardiography

In people, echocardiography is not a routine diagnostic
test for PTE, although case registries report echocardiog­
raphy is performed in 47–74% patients. Although many
echocardiography studies are normal in PTE, they may be
diagnostic if cardiac or RV outflow tract thrombi are pre­
sent (Figure 32.4). Where PTE is present, echocardiogra­
phy can quantify the hemodynamic consequences of PTE
and provides valuable prognostic information to guide
patient management. Echocardiography can also identify
differential diagnoses such as cardiomyopathy, endocar­
ditis or pericardial tamponade noninvasively.
Typical echocardiographic findings in humans with
PTE include right ventricular dilation and hypokinesis,
septal flattening and paradoxical septal motion, diastolic
left ventricular impairment, pulmonary arterial hyper­
tension, right ventricular hypertrophy, and patency of
the foramen ovale. The degree of right ventricular dys­
function is related to the cross‐sectional area of the pul­
monary vasculature affected; occlusion of >30% is
frequently associated with RV hypokinesis. In people
with severe PTE, the apex of the RV appears to be spared
the hypokinesis that affects the remainder of the right
ventricular free wall (RVFW). This apical sparing (the
McConnell sign) is highly specific for the diagnosis of
PTE in people.
There are currently few data regarding echocardiogra­
phy in canine PTE because in recent retrospective stud­
ies <20% of dogs underwent echocardiography. However,
it is reasonable to suspect many small animals with PTE
will have abnormal echocardiograms. Typically reported
findings in small animals include right atrial and ventric­
ular enlargement, paradoxical septal motion, pulmonary
hypertension, and thrombi in the heart or pulmonary

In humans, echocardiographic RV dysfunction sec­
ondary to PTE is associated with elevated cardiac tro­
ponin (cTn) concentrations. A recent metaanalysis of
20 studies suggested that humans with PTE and an
increased cTn level are at high risk of short‐term death
and adverse events. Cardiac troponins are increased in
veterinary patients with primary, ischemic, congenital
and degenerative cardiac and pericardial diseases, but
also in gastric dilation‐volvulus (GDV) syndrome, sep­
sis, trauma, uremia, and hyperthyroidism. Serum cTn
concentrations are related to the magnitude of myo­
cardial injury in myocarditis, GDV syndrome, and
blunt chest trauma. In dogs with PTE secondary to
dirofilariasis, cTnI values were significantly higher
than in controls, and in dogs with experimental PTE,
cTnI levels increase in proportion to the severity of
occlusion as indicated by PVR and mean pulmonary
artery pressure (MPAP). There is only one report on
cTnI in dogs with PTE. In that small study, patients
with CT‐confirmed PTE did not have significantly
increased cTnI values compared to dogs without PTE,
but the sample size was limiting.
It seems unlikely that cTn values will be sufficiently
specific to enhance the diagnosis of PTE and they may
prove most valuable in assessing PTE severity and pre­
dicting complications, rather than differentiating PTE
from other disease processes. In contrast to D‐dimers,
which peak at 1–2 hours after PTE, cTnI levels peak at
eight hours post embolism in people and are most diag­
nostically accurate at this time point. The availability of
POC tests for cTn in dogs makes accurate timing of this
assay a viable proposition.
Atrial and B‐type natriuretic peptides are produced by
cardiac muscle and released in response to volume over­
load, hypertrophy, and hypoxia to elicit natriuresis and
vasodilation. Assays of BNP or the metabolic by‐product
NT‐proBNP are used to diagnose cardiac disease, differ­
entiate respiratory from cardiac disease, assess severity,
and guide management. In PTE, NT‐proBNP concentra­
tions are closely related to the degree of RV dysfunction,
and this likely underpins their relationship with adverse
events and outcome in people with PTE. No studies on
NT‐proBNP measurement in small animal PTE have
been reported to date. As with cTn, it is likely that con­
centrations of NT‐proBNP will be increased. The discri­
minant ability of this test in small animal PTE remains an
open question. Currently, the principal limitations of the
NT‐proBNP test are the ex vivo stability of the analyte
which is time and temperature dependent, and the lack
of a POC test for dogs. Once a bedside test for dogs

VetBooks.ir

32 Pulmonary Thromboembolism

becomes available, NT‐proBNP may become integral to
the evaluation of these patients.
Electrocardiography

Electrocardiographic abnormalities are likely uncom­
mon in acute PTE. The most likely alteration is sinus
tachycardia secondary to sympathetic stimulation asso­
ciated with hypotension or hypoxemia. Myocardial
hypoxia or cardiac hypertrophy may cause ST segment
depression or slurring. Only with chronic pulmonary
hypertension will ECG morphology changes occur,
reflecting right ventricular compromise (right axis devi­
ation, increased amplitude of S‐, T‐ or P‐waves).

­Definitive Diagnostic Imaging
Computed Tomography Pulmonary Angiography
Rapid, multislice helical CTPA is key to diagnosis of PTE
in human medicine, and is now integral to PTE diagnosis
in small animals too. These studies are obtained by per­
forming rapid, spiral thoracic CT concurrent with bolus
injection of contrast media. The contrast agent is infused
through a peripheral catheter using a pressure injector,
linked electronically to the scanner to ensure peak
enhancement of the pulmonary arteries.
Diagnostic criteria for PTE using CTPA are failure to
enhance the entire arterial lumen due to occlusive filling
defects, partial filling defects surrounded by contrast
material, producing the “polo mint” or “railway track”
signs, and peripheral intraluminal filling defects that
form acute angles with the arterial wall (Figure 32.5). A

Figure 32.5 A transverse CT angiographic image of the heart and
main pulmonary arteries from a cat with PTE. Right is on the left of
the image. There is a strongly attenuating signal from contrast
medium in the heart and in the left pulmonary artery (arrow), but
there is substantially lower attenuation by the right pulmonary
artery (arrowhead) due to an occlusive thrombus, which has
prevented the entry of contrast material.

normal CTPA study essentially rules out PTE as the
cause of the patient’s respiratory distress, unless the
index of suspicion is very high.
Single‐channel CTPA has been used for experimental
PTE diagnosis and investigation of PTE following total
hip arthroplasty. No emboli were identified in the arthro­
plasty patients, but the authors stated that the CTPA
protocol enabled consistent diagnostic quality acquisi­
tion visualization down to fifth‐generation PA branches.
Multidetector row CT is also increasingly available in
veterinary medicine. These multislice CT scanners per­
mit imaging of the whole thorax in sedated patients
without the need for breath‐hold techniques to eliminate
motion artifact. Multidetector CTPA has been reported
in dogs using 16‐slice and 64‐ slice scanners, and proto­
cols to maximize PA contrast enhancement have been
published. Although the majority of publications to date
have focused on normal patients, multidetector CT angi­
ography has been successfully used to detect PTE in
experimental dogs, to identify a descending aortic
thrombus secondary to spirocercosis in a dog and in
dogs with PTE secondary to immune‐mediated hemo­
lytic anemia (IMHA).
MRI and Clot‐Labeling Techniques
The use of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the
diagnosis of PTE is still in its infancy, but recently this
technology has been used for angiography in dogs. The
safe, noninvasive nature of MRI offers potential advan­
tages over CT – lack of ionizing radiation and no need
for iodinated contrast material. However, the need for
cardiac gating and, more importantly, a requirement for
general anesthesia limit the utility of MRI‐based tech­
niques in unstable veterinary patients. Nevertheless, MR
angiography appears comparable to CTPA in experi­
mental studies in dogs.
Direct thrombus imaging techniques have also been
developed. Clots can be imaged by identifying the
thrombus degradation product methemoglobin via a
heavily T1‐weighted image. Clot‐labeling techniques
utilizing radiolabeled antibodies against P‐selectin, D‐
dimers or GPIIIa have been performed experimentally in
dogs. The feasibility and utility of these techniques
remain uncertain and they may be best suited to more
stable patients, patients in whom CTPA is equivocal or
those with specific contraindications to iodinated con­
trast material use.
Other Imaging Modalities
Selective pulmonary angiography is now largely obso­
lete in human medicine. Since selective pulmonary
angiography involves the risk of general anesthesia and

319

VetBooks.ir

320

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

the technical difficulty of PA catheter placement, it has
been largely supplanted by CTPA in small animals.
Ventilation–perfusion (V–Q) scanning has been used
for the detection of PTE in small animals. Perfusion
scanning is performed after IV injection of techne­
tium‐labeled macroaggregated albumin (99mTc‐MAA).
Inhomogenous pulmonary vascular distribution of activ­
ity from the decay of 99mTc‐MAA is consistent with PTE.
Although radionuclide labeling of inspired air to assess
ventilation is possible, typically perfusion scans are com­
pared against thoracic radiographs to identify pulmo­
nary pathology. Photopenic wedge‐shaped, pleural‐based
defects with a lobar or segmental distribution are classic
for PTE, but entire lung lobes may appear photopenic, or
if multiple small emboli are present, then a mottled pat­
tern may result.
Computed tomography pulmonary angiography has
largely replaced V–Q scanning in human medicine. A
prospective evaluation of PTE diagnosis (PIOPED II)
suggested that V–Q scanning was indicated for just a
small subset of the population presenting with suspected
PTE. In light of this, and the limited availability of equip­
ment and expertise, it is likely few V–Q scans will be per­
formed in small animals in future.

­Management
In people, risk stratification based on clinical assess­
ment, oxygenation status, anatomic clot size, cardiac
function, and biomarkers underpins successful treat­
ment. Anticoagulant therapy alone is recommended for
low‐risk patients, while patients with hypotension sec­
ondary to PTE are treated with thrombolytics followed
by anticoagulation. The optimal strategy for manage­
ment of PTE in small animals is not known because of
the scarcity of specific information in the veterinary lit­
erature. Tailored supportive treatment for PTE patients
is easy to recommend. When PTE is definitively diag­
nosed or the index of suspicion is sufficiently high then
antithrombotic therapy is also warranted. Successful
treatment for acute PTE is typically followed by chronic
antithrombotic therapy and should be accompanied by
management of any underlying predisposing disorder.
Supportive Therapy
For some patients, PTE is rapidly fatal irrespective of
therapy. In normal dogs, thrombi lyze rapidly so sup­
portive therapy buys time for fibrinolysis to occur. All
dyspneic patients should receive oxygen therapy. Positive
pressure ventilation (PPV) should be considered as a last
resort if oxygen therapy cannot resolve hypoxemia, with
efforts made to minimize the detrimental impact of PPV

on PVR, which will already be increased in these patients.
Caution must be exercised with fluid therapy, because
RV overdistension impairs coronary perfusion and LV
preload. Echocardiography to determine RV filling may
help determine if fluid administration is likely to be
beneficial.
Theophylline may be beneficial as a bronchodilator
and through pulmonary vasodilation, improved dia­
phragmatic contractility, and reduced respiratory muscle
fatigue. Positive inotropes such as dobutamine may be
necessary in cardiogenic shock, but can increase MPAP
and cause arrhythmias. Reflex pulmonary vasoconstric­
tion increases PVR in PTE. Inhaled nitric oxide (NO)
acts as a vasodilator, decreasing MPAP and improving
hemodynamics in PTE, but has not been used clinically
in small animals as yet, and is cost‐prohibitive. In dogs,
sildenafil has beneficial effects in pulmonary hyperten­
sion, and in canine PTE models it reduces MPAP through
selective pulmonary arterial vasodilation. In people,
sildenafil has beneficial effects in both acute PTE and the
treatment of chronic PTE‐induced pulmonary hyperten­
sion. Although sildenafil has not been reported in small
animal PTE to date, it should be considered if pulmonary
hypertension is documented echocardiographically.
Potential side‐effects include vomiting and systemic
hypotension, and co‐administration with heparin may
increase the risk of hemorrhage.
Thrombolysis
Therapeutic thrombolysis is the administration of supra­
physiologic doses of plasminogen activators systemically
or directly at the thrombus site to accelerate plasmin gen­
eration and induce thrombus dissolution. Thrombolysis
in PTE aims to reverse right heart failure, improve sys­
temic and pulmonary hemodynamics, limit neurohu­
moral activation, and reduce recurrence. Available drugs
include alteplase, reteplase, and tenecteplase. These drugs
have distinct pharmacokinetics, thrombolytic activities,
and fibrin specificities. Veterinary experience with throm­
bolytics is limited and is predominantly in the field of
feline aortic thromboembolism (ATE). A recent prospec­
tive clinical trial of tissue plasminogen activator (t‐PA) in
cats with ATE highlighted the risks of side‐effects associ­
ated with these agents. Although efficacious in >50% cats,
all 11 patients in the study suffered side‐effects, many
attributable to reperfusion injury.
The t‐PA products are fibrin specific, activating
fibrin‐bound plasminogen more rapidly and more effec­
tively than plasminogen in circulation. At pharmaco­
logic concentrations, however, a systemic lytic state
can still occur and all t‐PA products are associated with
a risk of hemorrhage in humans. Alteplase has the short­
est half‐life of the available recombinant thrombolytics.

VetBooks.ir

32 Pulmonary Thromboembolism

Alteplase has been successfully used in one dog with
ATE, and experimentally induced canine PTE has been
treated with t‐PA therapy.
Currently, the American College of Clinical Pharma­
cology (ACCP) recommends thrombolytic therapy
for people with hypotension secondary to acute PE.
Thrombolysis in PTE in the absence of hypotension is
not currently recommended, but could be considered in
patients with echocardiographic evidence of cardiac dys­
function or in those with high cTnI or NT‐proBNP con­
centrations. A recent trial of normotensive PTE patients
with biomarker and echocardiographic evidence of myo­
cardial damage and dysfunction evaluated thrombolysis
with tenecteplase. Thrombolysis in these patients sig­
nificantly reduced the rate of death due to hemodynamic
collapse, but at the cost of a significant increase in major
bleeding events.
Where thrombolytic agents are used, the ACCP rec­
ommend they be administered over a short time period
via a peripheral catheter rather than a PA catheter. Case
registry data suggest thrombolytics are used in only 30%
of people with massive PTE. In veterinary medicine, no
consensus on their administration exists and clinicians
must determine the potential benefits and risks of
administration for individual patients. Recent advances
in small animal interventional radiology may provide
novel methods or routes for thrombolysis in future.
Based on the ACCP guidelines, thrombolytic therapy
should only be considered in veterinary patients with
hemodynamically unstable acute PTE and where con­
tinuous hemodynamic monitoring is available. In appro­
priate cases, fibrin‐specific drugs with short half‐lives
(e.g., alteplase) are preferred.
Antithrombotic Strategies
In PTE anticoagulants and antiplatelet agents are
administered to minimize thrombus propagation,
which can be stimulated by embolization, and to reduce
risk of recurrence. However, the optimal antithrom­
botic strategy for small animals is not known. Some
suggest that PTE should be managed with anticoagu­
lant drugs and that antiplatelet agents are not appropri­
ate. Viewing arterial and venous thrombosis as separate
pathophysiologic entities is likely an oversimplification,
however, and there is evidence of overlapping efficacy
of antiplatelet and anticoagulant agents in the treat­
ment of both venous and arterial thromboembolic con­
ditions. Platelets are integral to the cell‐based model of
hemostasis, and thrombocytosis is associated with an
increased risk of PTE in people. In venous thrombosis,
tissue factor‐mediated secondary coagulation precedes
platelet activation, but both arms of the hemostatic sys­
tem are activated, which correlates with the architec­

tural and pathophysiologic features shared by both
venous and arterial thrombi.
Anticoagulants remain the mainstay of antithrombotic
therapy for people with PTE, however. In people with
PTE, the ACCP recommends initial parenteral antico­
agulation with low molecular weight heparin (LMWH)
or fondaparinux except where renal insufficiency, throm­
bolytic therapy or poor perfusion mandate the use of IV
unfractionated heparin (UFH). Ongoing anticoagulation
for people with PTE is recommended for three months,
although this may be extended in certain cases. Since the
advent of the orally active direct Xa inhibitors and direct
thrombin inhibitors, most people are now maintained on
these newer medications. The direct oral anticoagulants
(DOACs) have equivalent efficacy to warfarin but are
associated with significantly lower bleeding risk.
To date, there are no clinical trials of anticoagulants in
PTE in small animals on which to base recommenda­
tions. Although there is not universal consensus on dos­
age, frequency of administration or monitoring strategy
for antithrombotics in small animals, ongoing efforts by
the American College of Veterinary Emergency and
Critical Care led to guidelines being published in January
2019. As a result of improved understanding and the
availability of the DOACs, long‐term anticoagulation in
veterinary medicine is becoming increasingly common.
The narrow therapeutic index of warfarin has led to
increasing use of the DOACs in dogs and cats. Individual
patient monitoring and dose adjustment of UFH and
LMWH may enhance efficacy and improve safety and is
possible using commonly available assays.
Anticoagulants

Unfractionated heparin, a heterogenous mixture of poly­
saccharides, complexes with and amplifies the inhibitory
activity of AT against factor IIa (thrombin) and factor
Xa, although factors IXa, XIa, XIIa, and XIII are also
inhibited. Thrombin inactivation prevents fibrin forma­
tion and reduces thrombin‐induced platelet activation.
Variation in the size distribution of heparin molecules in
UFH and unpredictable bioavailability in critical illness
cause variation in heparin dose–responses, necessitating
therapeutic monitoring since severe bleeding complica­
tions can result from exceeding the therapeutic range.
Therapeutic monitoring can be performed using the
ACT, aPTT, thrombin generation, viscoelastic testing, or
anti‐FXa levels. This need for therapeutic monitoring
reduces the cost benefit of UFH, but individually adjusted
dosing may offer benefits over fixed dosing.
Low molecular weight heparins derive from depolym­
erization of UFH and were developed to provide more
consistent pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic (PK/PD)
profiles than UFH. The reduced size of the LMWH poly­
saccharides limits their ability to simultaneously bind AT

321

VetBooks.ir

322

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

and thrombin. Thus, LMWHs are principally anti‐FXa
agents and are probably best monitored with anti‐Xa
assays, although tissue factor (TF)‐activated TEG can
also be used. LMWHs are less protein bound than UFH,
and have more predictable PK profiles and better bioa­
vailability after SC injection. The PK profiles of distinct
LMWHs preparations are not interchangeable, however.
LMWH PKs have been evaluated in normal healthy dogs
and therapeutic anti‐Xa levels extrapolated from people
are achievable. LMWH PKs in cats are less predictable,
however, with frequent administration of high dosages
necessary to achieve target anti‐FXa activities. A recent
study evaluated the ex vivo antithrombotic effect of
enoxaparin in a venous stasis model in cats, comparing it
to anti‐Xa activity. The study found that at peak (but
not at trough) plasma levels, enoxaparin significantly
reduced thrombus formation, but in this model there
was little correlation between antithrombotic effect and
anti‐Xa activity. Clearly, well‐designed clinical studies
evaluating LMWH in naturally occurring PTE in dogs or
cats are urgently needed.
Fondaparinux is a synthetic, AT‐dependent selective
FXa inhibitor with no anti‐FIIa activity. In people with
acute PTE, fondaparinux administration reduces PTE
recurrence rate compared with UFH without increases
in major bleeding, and is at least as effective as enoxapa­
rin in this setting. In dogs to date, fondaparinux has only
been studied in experimental settings. In cats, a recent
dose‐finding study found that SC administration of
0.06–0.20 mg/kg q12h was sufficient to achieve peak
plasma anti‐Xa activity deemed therapeutic in humans.
Warfarin is an oral anticoagulant that inhibits vitamin
K epoxide reductase, interrupting the recycling of vita­
min K epoxide to hydroquinone and depleting the
supply of carboxylated clotting factors II, VII, IX, and X.
Warfarin is the mainstay for oral anticoagulation in peo­
ple but maintaining adequate anticoagulation without
hemorrhagic complications is challenging. The drug
has a narrow therapeutic index, variable patient dose–
response and numerous interactions with other drugs,
necessitating close therapeutic monitoring. As a result,
the Consensus on the Rational Use of Antithrombotics
in Veterinary Critical Care (CURATIVE) guidelines pub­
lished in January 2019 advise against the use of warfarin
in small animals.
The difficulties associated with the clinical use of vita­
min K antagonists generated a need for effective, safe,
novel oral anticoagulants. Rivaroxaban is an oral, small
molecule, direct FXa inhibitor that can inhibit both free
and prothrombinase complex‐associated FXa. This drug
can be monitored using the PT or aPTT. Rivaroxaban
was recently approved by the FDA for PTE following
demonstration of equivalent efficacy to standard therapy
with enoxaparin and warfarin. The pharmacokinetics of

rivaroxaban has been studied in dogs, and it is reported
to be an effective anticoagulant in healthy dogs. Its clini­
cal use has been reported in a small case series, but it has
not been evaluated in a randomized clinical trial.
The oral prodrug dabigatran etexilate is a potent,
reversible direct thrombin inhibitor. This class of drugs
do not require AT as a co‐factor for their anti‐IIa activity
and are also able to inhibit thrombin bound to formed
clot. Dabigatran can be monitored with the PT, aPTT or
the preferred ecarin clotting time (ECT) in canine
plasma. Dabigatran is FDA approved for thromboembo­
lism in AF and in other countries for VTE and has a simi­
lar efficacy and safety profile to warfarin for the treatment
of acute symptomatic VTE. To date, no studies have
examined the effects of dabigatran in small animals.
Antiplatelet Agents

In small animals, antiplatelet agents are principally used
for long‐term oral maintenance therapy or as thrombo­
prophylaxis for at‐risk patients. Oral antiplatelet agents
available for small animals include aspirin, ticlopidine,
and clopidogrel, although concerns over myelotoxicity
associated with ticlopidine have led to it being largely
superseded by clopidogrel. There is limited evidence of
efficacy for either aspirin or clopidogrel in veterinary
medicine, however.
The COX‐1 inhibitor aspirin irreversibly inhibits
platelet thromboxane A2 (TXA2) synthesis, inhibiting
platelet function. Aspirin is the primary antithrombotic
therapy for people with atherosclerotic disease, but the
populations of small animals which would most benefit
from aspirin therapy are unknown. Aspirin has been rec­
ommended for dogs with protein‐losing nephropathy,
nephrotic syndrome, and IMHA. The use of aspirin in
IMHA is contentious, however.
To date, no studies have been performed in veterinary
medicine evaluating the efficacy of aspirin against objec­
tive measures of thrombosis or comparing the efficacy of
aspirin against other antithrombotic therapies, but one
such study is reportedly under way. The dose required to
cause in vitro or ex vivo inhibition of canine platelet
function varies with the assay used, but is in the range of
0.5–20 mg/kg. This wide range may be related to herita­
ble variability in canine thromboxane responsiveness. A
recent study suggested that 1 mg/kg/day aspirin consist­
ently inhibited platelet function in only a third of dogs
and higher dosages may be required to obtain a consist­
ent effect.
The thienopyridines ticlopidine and clopidogrel are
both produgs that rely on active metabolites for their
in vivo efficacy. The active metabolite of clopidogrel
causes cumulative inhibition of platelet function follow­
ing repeated daily administration. In humans, clopi­
dogrel may be marginally more effective than aspirin,

VetBooks.ir

32 Pulmonary Thromboembolism

while combining both agents may produce beneficial
additive effects. The clinical activity and pharmacody­
namics of clopidogrel have been evaluated in cats and in
dogs and significant antiplatelet effects are achievable in
both species. A recent multicenter double‐blinded pro­
spective study comparing aspirin with clopidogrel in cats
with ATE demonstrated superior efficacy for clopidogrel
compared to aspirin, suggesting that clopidogrel should
be the first‐choice antiplatelet agent in cats.
The parenteral GPIIb/IIIa inhibitors abciximab,
­eptifibatide, and tirofiban, which antagonize the platelet
fibrinogen/vWF receptor, have been used in canine
experimental model settings of myocardial infarction
and coronary stent thrombosis. Of these agents, only
abciximab has been used safely in cats. Eptifibatide
causes fatal cardiotoxicity in cats and should be avoided.
All three drugs effectively inhibit canine platelet aggre­
gation, but none has been used in veterinary medicine.
Barriers to their clinical use include cost, risk of hemor­
rhage, and the need for administration by continuous
infusion.

­Conclusion
Despite recent advances in human and veterinary medi­
cine, PTE remains a challenging diagnosis to confirm. A
thorough, logical diagnostic approach should incorpo­
rate assessment of clinical probability, identification of
risk factors and disease biomarkers, and appropriate
application of diagnostic imaging, principally echocardi­
ography and multislice CTPA. Many of these diagnostic
steps remain to be prospectively investigated in veteri­
nary medicine.
Since PTE carries a poor prognosis and is potentially
fatal, the importance of early detection cannot be over­
stated. Once we can more consistently confirm the diag­
nosis of PTE in small animals, therapeutic clinical trials
of thrombolytics, anticoagulants, and antiplatelet agents
will be essential in order to improve our treatment of
this condition. Until such time, therapy for PTE should
consist of close monitoring, good supportive therapy
and judicious, individualized empiric use of thrombolyt­
ics and antithrombotic agents.

­Reference
1 Goggs R, Benigni L, Fuentes VL, Chan DL. Pulmonary

thromboembolism. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2009; 19(1):
30–52.

­Further Reading
Goggs R, Chan DL, Benigni L, et al. 2014. Comparison
of computed tomography pulmonary angiography and
point-of-care tests for pulmonary thromboembolism
diagnosis in dogs. J Small Anim Pract. Apr; 55(4):
190–7.
Jacinto AML, Ridyard AE, Aroch I, et al. 2017.
Thromboembolism in Dogs with Protein-Losing
Enteropathy with Non-Neoplastic Chronic Small
Intestinal Disease. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. May/Jun;
53(3):185–192.

Marschner CB, Kristensen AT, Rozanski EA, et al. 2017.
Diagnosis of canine pulmonary thromboembolism by
computed tomography and mathematical modelling
using haemostatic and inflammatory variables. Vet J.
Nov; 229:6–12.
Yang VK, Cunningham SM, Rush JE, et al. 2016. The use of
rivaroxaban for the treatment of thrombotic
complications in four dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
(San Antonio). Sep; 26(5):729–36.

323

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

325

33
Surgical Approaches to Thoracic Disease
Raegan Wells, DVM, DACVECC
Phoenix Veterinary Referral and Emergency Center, Phoenix, AZ, USA

Thoracotomy is commonly performed in critically ill
small animal patients with disease of the pulmonary
parenchymal structures, intrathoracic cardiovascular
system, pleural space, thoracic wall, mediastinum, or
esophagus. Aside from the underlying disease process,
the thoracotomy procedure has the potential to induce
several negative effects that can be detrimental without
appropriate intensive monitoring and care. This chapter
discusses the pathophysiologic effects of thoracic surgery,
thoracostomy tube care, postoperative monitoring, overall case management strategies, and potential complications incurred in postoperative thoracotomy patients.

­Pathophysiology of Thoracotomy
The most common surgical approaches to the thoracic
cavity include intercostal thoracotomy, median sternotomy, and transdiaphragmatic incisional thoracotomy.
Regardless of technical approach, some pathophysiologic
consequences of entering the thoracic cavity may include
atelectasis, hypoxemia, hypoventilation, hypotension,
hypothermia, cardiac arrhythmias, pain, and continual
pneumothorax or effusion.
The four distending forces of the lungs that prevent
collapse under normal conditions are transpulmonary
pressure (the difference between alveolar and pleural
pressure), tethering of the lungs to the surrounding
structures, pulmonary surfactant, and the nitrogen skeleton. During thoracotomy, there is disruption of the
natural subatmospheric pleural and transpulmonary
pressure. Thoracotomy induces a positive pleural pressure which exceeds the alveolar pressure and this alteration from normal physiology rapidly leads to atelectasis.
Nitrogen wash‐out occurs secondary to oxygen supplementation, which results in absorption atelectasis. This
occurs as the native nitrogen skeleton is washed out by
the greater than 21% FiO2, leading to a loss of the natural

nitrogen skeleton that helps maintain normal alveolar
distension. It is important to emphasize that oxygen supplementation is necessary during the thoracotomy procedure, and strongly recommended in the postoperative
period. Nitrogen wash‐out is, however, an important
pathophysiologic contributing factor to atelectasis in the
thoracotomy patient. Prolonged lateral recumbency may
lead to pressure atelectasis, which results in significant
low ventilation–perfusion (V–Q) mismatching and
intrapulmonary shunting. Hypoxemic pulmonary vasoconstriction is the natural defense mechanism to improve
V–Q mismatching under such conditions. This emphasizes the importance of body positioning and frequent
rotation of recumbent patients in the immediate postoperative period.
Hypoxemia and Hypoventilation
Postthoracotomy hypoxemia can result from many etiologies, including hypoventilation, V–Q mismatching,
and diffusion impairment. Delivery of oxygen (DO2) is
the product of arterial oxygen content (CaO2) and cardiac output. In relation to hypoxemia, arterial oxygen
content is dependent upon hemoglobin concentration
(g/dL) and saturation as well as the partial pressure of
dissolved oxygen (PaO2).
Hypoventilation is defined as a PaCO2 greater than
45 mmHg in the dog or 40 mmHg in the cat. Common
causes of hypoventilation in postthoracotomy patients
include pain, residual anesthetics, respiratory fatigue, loss
of chest wall elasticity, decreased total pulmonary compliance, increased airway resistance, and increased dead
space ventilation. There is an approximate 1:1 ratio to
explain hypoxemia due to hypoventilation. That is, for
every 1. mmHg elevation in PaCO2, there is a corresponding 1.0 mmHg decrease in PaO2. Calculation of the alveolar to arterial oxygen gradient can be performed to rule
out pulmonary pathology as the cause for hypoxemia.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

326

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

Decreased transpulmonary pressure, pain, and recumbency impede proper ventilation via atelectasis and
decreased tidal volume. As previously mentioned, gravitational forces may cause significant atelectasis and decreased
alveolar ventilation within the dependent lung, but perfusion is maintained (or even increased) within these pulmonary segments. The overall net result in this situation is
moderate to low V–Q mismatching and hypoxemia.
Finally, hypoxemia following thoracotomy may also
result from a combination of diffusion impairment and
low V–Q mismatch secondary to reexpansion pulmonary
edema or increased pulmonary vascular hydrostatic pressure. The pulmonary vasculature possesses significant
permeability to protein compared to the extrapulmonary
blood vessels. Since there is less intravascular oncotic
pressure within this vascular circuit, elevated intrapulmonary hydrostatic pressure will favor the movement of
fluid into the alveolar and interstitial space relatively
quickly. Thus, pulmonary hydrostatic pressure is the
main determinant for the development of pulmonary
interstitial fluid accumulation and subsequent edema.
Net filtration in the pleural cavity (pleural effusion) is
dependent upon the capillary hydrostatic pressure of the
visceral and parietal pleura, intrapleural hydrostatic
pressure, plasma oncotic pressure, and intrapleural
oncotic pressure. Unlike the low pulmonary interstitial
to vascular space oncotic gradient, a substantial gradient
is generated within the pleural space. The normal colloid
osmotic pressure (COP) of the pleural space is 3.2 cmH2O
(compared to 24.5–27.0 peripherally) with the average
pleural pressure being –5 cmH2O.

erated idioventricular rhythm, bundle branch blocks,
and ventricular tachycardia.
Hypotension
Postoperative hypotension is a common challenge for
clinicians caring for patients following thoracotomy.
Similar to the transpulmonary pressure gradient, subatmospheric pleural pressure is also important to maintain
vascular distension within the thoracic cavity.
During a normal breath, the elastic recoil of the lungs
upon inhalation allows distension of the large intrathoracic
vessels (caudal and cranial vena cava), promoting venous
return and thus increasing preload. Positive intrathoracic
pressure exerted during exhalation causes mild collapse of
these vessels, resulting in slight changes in pulse pressure
between inspiration and expiration. During mechanical
ventilation, the opposite effect occurs. With positive pressure ventilation, the majority of venous return occurs during expiration, not inspiration. Anesthesia along with
underlying pulmonary pathology often necessitates the use
of positive end‐expiratory pressure (PEEP). Baseline PEEP
is generally set at 5.0 cm H2O, but decreased pulmonary
compliance and atelectasis often require higher values of
PEEP. Constant, low‐grade, positive intrathoracic pressure,
as PEEP increases, further impedes venous return, resulting in significant reductions in cardiac preload. Decreased
preload leads to compromised stroke volume, cardiac output, and subsequent reduced delivery of oxygen. Positive
pressure ventilation also has beneficial effects as it
decreases afterload during inspiration, although this can be
offset by dramatic decreases in preload.

Hypothermia

Pain

Hypothermia is a common occurrence during and
immediately following thoracotomy. With either
median sternotomy or lateral thoracotomy, the pleural
(visceral and parietal) body surface area is exposed to
relatively cool ambient temperatures. This results in
loss of body heat via evaporation and to some extent
convection. Unimpeded hypothermia can have serious
­detrimental cardiovascular, respiratory, acid–base, and
coagulopathic effects.

Postoperative pain control is of critical importance following median sternotomy or lateral thoracotomy. Both
of these procedures induce pain. In addition to surgical
trauma, all postthoracotomy patients have an indwelling
thoracostomy tube(s) that is a frequent source of pain.
Hypoventilation and hypoxemia may be a direct result of
pleurodynia, incisional pain, or thoracostomy tube‐
induced discomfort. Some patients are unwilling or unable to maintain an adequate tidal volume due to painful
thoracic expansion. Hypoventilation secondary to pain
may also contribute to significant atelectasis resulting in
hypoxemia secondary to V–Q mismatching.

Arrhythmias
Cardiac arrhythmias may be observed during and subsequent to thoracotomy. Intraoperative cardiac arrhythmias may result from manual cardiac manipulation
and are typically ventricular in origin. Postoperative
arrhythmias, however, are classically secondary to
underlying pathophysiology including pain, hypoxemia,
or physical irritation from thoracostomy tube(s).
Common arrhythmias include sinus tachycardia, accel-

Continual Effusion and Pneumothorax
The goal of thoracic surgery is generally to palliate or
resolve the underlying disease process to improve cardiopulmonary, vascular, or esophageal function. Often, the
underlying disease process may not be immediately
terminated post thoracotomy, such as chylothorax,
­

VetBooks.ir

33 Surgical Approaches to Thoracic Disease

­pyothorax, or pneumothorax. In such cases, thoracostomy tubes remain in place for several days following
surgery for continual thoracic evacuation and fluid sampling. Occasionally, continual effusion or pneumothorax
occurs postoperatively, exceeding expected volumes.
Predictable pleural effusion secondary to an indwelling thoracostomy tube should approximate 2.0 mL/kg/
day. Fluid production above this may represent continual
disease. Fluid analysis, including cell counts and cytology, can help the clinician assess if the fluid is reflective
of ongoing disease. If cell counts and cytology do not
support ongoing inflammation, infection or neoplasia,
then it is possible that the ongoing fluid production is
related to a systemic vasculitis, low oncotic pressure or
elevated hydrostatic pressure. The pleural space volume
is approximately 100–140 mL/kg in small animals. As
such, when volumes of air or fluid exceed this value, it
can be classified as a continuous process (e.g., continuous pneumothorax).

­Thoracostomy Tubes
Thoracostomy tubes are a mainstay in the management
of postthoracotomy patients. Depending on patient stability, a thoracostomy tube may be placed preoperatively
or intraoperatively. Patients with viscous thoracic effusions or large‐volume pneumothoraces may require
bilateral thoracostomy tube placement.
Conventional thoracostomy tubes consist of large‐bore
plastic tubing made from silicone or polyvinyl chloride.
Soft, small‐bore thoracostomy tubes (e.g., Mila®, Mila
International) that can be placed using a percutaneous
catheter and guidewire are preferred by many emergency
and critical care clinicians. The small bore tubes can be
placed with ease and minimal risk to the patient either pre
or intra-operatively. The smaller diameter low profile
thoracostomy tubes are effective for all disease processes,
including viscous effusions such as pyothorax. A cadaver
study evaluating traditional large bore chest tubes to small
bore tubes in efficiency to remove air, low viscosity fluid
and high viscosity fluid found that small bore tubes were
as effective as large bore tubes. It is the authors’ opinion
that the more traditional larger diameter tubes should be
very rarely utilized, and that these tubes contribute to
patient discomfort without providing any significant
advantage with regards to evacuating the pleural space.

­Postoperative Monitoring
Intensive postoperative monitoring is imperative following thoracotomy. Ideal monitoring would include
electrocardiography, direct arterial blood pressure

measurement, pulse oximetry, and arterial blood gas
analysis, as well as end‐tidal CO2 and tidal volume in
patients requiring continued mechanical ventilation.
Electrocardiography
Electrocardiographic monitoring provides early detection
and continuous monitoring of cardiac arrhythmias.
Postoperative arrhythmias may be observed primarily as a
result of surgical trauma, prior manual cardiac manipulation, or direct pericardial or epicardial irritation from the
indwelling thoracostomy tube. Arrhythmias may also
occur secondary to pain, hypoxemia, hypovolemia, or
electrolyte imbalances. Observation of hemodynamically
significant postoperative atrial or ventricular arrhythmias
necessitates therapeutic intervention including supplemental oxygen therapy, aggressive analgesia, correction of
hypovolemia and electrolyte imbalance, and possibly antiarrhythmic medications. Diagnostic evaluation of postoperative arrhythmias may include electrolyte measurement,
arterial blood gas analysis, and echocardiography.
Arterial Blood Pressure
As mentioned, changes in transpulmonary and pleural
pressures can have significant hemodynamic effects.
Direct arterial blood pressure measurement is the gold
standard for monitoring patient stability and diagnosing
changes in intrathoracic pressure. A sudden reduction in
blood pressure may indicate an acute increase in pleural
pressure, such as pneumothorax, warranting immediate
investigation. Central venous pressure (CVP) monitoring can guide fluid therapy for postthoracotomy patients,
but CVP is known to be affected by changes in intrathoracic pressure due to respiration, PEEP, and abdominal
hypertension as each of these is known to decrease right
ventricular compliance and thus artificially augment
CVP. For these reasons, routine measurement of CVP in
the postoperative patient with significant pleural space
disease is not recommended.
Pulse Oximetry and End‐Tidal CO2
Pulse oximetry can provide valuable information regarding arterial hemoglobin saturation but it can also be
affected by multiple patient factors. End‐tidal CO2
(ETCO2) and tidal volume are helpful monitoring tools
in the postthoracotomy patient requiring extended intubation and mechanical ventilation. Changes in ETCO2
may be the first indicator of acute deterioration such as a
large pulmonary thromboembolism or cardiopulmonary
arrest in these critical patients, emphasizing the importance of capnography.

327

VetBooks.ir

328

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

Arterial Blood Gas Analysis
Arterial blood gas analysis is paramount in patients with
pulmonary dysfunction, as it will provide rapid identification of hypoxemia, hypoventilation, and respiratory
failure. When arterial access is unobtainable, central
venous (ScvO2) or mixed venous (SvO2) oxygen saturation as well as venous CO2 (PvCO2) can be extrapolated
to evaluate respiratory function. Normally, ScvO2 is
10–15% higher than SvO2 but in states of circulatory
shock or failure, these two measurements closely parallel
one another. The normal arterial‐venous gradient for
PCO2 is 4–6 mmHg, but it may approach 10 mmHg in
some patients. This allows for serial ventilatory monitoring via venous blood sampling.

­Postoperative Management
Intense postoperative management following thoracic
surgery comprises adequate analgesia, appropriate
thoracostomy tube care, intravenous fluid therapy, and
intensive nursing care. Supplemental oxygen therapy is
often implemented in the immediate postoperative
period and occasionally continued mechanical ventilation is required.
Analgesia
Optimal analgesic protocols are critical for the postthoracotomy patient to prevent secondary hypoxemia,
hypoventilation, and cardiac arrhythmias. Multimodal
analgesia is preferred to avoid noxious effects of single‐
agent protocols. Combination therapy of systemic analgesics allows for synergistic analgesia and lower dosing
of each chosen drug. Local analgesia including intercostal nerve blocks, incisional diffusion catheters, and
intrapleural infusion of local anesthetics via the thoracostomy tube provides effective adjunctive analgesia.
Intercostal nerve blocks can provide very effective analgesia when utilized for lateral thoracotomy. It is recommended to perform the procedure at the intercostal
space of the incision, one space cranial and one space
caudal to the incision. As discussed later, much of the
postoperative pain seems to be associated with large‐
bore thoracostomy tubes.
Thoracostomy Tube Management and Pleural
Drainage
Thoracostomy tubes generally remain in place
for 12–24 hours post thoracotomy in patients
without ongoing pleural space disease, but certain
­

­circumstances may necessitate maintenance beyond
this ­
timeframe due to continual effusion, residual
pneumothorax, and for therapeutic lavage or delivery
of chemotherapeutics. Pleural drainage may be passive
or active, but active drainage is more commonly implemented in veterinary patients. The normal transpulmonary pressure is 4–8 mmHg, which is equivocal to
5–10 mL of suction in a syringe. Intrapleural infusion,
via the thoracostomy tube, of lidocaine and bupivacaine (1.0 mg/kg each) provides local analgesia following intermittent suction and may be performed
every 4–6 hours. The rationale behind using both lidocaine and bupivacaine is that the lidocaine provides
immediate relief and allows for a more comfortable
infusion of the longer‐acting bupivacaine. This method
of analgesia delivery has been investigated and deemed
safe in patients following pericardectomy.
Intermittent active suction is applied often postoperatively, but continuous active suction may be necessary
for larger volumes of air or effusion which compromise
ventilation. The pleural space in small animals can
accommodate approximately 100–140 mL/kg of fluid or
air. Beyond this volume, continuous pneumothorax or
hydrothorax (usually hemothorax) should be suspected.
Obstruction of the thoracostomy tube may rarely occur,
depending on tube diameter and viscosity of the thoracic
effusion. The Mac technique consists of turning the
thoracostomy tube 180° in each direction and observing
whether the tube returns to the prior position. This
method can be used to evaluate kinking of the tube when
persistent negative pressure is observed despite evidence
of significant pleural effusion or pneumothorax. If the
tube consistently spins back into the initial position, tube
kinking should be suspected.
The thoracostomy tube itself will induce approximately 2.0 mL/kg/day of pleural effusion. Once the volume of pleural effusion drops below this value, removal
of the thoracostomy tube may be considered. Ideally,
consistent negative pressure should be observed for 24
hours following pneumothorax prior to thoracostomy
tube removal.
Fluid Therapy
Fluid therapy is a mainstay of postthoracotomy therapy.
Most postoperative patients will require, at minimum,
maintenance fluid therapy, as they may be unwilling to
drink following surgery. Of further importance, continual
fluid losses via the thoracostomy tube should be
accounted for, and at least a percentage of this loss should
be replaced with IV fluids to avoid hypovolemia due to
third spacing. Postthoracotomy patients may experience
significant protein loss with pleural effusion. The ideal

VetBooks.ir

33 Surgical Approaches to Thoracic Disease

therapy for protein replacement in critically ill patients is
to provide enteral nutrition in order for the patient to
synthesize albumin.
Oxygen Therapy
Oxygen therapy may be provided intermittently via facemask or continuously by nasopharyngeal insufflation,
nasal prongs, oxygen cage, or intubation and mechanical
ventilation. Provision of intermittent supplemental oxygen at an FiO2 of 50–60% can be achieved via facemask
with oxygen flow rates of 8.0–12.0 L/min. Nasopharyngeal
insufflation or nasal prongs may be utilized with oxygen
flow rates of 50–150 mL/kg/min to achieve an FiO2 of
30–70%. More commonly, postoperative thoracotomy
patients are maintained in an oxygen cage with flow rates
of 0.5–1.0 L/min to maintain a FiO2 of 40–60%. Patients
requiring an FiO2 above 60% to maintain normoxemia
will likely require intubation and mechanical ventilation.
Caution must be exercised to avoid oxygen toxicity when
supplemental oxygen levels are maintained above 60%
for more than 24 hours.
When mechanical ventilation is utilized, PEEP ventilation can be beneficial to prevent atelectasis and
augment work of breathing. In contrast to the spontaneously breathing patient, permissive hypercapnia is
tolerated in mechanically ventilated postthoracotomy
patients. Arterial PCO2 may rise to 50 mmHg before
intervention is necessary, as long as normoxemia is
maintained. Proper humidification is an important
component of oxygen therapy for preservation of
proper mucociliary function and clearance of respiratory secretions.
Dyspnea
Dyspnea is the perceived feeling of breathlessness. The
pathophysiology of dyspnea is multifactorial and is
described elsewhere. Multiple therapeutic targets have
been investigated to decrease the perception of dyspnea
in human patients. In human studies, nebulized or aerosolized furosemide has been found to prevent bronchoconstriction and inhibit the cough reflex in addition to
reducing pulmonary vascular hydrostatic pressure and
edema when absorbed systemically. Furosemide has
been shown experimentally and clinically in people to
reduce bronchial slow‐acting receptors (SARs), thereby
reducing the sensation of dyspnea. Furosemide exerts a
diuretic effect when administered by the enteral or parenteral route via inhibition of the Na:K:2Cl co‐transporter within the thick ascending loop of Henle. A
similar mechanism is postulated for the antidyspneic
effect of nebulized furosemide causing a local increase in

sodium ion concentration within the airways, increasing
pulmonary stretch receptor activity.
Hypothermia
Hypothermia is an inevitable occurrence during and
immediately following thoracic surgery. Warming IV
fluids prior to administration can help diminish
large reductions in intraoperative body temperature.
Postoperative temperature monitoring, either intermittent or continuous, is recommended to ensure euthermia and active warming using warming blankets or
heat lamps should be performed until the patient’s temperature has reached 99.5 °F.
Arrhythmias
For hemodynamically significant, multifocal, sustained, or R‐on‐T phenomena ventricular arrhythmias,
lidocaine remains the mainstay therapy. Lidocaine may
also be useful to slow the heart rate, allowing differentiation of ventricular tachycardia from sinus tachycardia with bundle branch block. The waveform of the
latter often will not change following lidocaine bolus
(2.0 mg/kg IV), but P‐waves may be appreciable once
the heart rate has decelerated. For lidocaine‐responsive arrhythmias, a constant rate infusion of 60–80 μg/
kg/min may be implemented postoperatively. A beta‐
blocker may also be ­considered for patients that do not
have known underlying cardiac disease with compromised contractility. Anecdotally, sotalol 2.0 mg/kg PO
BID has favorable postoperative antiarrhythmic
­properties for patients with supraventricular and ventricular tachyarrhythmias.
Nursing Care
Nursing care is a critical yet often underemphasized
aspect of postthoracotomy care. Patients undergoing
median sternotomy often prefer lateral recumbency in
the immediate postoperative period due to incisional
pain. Turning or rotating the patient every 4–6 hours
prevents atelectasis and V–Q mismatching secondary to
gravitational forces in lateral recumbency. Turning the
patient also promotes patient comfort and hygiene.
Optimal analgesia aids in patient well‐being and may
promote tolerance of sternal recumbency and therefore
improved oxygenation and ventilation.
Complications
Complications post thoracotomy may include edema
formation, hypoproteinemia, continual pleural effusion,

329

VetBooks.ir

330

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

secondary infection, hemorrhage, residual or continuous
pneumothorax, seroma formation, sternal osteomyelitis,
pyrexia, iatrogenic chylothorax, fibrosing pleuritis, surgical dehiscence, and ipsilateral thoracic limb lameness
(lateral thoracotomy). Crystalloid fluid therapy, anorexia, vasculitis, and postoperative inflammation can
contribute to peripheral edema formation.
The most common complication involving the thoracostomy tube is improper placement. Insufficient subcutaneous tunnel formation with large‐bore thoracostomy
tubes can lead to continuous air leakage and pneumothorax. The thoracostomy tube percutaneous insertion
site should be inspected carefully when continuous
pneumothorax is observed. Continual pleural effusion
may be primary or secondary in origin, depending on the
etiology requiring thoracotomy. Pyothorax, chylothorax,
and neoplastic effusion represent sources of continual
pleural effusion during the postoperative period. Pleural
drainage is important to maintain proper ventilatory
function as well as oxygenation. However, excessive
pleural effusion can lead to significant systemic protein
and fluid loss with subsequent intravascular volume
depletion. Vasculitis and surgical inflammation are contributors to this protein‐losing pleuropathy and third
spacing, which may encourage perpetual effusion.
Resolution of the underlying disease process will likely
terminate the cause of effusion.
Infection is an undesirable complication in any postoperative patient. Preoperative infection may be present
in some patients, such as pyothoraces, in which septic
effusion necessitated surgical intervention. Continual
monitoring of thoracic fluid cytology and cell counts aids
in determining resolution of pyothorax. Responsible
antimicrobial administration is of paramount importance in the care of critically ill patients. A full discussion
on this topic can be found elsewhere. Generally speaking, clinicians should be familiar with antibiotic sensitivity patterns of common bacterial isolates from their
hospitals and deescalate coverage to single‐agent therapy
as soon as possible. Infection may be introduced intrathoracically via the thoracostomy tube or surgical incision.
This may be due to bacterial contamination associated
with prolonged surgical exposure, improper handling of
the thoracostomy tube, or bacterial invasion of the thoracostomy tube insertion site and/or surgical incision.
Appropriate samples should be obtained for bacterial
culture and antimicrobial susceptibility testing when
­
infection is suspected. ­
Proper intraoperative hemostasis ensures minimal
postoperative hemorrhage, therefore significant
hemorrhagic pleural effusion is not expected in the
­

­postthoracotomy patient. Serosanguinous pleural effusion (PCV <25% of peripheral PCV) is a common and
expected occurrence with an indwelling thoracostomy
tube(s). However, hemothorax is diagnosed when the
pleural PCV exceeds peripheral PCV by 25% and warrants immediate investigation. When the volume of thoracic hemorrhage exceeds 10 mL/kg, autotransfusion
should be considered.
Proper postoperative incisional care can reduce
patient discomfort and surgical inflammation while
minimizing risk of infection. During the initial postoperative period, the thoracotomy incision as well as
thoracostomy tube insertion site(s) should be covered
with an impermeate adhesive dressing. This provides a
seal preventing air leakage with resultant pneumothorax while protecting against environmental contamination. Cold and warm compresses following surgery can
reduce incisional pain, swelling, and inflammation.
Cold compresses are usually applied during the immediate postthoracotomy period for 24–48 hours, with
warm compresses used thereafter.
An elevation in body temperature above normal in any
postoperative patient warrants immediate concern and
investigation. Hyperthermia may be secondary to
decreased heat dissipation (inability to pant due to pain,
excessive cage bedding), pharmacologic (mu opioid use
in cats), or pain induced. Postthoracotomy pyrexia may
be observed with infection, inflammation, or neoplasia.
Indwelling catheter sites should be inspected for
hyperemia, warmth or discomfort upon palpation.
Thoracostomy tube insertion sites should also be interrogated in a similar fashion. Complete blood count and
thoracic radiographs may also be considered when an
obvious etiology of pyrexia cannot be determined from
physical examination.
Surgical reexploration is rarely necessary following
thoracotomy, but is required for continuous pneumothoraces or hemothoraces that do not respond to medical management. Pneumothoraces, which fail to seal
despite continuous active suction, are an indication for
prompt reexploration to evaluate the pulmonary parenchyma (bullae or pneumatocele rupture) and previous
surgical sites (complete or partial lobectomy). Chronic
pleural effusion, despite prior thoracotomy, may also
necessitate a second surgery due to fibrosing pleuritis
or restrictive fibrin plaque formation on the surface of
the visceral pleura of the lung. Decortication may be
necessary if ­significant inelastic fibrin plaque formation has occurred restricting lung expansion. For perpetual pleural effusion, pleurodesis may also be
considered.

VetBooks.ir

33 Surgical Approaches to Thoracic Disease

­Further Reading
Adamantos S, Hughes D. Pulmonary edema. In: Silverstein
D, Hopper K, eds. Small Animal Critical Care Medicine.
St Louis, MO: Saunders, 2008, pp. 86–90.
Aldrich J. Atelectasis. In: Silverstein D, Hopper K, eds.
Small Animal Critical Care Medicine. St Louis, MO:
Saunders, 2008, pp. 122–4.
American Thoracic Society. Dyspnea. Mechanisms,
assessment, and management: a consensus statement.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999; 159(1): 321–40.
Fetzer TJ, Walker JM, Bach JF. Comparison of the efficacy
of small and large-bore thoracostomy tubes for pleural
space evacuation in canine cadavers. J Vet Emerg Crit
Care 2017; 27(3): 301–306.
de Laforcade AM, Silverstein DC. Shock. In: Silverstein D,
Hopper K, eds. Small Animal Critical Care Medicine. St
Louis, MO: Saunders, 2008, pp. 41–5.
Hackett TB. Care of respiratory patients. In: Slatter J, ed.
Textbook of Small Animal Surgery. St Louis, MO:
Saunders, 2003, pp. 899–902.
Hopper K. Basic mechanical ventilation. In: Silverstein D,
Hopper K, eds. Small Animal Critical Care Medicine.
St Louis, MO: Saunders, 2008, pp. 900–3.
Liptak JM, Monnet E, Campbell VL. Surgery of the
thoracic wall. In: Monnet E, ed. Small Animal Soft

Tissue Surgery. Ames, IA: John Wiley and Sons, 2013,
pp. 709–19.
Mazzaferro EM. Oxygen therapy. In: Silverstein D, Hopper
K, eds. Small Animal Critical Care Medicine. St Louis,
MO: Saunders, 2008, pp. 78–81.
Mellema MS. The neurophysiology of dyspnea. J Vet Emerg
Crit Care 2008; 18(6): 561–71.
Monnet E. Postthoracotomy management. In: Silverstein
D, Hopper K, eds. Small Animal Critical Care Medicine.
St Louis, MO: Saunders, 2008, pp. 642–4.
Newton PJ, Davidson PM, Macdonald P. Nebulized
furosemide for the management of dyspnea: does the
evidence support its use? J Pain Symptom Manage
2008; 36(4): 424–41.
Reems MM, Aumann M. Central venous pressure:
principles, measurement, and interpretation. Compend
Contin Educ Vet 2012; 34(1): E1.
Sauve V. Pleural space disease. In: Silverstein D, Hopper K,
eds. Small Animal Critical Care Medicine. St Louis, MO:
Saunders, 2008, pp. 125–30.
Sigrist NE. Thoracostomy tube placement and drainage.
In: Silverstein D, Hopper K, eds. Small Animal
Critical Care Medicine. St Louis, MO: Saunders,
2008, pp. 134–7.

331

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

333

34
Pleural Effusion
Ashley Allen, DVM, DACVECC and Gareth Buckley, MA, VetMB, MRCVS, DACVECC
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA

Pleural effusion is the pathologic collection of fluid within
the pleural space resulting from one of three primary
mechanisms: disruption of pleural pressure homeostasis,
diminished lymphatic drainage, or increased mesothelial
and capillary endothelial permeability. Given the dynamic
state of the pleural space, overlap can occur between the
mechanisms of effusion, depending on the underlying
disease. Dogs and cats with pleural effusion present with
various clinical signs including lethargy, hyporexia,
tachypnea, dyspnea, and a paradoxical breathing pattern,
regardless of precipitating cause. History and physical
examination may help to formulate a differential diagnosis for pleural effusion, but ultimately collecting a sample
of the effusion for cytologic analysis and additional tests
provides the most important information to obtain an
accurate diagnosis. Treatment options and prognosis are
dependent on the underlying cause of pleural effusion.

­Anatomy and Physiology
The pleura lines the thoracic cavity and is a thin, serous
membrane with five layers: an outer fibroelastic layer, an
extensively vascularized subpleural loose connective tissue layer, an elastic superficial tissue layer, a loose connective submesothelial tissue layer, and a mesothelial
layer. The visceral pleura line the lungs, whereas the parietal pleura line the thoracic wall with the potential space
between the two known as the pleural space. The visceral
pleura functions to provide mechanical lung support,
limit lung expansion, and contribute to elastic recoil and
deflation of the lung. The parietal pleura is subdivided
into the costal, mediastinal, and diaphragmatic parietal
pleura and contains numerous lymphatic vessels that
form stomas between mesothelial cells for lymphatic
drainage. Lacunae are dilated lymphatic vessels in the
submesothelial parietal pleura where stomas form and

transport fluid back through the lymphatic system.
Compared to other species, dogs and cats have a thin
pleural surface, approximately 15 μm thick. The mediastinum divides the pleural space into a right and left
pleural cavity, although in dogs and cats the mediastinum
may not be complete, allowing for bilateral disease from
a unilateral origin. The highly metabolically and immunologically active multipotent mesothelial cells line the
entire pleural cavity and play an active role in pleural
fluid production and reabsorption. Sialomucins are negatively charged glycoconjugates which coat the free mesothelial surface, functioning to repel opposing membranes
as well as organisms, abnormal cells, and particles.
In healthy animals, a small volume of fluid is present in
the pleural space which facilitates smooth gliding of the
lung over the thoracic wall and transmission of forces
during normal respirations. Normal pleural fluid is low in
protein (<1.5 g/dL) and cellular content (1500–2500
cells/μL), consisting of mesothelial cells (9–30%), monocytes (61–77%), lymphocytes (7–11%), and neutrophils
(<2%). Healthy dogs and cats produce approximately
0.01–0.02 mL/kg/h of pleural fluid via microvascular filtration from pleural capillaries. Fluid crosses the pleural
capillary endothelium followed by the interstitium.
Pleural capillary endothelium imparts most of the resistance to flow; however, the resistive properties of the
endothelium and interstitium are additive, which
becomes significant during some disease processes that
interfere with the resistive properties of these layers. The
production and reabsorption of pleural fluid are multifactorial, dependent on Starling forces, solute flux, hydraulic
conductivity (the resistive properties of the two pleural
surfaces), total surface area, the solute reflection coefficient (ability of the surface to restrict larger molecules),
membrane diffusive permeability, pleural lymphatic
drainage via stomata in the parietal pleura, and cellular
mechanisms of transport by mesothelial cells (Table 34.1).

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

334

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

Table 34.1 Starling Law applied to pleural membrane
Qb = LA[(Pc−Ppl) – σo(πc−πpl)]

Qb

Filtration rate across the capillary endothelial barrier in
series with the pleural membrane (interstitium)

LA

Filtration coefficient = [hydraulic conductivity (L) *
surface area (A)]

σo

Reflection coefficient to protein of the combined
endothelial‐interstitial barrier

Pc

Capillary hydrostatic pressure

Ppl

Pleural hydrostatic pressure

πc

Capillary oncotic pressure

πpl

Pleural oncotic pressure

Source: Adapted from Lai-Fook 2004.

Normal pleural pressure is approximately –3 to
–5 cmH2O at functional residual capacity, becomes
greater (more negative) with deeper breaths, and is more
negative in the dorsal space compared to the ventral
space, decreasing by 0.5–0.7 cmH2O/cm in dogs. This
subatmospheric pleural pressure results from elastic
recoil forces of the lung exerting a force inward with the
propensity of the chest wall to expand outward and
serves to maintain lung inflation while decreasing the
work of breathing. Although reported as a single number, pleural pressure is a result of the dynamic nature of
the pleural space and represents a summation of the
pressure exerted by pleural fluid, regional pleural surface
deformation, and weight of the lung in dependent areas
of the thoracic cavity.

­Pathophysiology of Pleural Fluid
Accumulation
Pleural fluid volume depends on Starling forces, mesothelial cell activity, and lymphatic drainage; however, the
exact contribution of each of these mechanisms remains
somewhat elusive and varies during disease processes.
Starling forces which favor the formation of pleural
fluid include increased capillary hydrostatic pressure,
decreased capillary oncotic pressure, and increased capillary permeability. Mesothelial cells have apical microvilli that increase the surface area for exchange and
vesicles that allow for transcytosis of proteins from the
pleural space to the pleural interstitium. In addition,
indirect evidence suggests mesothelial cells are involved
in solute‐coupled liquid transport across the pleural surface. Lymphatics communicate directly with the pleural
cavity through openings between the mesothelial layer in
the parietal pleura, called stomas, and allow cells, ­protein,

and larger particles to be absorbed into the lymphatic
system through channels called lacunae. The maximal
reabsorption rate through pleural lymphatics is estimated to be 0.2–0.3 mL/kg/h, which is considerably
more than the normal daily rate of fluid accumulation.
Therefore, the accumulation of pleural fluid occurs when
the disease process overwhelms fluid reabsorption
capacity, reduces the ability of lymphatics to reabsorb
fluid, or increases production of fluid while simultaneously decreasing lymphatic clearance.
Pathologic fluid effusions are classified in two broad
categories: transudates and exudates. Transudative effusions typically accumulate secondary to an increase in
hydrostatic pressure or a reduction in plasma oncotic
pressure while the pleura remains normal, whereas exudative effusions typically accumulate secondary to various pleural pathologic conditions leading to increased
vascular permeability and/or diminished lymphatic fluid
reabsorption. Mesothelial cells play a pivotal role in the
development of exudative effusions by synthesizing
inflammatory cytokines, growth factors, and extracellular proteins. A classic example of increased systemic
venous hydrostatic pressure leading to a transudative
effusion is congestive heart failure. In addition, pulmonary thromboembolism, cardiac tamponade, heartworm
disease, and neoplasia can all lead to increased venous
hydrostatic pressure and therefore transudative pleural
effusion. In comparison, a classic example of an exudative effusion is pyothorax with an influx of inflammatory
cells, which can increase vascular permeability and
decreased lymphatic drainage (Table 34.2).
Regional changes in pleural pressure occur with the
accumulation of pleural effusion and the mechanism of
pressure change is controversial. Proposed theories to
explain the pressure difference center around the hydrostatic pressure contribution of a column of fluid in the
thorax and the changes in deformation forces as the lung
and thoracic wall become separated by fluid. The hydrostatic theory divides the pleural space into three distinct
pressure zones: the upper (dorsal) zone, middle zone,
and lower (ventral) zone. In the upper (dorsal) zone, the
pleural liquid thickness is normal and the pleural liquid
pressure is less than the pleural surface pressure. In the
middle zone, the pleural liquid thickness increases and
pleural liquid pressure equalizes with pleural surface
pressure at zero. In the lower (ventral) zone, the pleural
fluid thickness increases substantially and the pressure
becomes positive, displacing the lung from the thoracic
wall. In the other predominant theory, the pleural liquid
pressure is always equal to pleural surface pressure such
that pressure gradients caused by gravity and regional
differences in pleural surface pressure drive a small
­viscous flow of fluid in the normal pleural space and
surfaces are never in contact. As pleural effusion
­

VetBooks.ir

34 Pleural Effusion

Table 34.2 Causes of pleural effusion in dogs and cats
Physical agents
Thoracic trauma
●● Electrical burn
●● Radiation therapy
●● Iatrogenic
●● Foreign body (e.g., grass
awn)
●●

Lymphatic or venous
obstruction
●● Lung lobe torsion
●● Diaphgragmatic hernia
Decreased oncotic pressure
●● Protein‐losing
nephropathy
●● Protein‐losing
enteropathy
●● Liver failure
Increased hydrostatic
pressure
●● Congestive heart failure
●● Heartworm disease
●● Thrombosis
●● Neoplasia

Neoplastic disease
Mesothelioma
●● Lymphoma
●● Adenocarcinoma
●● Lymphoproliferative
syndromes
●● Mesenchymal tumors
●●

Infectious disease
Pyothorax (bacterial, fungal)
●● Mycoplasma
●●

Extrathoracic disease
Pancreatitis
●● Peritonitis
●● Esophageal rupture
●● Uroabdomen
●●

Others
Feline infectious peritonitis
●● Coagulopathy (rodenticide
or factor deficiency)
●● Allergic hypersensitivity
conditions
●● Cholecystectomy
●●

accumulates, the viscous resistance to flow quickly
­
decreases and the pleural pressure gradient approaches
the hydrostatic pressure gradient. Both theories contend
that pleural effusion increases pleural pressure by 1 cm
H2O/cm effusion height.
Measuring pleural liquid pressure and pleural surface
can be challenging because the space is small and the
insertion of any device will cause an artifact by deforming
the surface. In the diseased thorax with an appreciable
amount of pleural effusion, these challenges become less
significant and pleural pressure measured is an accurate
representation of hydrostatic pressure at the level of the
catheter or transducer. During thoracocentesis or if an
indwelling thoracostomy tube is in place, pleural ­pressure
can be monitored in veterinary patients with a minimal
amount of equipment using a water manometer or pressure transducer. If using a pressure transducer, measurements are recorded in mmHg and should be converted to
be interpreted appropriately (1 mmHg = 1.36 cmH2O).
Pleural pressure monitoring may be beneficial with
chronic effusions when draining the effusion does not
necessarily equate to return to normal pleural physiology
because the pleural surface remains diseased. If the lungs
cannot expand appropriately after thoracocentesis, creating a situation of entrapped lung, the s­upraphysiologic
negative pressure created in the pleural cavity by removing the fluid may increase the risk of pneumothorax.

­Clinical Signs and Physical
Examination
Rapid intervention with minimal patient stress is paramount in patients with respiratory distress so it is important to be familiar with clinical signs and physical
examination findings indicative of certain disease processes. Time of onset, volume of fluid accumulation, and
inciting cause of pleural effusion all contribute to the
patient’s history and clinical signs.
Pleural effusion is a consequence of an underlying disease and vague historical clinical signs are often reported
including lethargy, exercise intolerance, weight loss, and
hyporexia or anorexia. In a retrospective study, tachypnea and dyspnea were the most commonly reported
complaints by owners, present in 95% of dogs with pleural effusion. Additional complaints, which may or may
not be an indication of the underlying disease, include
cough, polydipsia, vomiting, fever, collapse, diarrhea,
restlessness, reluctance to lie down, cervical extension,
hemoptysis, abdominal distension, melena, hematemesis, and halitosis. Severe pleural effusion may present as
open mouth breathing and cyanosis, especially if onset
is acute.
On physical examination, a restrictive breathing
­pattern seen as rapid and shallow breathing has historically been reported but recent literature suggests an
asynchronous (paradoxical) or inverse breathing
­pattern and decreased lung sounds on auscultation are
more common clinical findings in dogs and cats.
Paradoxical breathing refers to increased inspiratory
effort strong enough to pull the abdominal contents
toward the thorax, leading to a sunken flank appearance during inspiration and a bulging flank appearance
on expiration. Additional physical examination findings include muffled heart sounds, decreased ventral
lung sounds, shallow breathing, and inspiratory dyspnea. Patients with cardiac disease, such as heart failure,
pericardial effusion, or caval syndrome, may have a
murmur or crackles on thoracic auscultation, jugular
pulses, a positive hepatojugular reflex, and/or pulse
deficits. Patients with a coagulopathy causing pleural
effusion, such as anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity,
may have bruising, pale mucous membranes, weak
pulses, or tachycardia on physical examination. Masses
found on abdominal palpation, oral or dermatologic
examination may indicate a neoplastic cause for pleural
effusion. Mediastinal neoplasia should be suspected
with an incompressible cranial thorax in cats or Horner
syndrome in cats or dogs. Pain in the right cranial
abdominal quadrant with gastrointestinal signs may be
suggestive of pancreatitis as an underlying cause of
pleural effusion (Table 34.3).

335

VetBooks.ir

336

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

Table 34.3 Classification of effusions in dogs and cats
Total protein
(g/dL)

Cells per
microliter

Cell types

Special features

Transudate

<2.5

<1500

Mononuclear

Low cellularity

Modified
transudate

2.5–7.5

1000–7000

Mononuclear

Cell type varies with etiology

Exudate

>3.0

>3000

Neutrophils or specific to
underlying disease

Subcategories: hemorrhage, bile,
chyle, septic, aseptic

­Diagnostics
Patient presentation, stability, and available resources
will often guide the diagnostic approach in patients with
pleural effusion. The cyanotic cat with open mouth
breathing will have a different initial diagnostic and
treatment plan from a dog presenting for vomiting or
diarrhea with scant pleural effusion found during routine testing for underlying gastrointestinal disease.
Regardless of the underlying pathology, the goal should
be patient stabilization first followed by a thorough
investigation into the inciting cause of pleural effusion
using imaging techniques, pleural fluid tests, and, if necessary, histopathology.
Imaging
Ultrasonography, radiography, and computed tomography (CT) are currently available imaging techniques in
dogs and cats with pleural effusion. In general, the
patient requiring emergent treatment for respiratory distress due to pleural effusion is likely to have an ultrasound in the emergency department initially followed by
thoracocentesis prior to the pursuit of additional imaging techniques whereas a stable patient will likely have
thoracic radiographs with or without a thoracic ultrasound followed by advanced imaging if necessary.
Although the name implies a single subset of patients,
which benefit from the test, the thoracic focused assessment with sonography for trauma (TFAST) is the most
common initial test in an emergency situation due to
pleural space disease because it allows for rapid assessment of the thoracic cavity with a therapeutic goal.
TFAST is performed with the patient in sternal or right
lateral recumbency and assessing five areas of the thoracic cavity: the right and left chest tube site (dorsolateral 7th–9th intercostal spaces), right and left pericardial
site (ventrolateral 5th–6th intercostal space), and the
diaphragmatico‐hepatic (subxiphoid) site. Pleural
­effusion is recognized as anechoic or echogenic fluid in
the pleural space and its presence may allow better
­visualization of some mediastinal masses. In people, the

diaphragmatico‐hepatic site is the most sensitive and
specific area to diagnose pleural effusion because it has
less air interface than the pericardial sites; however, with
breed conformation and size variation of veterinary
patients, this has yet to be prospectively evaluated.
Thoracic ultrasound is useful for the detection, characterization, and subjective quantification (by depth) of
pleural fluid, in addition to guiding therapeutic intervention. Abdominal ultrasound and echocardiogram may
also help determine the cause of pleural effusion.
Thoracic radiographs are useful to evaluate for the
presence of pleural effusion and survey the thoracic cavity for an underlying etiology. Radiographic signs of
pleural effusion include retraction of the lung margins
from the thoracic wall and sternum with increased
­opacity in the pleural space, widened interlobar fissures,
rounding of lung margins, pleural thickening, and
obscuring of the diaphragm and cardiac silhouette by
radiopaque fluid. Pleural fluid will often obscure structures in the thoracic cavity, including the heart, mediastinum, and diaphragm; therefore, in patients with
significant pleural effusion it is advantageous to perform
thoracocentesis, ideally ultrasound guided, prior to radiographs to allow better evaluation of intrathoracic structures. Since the pleura cannot normally be seen on
radiographs, if pleural lines are seen, horizontal beam
radiographs, in addition to the standard three‐view
series, may help differentiate pleural thickening from
pleural effusion because vertical beam projections are
limited by superimposition of fluid and soft tissue structures. In addition, more pleural effusion is present than
predicted based on vertical beam (standard‐view) radiographs because large fluid pockets are not struck head‐
on by the X‐ray beam; however, a horizontal beam allows
fluid to collect ventrally such that the X‐ray beam strikes
the fluid–lung interface tangentially. However, ultrasound remains the most sensitive test for detection of
small amounts of fluid.
Thoracic CT has become increasingly available in
­veterinary practice; CT allows better lesion delineation
and characterization than conventional radiography
for many thoracic disorders. Prior to thoracic CT,

VetBooks.ir

34 Pleural Effusion

­thoracocentesis should be performed to remove as much
fluid as possible to enhance visualization of intrathoracic
and extrathoracic structures. Patients are maintained in
dorsal or ventral recumbency, manually hyperventilated
immediately preceding the helical scan to decrease respiratory drive during a forced breath hold, and the entire
thorax is acquired using a slice collimation of 3–7 mm,
depending on patient size. During a single inspiratory
hold not exceeding one minute, the entire thorax is
scanned which determines the slice thickness of the
images, reserving the ability to make thinner slices of
areas of pathologic importance if needed. Both ultrasound and conventional radiographs are poorly sensitive
to determine vascular invasion, displacement of normal
anatomic structures, or invasion of adjacent structures
by mediastinal masses; however, CT enhances the ability
to determine the aggressiveness of the tumor prior to
surgical exploration. Regarding chylothorax, CT may be
superior to traditional radiographic lymphangiography
to show contrast enhancement of the thoracic duct.
Thoracic CT may also be indicated in dogs and cats with
pyothorax not responding to conventional management
or if a pleural or pulmonary foreign body or abscess is
suspected because this imaging technique eliminates
superimposition and silhouetting of intrathoracic structures. Pleural abscesses on CT often appear as ring‐
enhancing cystic structures with a fluid‐attenuating
core. Additional benefits of thoracic CT include identifying pleural thickness, small‐volume pneumothorax,
parenchymal lung masses, and peripheral bronchopleural fistulae.
Pleural Fluid Evaluation
Thoracocentesis is therapeutic and has the potential to
be diagnostic in any dog or cat with pleural effusion. In
the emergent respiratory patient, thoracocentesis should
be the first step after pleural effusion has been confirmed
by TFAST with a goal to remove as much fluid as possible, the exception being the coagulopathic patient. There
are no absolute contraindications to perform thoracocentesis but in coagulopathic patients, extreme caution
should be used if thoracocentesis is necessary and should
be reserved for patients in moderate to severe respiratory distress. In the absence of ultrasound availability,
thoracocentesis can be carefully performed in a dyspneic
patient prior to radiographs. The small risk associated
with thoracocentesis is outweighed by the major risk of
prolonged restraint for radiographs of a patient in severe
respiratory distress. Unilateral or bilateral thoracocentesis may be needed and is ideally performed with ultrasound guidance.
Gross appearance of aseptically collected pleural fluid
should be recorded, as well as protein content and

­cytologic characteristics. Samples should also be saved
in ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA, lavender
top), serum (red top) tubes, sterile tubes for culture, and/
or other tubes for effusion‐specific tests such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Information gained from
protein content and cellularity may help guide future
diagnostics or treatment. Gram stain should be performed if pyothorax is suspected on preliminary diagnostics to guide antimicrobial therapy while cultures are
pending. Sterile samples can be stored for bacterial,
f­ ungal, and/or Mycoplasma culture followed by antimicrobial susceptibility. Fluids are typically divided into
three categories based on protein content and nucleated
cell count: transudate, modified transudate, and exudate.
Subcategories of exudative effusions include hemorrhage, bile, chyle, septic and aseptic (Table 34.4).
Pure transudates are low in protein (<2.5 g/dL) and
total nucleated cell count (<1500 cells/μL) with a clear,
colorless, or straw‐colored appearance. Cytologic examination shows predominantly mononuclear cells such as
lymphocytes, macrophages, and mesothelial cells with
low to absent numbers of nondegenerate neutrophils.
Transudative pleural effusion is a consequence of either
increased hydrostatic or decreased oncotic pressure.
Liver disease, protein‐losing enteropathies and nephropathies, malnutrition, maldigestion, and malabsorption can
cause profound hypoalbuminemia with or without hypoglobulinemia, leading to decreased oncotic pressure. In
addition, chronic blood loss, intestinal parasitism, and

Table 34.4 Pyothorax bacterial isolates
Organism

Dogs

Cats

Aerobic

Escherichia coli
Enterobacter cloacae
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Pasteurella spp.
Actinomyces spp.
Streptococcus canis
Streptococcus
intermedius
Mycoplasma spp.
Nocardia spp.

Pasteurella spp.
Actinomyces spp.
Escherichia coli
Enterococcus faecalis

Anaerobic

Peptostreptococcus
anaerobius
Bacteroides spp.
Fusobacterium spp.
Porphyromonas spp.
Prevotella spp.
Eubacterium spp.
Propionibacterium spp.

Bacteroides spp.
Peptostreptococcus
anaerobius
Fusobacterium spp.
Porphyromonas spp.
Prevotella spp.
Filifactor villosus
Fibrobacter succinogenes

Source: Adapted from Walker, Jang, and Hirsch 2000.

337

VetBooks.ir

338

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

intestinal neoplasia can also cause significant hypoproteinemia. In general, albumin concentrations less than
1.0 g/dL cause oncotic pressure to be low enough for a
transudate to develop; however, if increased hydrostatic
pressure is also present, a pure transudate can be seen
with a higher albumin concentration.
Modified transudates are variable in protein content
(2.5–7.5 g/dL) and cell count (1000–7000 cells/μL).
Grossly, they can be tan and slightly turbid, to pink, or
opaque and white in appearance depending on the
underlying etiology. Most of the nucleated cells are mononuclear (macrophages, lymphocytes, or a combination
of both) with a lower number of mesothelial cells and
nondegenerate neutrophils. Modified transudates result
from increased vascular or lymphatic permeability with
or without increased hydrostatic pressure. They are
modified by the addition of proteins, cells, or chyle, and
classifying a fluid as a modified transudate implies the
disease process causing fluid to accumulate is noninflammatory. Most modified transudates are a consequence of obstructed venous or lymphatic drainage
secondary to numerous underlying diseases, with right‐
sided heart failure being most common. Some modified
transudates may become exudative effusions, especially
with chronicity because fluid in the pleural space is
inflammatory. Chylous effusion has been classified as
both a modified transudate and an exudate for this reason. Initially, chylous effusions contain a predominant
population of mononuclear cells (lymphocytes) and fluid
accumulates due to lymphatic obstruction from noninflamed vessels. In cats, chylous effusion can result from
congestive heart failure or heartworm disease. Additional
causes in veterinary species include lung atelectasis,
neoplasia, diaphragmatic or peritoneal‐pericardial hernias, lung lobe torsion, lymphangiectasia, cranial vena
cava thrombosis, trauma, restrictive pericarditis, pericardial disease, and mediastinal disease. Often, an underlying disease for chylous effusion is not identified and is
therefore idiopathic.
Exudates have a high protein concentration (>3.0 g/dL)
and nucleated cell count (>3000 cells/μL). Exudates vary
in gross appearance from white to amber to pink depending on etiology and are typically turbid. The predominant
cell type is the neutrophil, which may be nondegenerate
(aseptic) or degenerate (septic), with macrophages, lymphocytes, eosinophils, and mesothelial cells in lesser
quantities. Exudative effusions usually result from an
inflammatory process in the pleural cavity causing
release of cytokines and other vasoactive mediators,
leading to increased capillary permeability (filtration
coefficient). The initial inflammatory process can be due
to endogenous (chyle, neoplastic cells) or exogenous
(bacteria, fungi) mediators. Eosinophilic effusions
determined cytologically with >10% eosinophils are
­

infrequently reported in veterinary medicine; however, if
present, cancer is the most common underlying etiology,
followed by thoracic wall trauma, pneumothorax, congestive heart failure, and allergic hypersensitivity conditions. Pyogranulomatous inflammation may indicate
fungal or foreign body reaction. Cytologic slides should
be closely evaluated for the presence of intracellular bacteria and aerobic and anaerobic cultures with antimicrobial susceptibilities should always be submitted when
degenerate neutrophils are present. Nondegenerate
­neutrophils typically indicate a nonseptic process and
may be secondary to neoplasia, chronic diaphragmatic
hernia, lymphatic obstruction or leakage, and infectious
processes. If the patient has a history of recent cholecystectomy or trauma and yellow, nonseptic exudate is
­collected, bilothorax should be a differential and further
diagnostics performed.
Specific Pleural Fluid Tests

When chylothorax is suspected, triglyceride concentration should be analyzed in the pleural effusion and
patient’s serum. Diagnosis of chylothorax is confirmed if
the triglyceride concentration in the pleural fluid is
higher than the triglyceride concentration in the patient’s
serum. Decreased glucose (<60 mg/dL) in pleural fluid is
due to decreased transport of glucose to the pleural fluid
or increased utilization of glucose by mononuclear cells,
neutrophils, bacteria, or malignant cells. If the effusion
appears hemorrhagic, the packed cell volume (PCV) of
the pleural effusion should be compared to the PCV of
the patient, with hemothorax present if the pleural fluid
PCV is at least 25% of the patient’s PCV. Bilirubin should
be quantified in the pleural fluid and blood if bilothorax
is suspected, such as those patients with recent biliary
surgery or known/suspected trauma. If bilirubin in the
pleural fluid is higher than in the patient’s blood, bilothorax is diagnosed.
Pleural Pressure Monitoring

Normal pleural pressure in a dog or cat is negative with
respect to the atmosphere and functions to facilitate
lung inflation and reduce the work of breathing. Negative
intrapleural pressure is generated by the lymphatic system as it drains the normal, physiologic small volume of
pleural fluid present. As pleural effusions accumulate,
lung parenchyma collapses and intrathoracic pressure
increases. Dyspnea and tachypnea result due to collapsed parenchymal lung tissue and pleural pressure
becomes less negative, or positive to the atmosphere.
When the fluid is removed by thoracocentesis, the
expectation is that intrapleural pressure returns to its
normal negative pressure and the lungs can reexpand but
this is not always the case, especially with chronic
effusions. The pleural surface can become fibrinous,
­

VetBooks.ir

34 Pleural Effusion

thickened, and inflamed by chronic effusions, thus inhibiting reexpansion of the lungs once the effusion is
removed. In humans, this is termed lung entrapment as
the intrapleural pressure has become negative, but the
lungs cannot expand due to the formation of a visceral
pleural peel and persistent pleural effusion. This imparts
a large negative pressure on the diseased visceral pleural
surface, which may cause pain or increase risk of spontaneous pneumothorax.
Intrapleural pressure can be measured during thoracocentesis with several techniques, including a U‐shaped
water manometer, an “overdamped” water manometer,
or electronic pressure transducer systems such as those
used for invasive blood pressure monitoring. The role of
intrapleuaral pressure monitoring in veterinary medicine is an expanding area of interest and research.

­Pyothorax
Pyothorax is the accumulation of purulent exudative
effusion in the pleural space caused by infection. Young
(3–6 years) male dogs are more likely to be diagnosed
with pyothorax, with performance breeds being overrepresented. Dyspnea, tachypnea, pyrexia, lethargy, and
anorexia are the most common clinical signs in dogs. In
cats, pyothorax is more common in young (2–4 years)
domestic shorthairs, with no sex predilection, and the
most common initial clinical signs include hyporexia or

Thoracoscopy
Thoracoscopy is a minimally invasive technique which is
becoming more widespread in veterinary medicine and
can be used as both a diagnostic and therapeutic technique in veterinary patients with pleural effusion.
Advantages of thoracoscopy include obtaining pleural
biopsies, visualization of intrathoracic pathology, and
minimally invasive approach (Figure 34.1).
Properly collected thoracoscopic pleural biopsies are
adequate in quality and quantity to obtain a definitive
histopathologic diagnosis (Figure 34.2). Disadvantages
include general anesthesia, risk of pneumothorax, hemorrhage, infection, and potential need for thoracotomy if
unable to achieve definitive treatment (depending on
underlying disease) with thorascoscopy alone.
(a)

Figure 34.1 Normal pleura visualized via thoracoscopy. Source:
Photo courtesy of Brad Case, DVM, DACVS, University of Florida CVM.

(b)

Figure 34.2 (a,b) Thoracoscopic biopsy in a dog with mesothelioma. Source: Photo courtesy of Brad Case, DVM, DACVS, University of
Floriday CVM.

339

VetBooks.ir

340

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

anorexia, lethargy, and/or dyspnea. Although more
­common in young animals, pyothorax can occur at any
age, with rare reports in neonatal dogs and cats.
Additional clinical signs include weight loss, nasal or
ocular discharge, hypersalivation, coughing, and exercise
intolerance. Clinical signs can be acute or chronic.
Physical examination findings often include tachypnea,
dyspnea, decreased ventral lung sounds, muffled heart
sounds, and restrictive respiratory pattern. Severe sepsis
and associated signs could occur in either species, with
pyothorax being the most common cause in a retrospective paper on cats with severe sepsis.
In dogs, causes include bite wounds, penetrating
­thoracic injury, foreign body inhalation, lung abscess,
parasitic migration, hematogenous spread, esophageal or
tracheal perforation, diskospondylitis, neoplasia with
lung abscessation, previous thoracic surgery, and thoracocentesis. In cats, causes include extension from a lung
parenchymal infection, foreign body migration, esophageal rupture, and penetrating thoracic wounds. Cats with
pyothorax are 3.8 times more likely to live in multiple cat
households, Pasteurella spp. are the most ­common bacterial isolate, and 14.5–40% of cases have a history of bite
wounds, thus adding support to the theory that bite
wounds are a common route of infection. Migrating
grass awns can be a common cause of ­pyothorax in dogs
and cats, depending on geographic location, but in many
cases the cause of infection is not identified.
Diagnosis is based on presence of an exudate, cytologic
slide evaluation, and positive bacterial cultures of aseptically collected pleural fluid. Intracellular bacteria identified on cytologic review confirms the diagnosis but if
intracellular bacteria are not seen and degenerate neutrophils are present, then bacterial cultures (aerobic and
anaerobic) should be performed (Figure 34.3). If the
patient has already been on antibiotics prior to collection

Figure 34.3 Pyothorax cytology. Pyothorax in a dog with a
predominance of mature, mildly karyolytic neutrophils that
sometimes contain bacilli or coccobacilli forms (Wright‐Giemsa
stain, 100× objective). Source: Photo courtesy of Sarah S.K. Beatty,
DVM, University of Florida.

of pleural effusion, diagnostic test results may not be
reflective of disease and a nonseptic exudate may be seen.
Many feline pyothorax infections are due to multiple
organisms and common bacterial isolates in feline
­pyothorax include Pasteurella spp., Clostridium spp.,
Fusobacterium spp., Bacteroides spp., Peptostreptococcus
anaerobius, Porphyromonas spp., Prevotella spp., and
Actinomyces spp. In dogs, enteric organisms are more
common than in cats and common bacterial isolates include Escherichia coli, Enterobacter cloacae,
Pasteurella spp., Actinomyces spp., Streptococcus canis,
Peptostreptococcus anaerobius, Bacteroides spp.,
Fusobacterium spp., and Porphyromonas spp. Additional
clinicopathologic findings seen in patients with pyothorax
include elevated liver enzymes, electrolyte disturbances,
hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia, hypoalbuminemia, mild
anemia, and leukocytosis due to neutrophilia.
Imaging techniques include thoracic ultrasound, radiographs, and CT. In clinical practice, thoracic ultrasound
is typically utilized initially because it is noninvasive,
does not require sedation, and can be used rapidly in
patients with respiratory disease for diagnosis and to
localize an area for therapeutic thoracocentesis. With
pyothorax, pleural fluid is often echogenic and wispy,
fibrinous strands can be seen along pleural margins.
Radiographs may be helpful once fluid has been removed
to determine if an underlying cause can be identified,
such as a lung mass lesion, focal pulmonary opacity, or
foreign body; however, as previously mentioned, an
underlying cause is rarely found. The use of CT is becoming more widespread in veterinary medicine but the role
of CT in canine pyothorax is controversial. A retrospective study in dogs with spontaneous pyothorax showed
that common CT findings include bilateral pleural fluid,
pleural gas (due to preimaging thoracocentesis or thoracostomy tube placement), pleural thickening, pulmonary
parenchymal abnormalities, and mediastinal involvement. Of the surgically managed dogs in this study, CT
correctly predicted the extent of disease in only 62.5%
and correctly identified the underlying cause in only
50%; therefore, surgical exploration remains the gold
standard to identify underlying pathology.
Treatment includes administration of appropriate
antimicrobials, intermittent or continuous thoracic
drainage, thoracic lavage, and surgery. Intravenous
broad‐spectrum antimicrobials with adequate anaerobic
coverage should be started once culture samples have
been collected and adjusted accordingly based on ­culture
and susceptibility results. Potentiated beta‐lactams are
reasonable first‐line therapy because they have efficacy
against Actinomyces spp., anaerobes, and some gram‐
negative organisms. Enrofloxacin is often added to
improve gram‐negative coverage while awaiting culture
results. Deescalation of antimicrobial therapy should be

VetBooks.ir

34 Pleural Effusion

considered once susceptibility data are available. Medical
management involves thoracocentesis alone (repeated as
needed) or placement of unilateral or bilateral indwelling
thoracostomy tubes with intermittent or continuous
suction and thoracic lavage along with appropriate antimicrobial therapy and supportive care. In general, large‐
bore trocar or surgically placed thoracostomy tubes are
preferred in larger patients; however, smaller thoracostomy tubes placed using a modified Seldinger technique
have been reported for management of pyothorax in
dogs. Surgical management involves exploratory thoracotomy, usually by median sternotomy, to lavage and
debride the pleural space, and break down any adhesions
causing pocketing of fluid, then insertion of thoracostomy tubes for postoperative care, in addition to appropriate antimicrobial therapy and supportive care.
Appropriate treatment of pyothorax is controversial
and there is no consensus on ideal therapy for all cases.
Failure of medical therapy or presence of a focal lesion
(abscess, tumor, or granuloma), foreign body, or evidence
of esophageal rupture found on imaging are indications
for surgical management in dogs or cats. In dogs, some
advocate for early surgical treatment regardless of
whether an underlying cause is identified, with the premise being that any other infectious disease such as peritonitis, septic arthritis, or abscess is best treated by
aggressive debridement and drainage. In a retrospective
paper on medical versus surgical treatment canine
­pyothorax, medical management was 5.4 times more
likely to fail compared to surgical treatment and more
dogs were free of disease at one year if treated surgically.
In contrast, other studies have not shown a survival benefit of surgery versus medical management and reported
success of medical management has ranged from 29% to
100%. If Actinomyces spp. are suspected on cytology or
cultured from dogs with pyothorax, surgical management is warranted because medical treatment has a high
rate of failure and a grass awn foreign body is a likely
underlying cause. In cats, medical management with
indwelling thoracostomy tubes is reported to have a survival rate of 73–95%, whereas surgical management has
been reported to have a 100% survival rate. Successful
management of chronic pyothorax in cats with unilateral
pneumonectomy has been reported.
With medical management alone or during the postoperative period, thoracic lavage is often recommended
to facilitate drainage of exudative fluid; however, there
are no large‐scale canine or feline studies to evaluate outcome with this method. Theoretical advantages of lavage
include minimizing bacteria and inflammatory mediators in the pleural space and dilution of exudative fluid,
which could clog the thoracostomy tube. Potential
­disadvantages include electrolyte disturbances such as
hypokalemia, which has been reported in a cat undergoing

thoracic lavage, and nosocomial infection if aseptic technique is not followed. Pleural lavage is performed by
slowly infusing 10–20 mL/kg of warmed, 0.9% saline into
the pleural space, waiting 10–15 minutes, and then withdrawing the fluid. If bilateral thoracostomy tubes are in
place, some advocate for using one side as an infusion
port and the opposite side as a withdrawal port.
Thoracostomy tubes are generally removed when fluid
production decreases to 3–5 mL/kg/day, in addition to
clinical improvement of the patient and cytologic confirmation of absence of infectious organisms. Time to resolution of disease is generally 5–8 days and patients should
be rechecked frequently as recurrence is possible.

­Chylothorax
Chylothorax is a syndrome characterized by the accumulation of chyle, the milky fluid consisting of lymph
and emulsified fat formed in the small intestines during
digestion, in the pleural space and is often idiopathic in
nature. Additional reported causes include traumatic or
surgical thoracic duct rupture, cranial vena cava thrombosis, lymphatic obstruction by cancer or fungal granuloma, cardiomyopathy, congenital defect, diaphragmatic
hernia, peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia, lung
lobe torsion, pericardial effusion, tetralogy of Fallot, tricuspid dysplasia, cor triatriatum dexter, constrictive pericarditis, and heartworm disease. Although trauma has
been a reported cause of chylothorax in the literature, it
could not be experimentally reproduced in dogs by laceration or transection of the thoracic duct as the effusion
resolved within 10 days. Reported neoplasms associated
with lymphatic obstruction causing chylothorax include
thymoma, lymphosarcoma, lymphangiosarcoma, and
aortic body tumors. The rate of chyle production and
drainage in normal dogs is approximately 2–4 mL/kg/h.
Most of the body except the right forelimb and right
side of the head and neck drain into the thoracic duct in
dogs and cats. Intestinal lymphatics drain chyle into the
mesenteric lymph nodes, which then form larger ducts
that continue on to form the cisterna chyli, which is a
lymphatic reservoir located ventral to the first four lumbar vertebrae. The cisterna chyli continues cranially to
become the thoracic duct and eventually empty into the
brachiocephalic trunk. In dogs, the cisterna chyli and
caudal thoracic duct are located on the right side of the
mediastinum; however, the duct crosses from right to
left in the mid‐mediastinum to empty into the brachiocephalic trunk. In cats, the thoracic duct is typically only
located to the left side of the mediastinum. Thoracic
duct anatomy can vary within the same species.
Obstruction of the thoracic duct or cranial vena cava
causes lymphatic flow stasis and dilation. It is thought

341

VetBooks.ir

342

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

that increased pressure causes chyle to leak out of dilated
lymphatics, as would occur in other parts of the body
with lymphedema. With cardiac disease, chylous ­effusion
can develop due to impaired lymph drainage to the
venous circulatory system. In addition, hepatic congestion occurs with heart failure, which significantly
increases hepatic lymph production and therefore
thoracic duct flow. Pathophysiologic mechanisms for
­
idiopathic chylous effusion are not well elucidated.
Chylothorax can occur in any breed or age of dog or
cat, with Afghan hounds being overrepresented because
of the association between lung lobe torsion and chylothorax. Clinical signs are those typical of pleural effusions, including lethargy, hyporexia or anorexia, weight
loss, tachypnea, cough, and paradoxical or restrictive
breathing pattern. Diligent cardiothoracic auscultation
should be performed because of the association between
cardiac disease and chylothorax. Additional physical
examination findings include muffled heart sounds,
decreased ventral lung sounds, and increased dorsal lung
sounds. There are no consistent laboratory findings for
dogs or cats with chylothorax.
Diagnosis of chylothorax is based on examination of
pleural fluid, which grossly appears milky white to
opaque pink‐white, but can vary depending on nutritional status of the patient. Pleural fluid from thoracocentesis should be saved in EDTA for cytologic
examination and a serum separator tube for triglyceride
concentration analysis. The fluid is most often classified
as an exudate, but may be classified as a modified transudate depending on the protein and cell count. Cytologic
examination shows predominantly lymphocytes, small
numbers of macrophages, and nondegenerate neutrophils, which increase in numbers with chronicity of
­pleural effusion (Figure 34.4).
Definitive diagnosis is made by demonstrating higher
triglycerides in pleural fluid than in serum samples,
­collected at the same time. If the effusion triglyceride
concentration is >100 mg/dL, chylomicrons are seen
­
microscopically on a wet‐mount preparation, pleural cholesterol concentration is less than serum cholesterol concentration, or Sudan stain verifies lipid in the sample, then
it is also classified as chylous. Once the diagnosis of chylothorax has been made, additional diagnostics, including
complete blood count, chemistry profile, heartworm test,
thoracic radiographs, thoracic ultrasound, echocardiogram, thoracic CT, +/− abdominal imaging, should be
considered to determine if an underlying disease can be
found. Cats should also be tested for retroviral diseases.
Treatment of chylothorax should be directed at the
underlying disease but as the disease is often idiopathic,
targeted treatment is rarely possible. Resolution of respiratory distress by removing the pleural effusion should
be initial treatment, regardless of etiology. Chylous
­effusion is rich in lymphocytes, protein, lipid, and elec-

Figure 34.4 Chylothorax cytology. Chylothorax in a cat consisting
of a mixture of mostly mature small, well‐differentiated
lymphocytes and intermediate‐sized lymphocytes. One
lymphocyte has smudged chromatin (top, right), a sign of partial
degradation (Wright‐Giemsa stain, 50× objective). Source: Photo
courtesy of Sarah S.K. Beatty, DVM, University of Florida.

trolytes and removal of large quantities of chylous
­effusion can cause hypovolemia, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, hypoproteinemia, lymphopenia, weight loss,
and immunosuppression. Conservative medical treatment involves pleural evacuation and nutritional
­management. Surgical treatment for idiopathic chylous
effusion involves ligation of the thoracic duct with or
without various adjunctive procedures including subtotal pericardectomy, cisterna chyli ablation, and thoracic
omentalization.
Diets low in fat have been recommended for medical
management of chylothorax in dogs and cats to decrease
the volume of chyle production and therefore flow
through the thoracic duct; however, this has not been
experimentally validated in dogs or cats. Rutin is a commercially available benzopyrone nutritional supplement
used in humans for treating lymphedema and commonly
recommended for medical management of idiopathic
chylothorax, although no proven beneficial effects have
been demonstrated in dogs and cats. Theoretical beneficial actions of rutin include edema uptake by lymphatic
vessels, reduction of blood vessel permeability, and
enhancement of tissue macrophage number and function
to promote phagocytosis of protein in chylous fluid.
Octreotide, a somatostatin analogue, inhibits biliary, pancreatic, and gastric secretions, and is recommended in
humans with chylothorax to decrease thoracic duct flow;
however, use in dogs and cats requires further research.
Prior to surgical treatment, some form of thoracic
duct imaging is typically recommended to allow for
­surgical planning given the anatomic variation within
and between species. Mesenteric lymphangiography, or
the use of aqueous contrast material injected into a

VetBooks.ir

34 Pleural Effusion

­mesenteric lymph node to highlight the thoracic duct,
has been utilized for over 30 years in veterinary medicine to guide surgical planning and assess postoperative
success. Mesenteric lymphangiography is an invasive
procedure as it requires an exploratory laparotomy and
injection of contrast medium into a mesenteric lymphatic vessel or lymph node, followed by radiographs or
CT under general anesthesia; therefore less invasive procedures have since been developed for thoracic duct
imaging. More recent minimally invasive imaging
modalities include percutaneous mesenteric lymphadenography, laparoscopic mesenteric lymphadenography,
percutaneous popliteal lymphangiography, and subcutaneous or submucosal lymphography, and CT has largely
replaced conventional radiography as the ideal imaging
technique.
Surgical treatment is recommended if chylothorax is
persistent despite medical therapy because chyle is
inflammatory and can cause severe fibrosing pleuritis
or pericarditis. Thoracic duct ligation at the entry
point of the duct into the thorax is the most commonly ­p erformed surgical technique for dogs and cats
with idiopathic c­ hylothorax. The premise behind thoracic duct ligation is to create a stimulus for new lymphaticovenous connections to the caudal vena cava or
azygous vein outside the pleural space, thereby bypassing the thoracic duct and preventing intrathoracic
flow of chyle. Surgical approach to the thoracic duct
can be through a caudal intercostal thoracotomy, paracostal or ventral midline celiotomy with transdiaphragmatic extension, median sternotomy, or using
thoracoscopy.
Several adjunctive surgical procedures have been
combined with thoracic duct ligation in an effort to
increase success rate of treatment. Cisterna chyli ablation was developed because hypertension within the
cisterna chyli is thought to cause collateral lympathic
vessels to form around the thoracic duct ligation site.
Adjunctive subtotal pericardectomy is rationalized
because chronic chylous effusions can cause pericarditis, which in turn can increase right‐sided venous pressure and possibly impede chyle drainage from new
lymphaticovenous anastomoses. Other adjunctive or
alternative procedures are thoracic omentalization to
provide lymphatic drainage, pleurodesis to abolish the
pleural space, and cisterna chyli and thoracic duct
embolization, with the latter being a salvage procedure
if previous surgical attempts have failed. Surgical (conventional or thoracoscopic) success rates vary between
50% and 100% in dogs and 14.3% and 80% in cats.
Persistence of chylous or nonchylous pleural effusion is
the most common surgical complication. If surgical
treatment fails, then implantation of an active pleuroperitoneal shunt or PleuralPort device should be considered to manage long‐term effusion.

­Hemothorax
Hemothorax is defined as an exudative effusion in the pleural space with a PCV that is at least 25% of peripheral blood.
Iatrogenic hemorrhage during thoracocentesis should be
suspected if the sample contains platelets and lacks erythrophagocytosis on cytology. In general, causes of hemothorax can be divided into coagulopathic and noncoagulopathic.
Anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity is the most common
cause of coagulopathic hemothorax in veterinary patients
but disorders of primary hemostasis could also result in
hemothorax. Reported noncoagulopathic etiologies include
neoplasia, thoracic trauma, lung lobe torsion, pancreatitis,
pulmonary parasitic disease (Spirocerca lupi, Dirofiliaria
immitis, or Angiostrongylus vasorum), esophageal foreign
body, and pulmonary infarction. Therapeutic thoracocentesis should only be performed in patients with hemothorax
if respiratory distress is present on physical examination
because most of the blood will be reabsorbed once the
underlying cause is treated. Coagulation tests should be
performed prior to thoracocentesis and blood products
should be readily available. Fresh frozen plasma should be
administered to coagulopathic patients with hemothorax,
prior to or during therapeutic thoracocentesis, if this is
deemed necessary on patient evaluation. Thoracic ultrasound, echocardiography, and CT may be utilized to determine the underlying cause along with standard blood tests,
heartworm test, and fecal examination. Treatment is
directed at the underlying cause and emergency surgical
treatment may be necessary in some dogs or cats that are
nonresponsive to conservative management.

­Bilothorax
Bilothorax is the accumulation of a nonseptic, exudative
effusion high in bilirubin within the pleural space and is rare
in both veterinary and human medicine. It has only been
reported in a few veterinary patients, all of which had recent
hepatobiliary trauma (gunshot wound or penetrating
trauma) or biliary surgery. In one cat, the penetrating
trauma was iatrogenic; pleurobiliary fistulae occurred secondary to thoracotomy tube placement. The theorized
mechanism of bilothorax formation is from pleurobiliary
formation, with a presumptive ­diaphragmatic incongruity;
however, bile can also be carried across an intact diaphragm
by way of the ­lymphatic system. Diagnosis is confirmed if
the ratio of bilirubin in pleural fluid to serum is greater than
1:1. Given the rarity of bilothorax, optimal treatment is controversial. Medical management by placing thoracostomy
tubes with ­frequent pleural fluid drainage is recommended
to minimize bile pleuritis. If medical management fails, surgical exploration is recommended. Bilothorax in dogs and
cats appears to have a good prognosis, with a combined
100% survival rate of currently reported cases.

343

VetBooks.ir

344

Section 4 Respiratory Disease

­Conclusion
Pleural effusion is a common consequence of several
underlying pathophysiologic processes in dogs and cats.
Historical findings can be acute or chronic and clinical

signs are variable, with many dogs and cats presenting with
a primary complaint related to lethargy, hyporexia, and/or
respiratory distress. A thorough diagnostic approach is
often needed to determine the underlying disease and subsequently guide treatment options and overall prognosis.

­Further Reading
Akulian J, Yarmus L, Feller‐Kopman D. The evaluation and
clinical application of pleural physiology. Clin Chest Med
2013; 34: 11–19.
Barrs VR, Allan GS, Martin P, et al. Feline pyothorax: a
retrospective study of 27 cases in Australia. J Feline Med
Surg 2005; 7: 211–22.
Boysen SR, Lisciandro GR. The use of ultrasound for dogs
and cats in the emergency room: AFAST and TFAST.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2013; 43: 773–97.

Reetz JA, Buza EL, Krick EL. CT features of pleural masses
and nodules. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2012; 53: 121–7.
Sigrist NE, Adamik KN, Doherr MG, et al. 2011.
Evaluation of respiratory parameters at presentation as
clinical indicators of the respiratory localization in dogs
and cats with respiratory distress. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
2011; 21: 13–23.

VetBooks.ir

345

Section 5
Critical Care Medicine

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

347

35
Approach to the Patient in the Critical Care Setting
Sarah Allen, DVM, DACVECC
Massachusetts Veterinary Referral Hospital, Woburn, MA, USA

Patients presenting to a veterinary emergency room represent a diverse array of illness and injury, ranging from
mild to life threatening. The use of a triage system allows
these patients to be systematically evaluated and prioritized based on presenting signs, history, and initial vital
parameters. While no triage system is perfect, success is
enhanced when staff are well trained. Every facility and
emergency team should have a standard triage system,
appropriately trained staff to perform triage, and a reliably equipped area to allow for efficient and prompt care
of these patients’ needs.
A clinician’s relationship with a critical patient often
begins upon presentation to the hospital or, in the case of
a referral center, upon admission to the intensive care
unit (ICU). As the direct definition of the word “critical”
states, a critical patient is one that is at a stage of disease
when an abrupt change for better or worse may be
expected, or that has an illness or condition involving
danger of death. Due to this unstable position, these
patients require intense and continuous assessment and
care and may benefit from consultation with a critical
care specialist.

­Physical Exam
A thorough initial physical exam, as well as frequent
sequential exams, should be performed with the goal of
promptly identifying current and evolving problems.
Advanced diagnostics may become necessary in order to
fully illuminate clinical findings but should never be used
in place of a physical exam. While each clinician should
have a routine by which they approach an exam, it may
be required that the order of the exam be varied in critically ill patients, based on each patient’s current condition and stability. Care must be taken to ensure that all
systems are assessed due to possible variation in exam

sequence. The exam may need to be performed in multiple phases to allow for patient comfort and safety.
Due to the critical condition of these patients, initial
exam time should be spent on evaluating critical systems, particularly airway and breathing, heart and circulation, and neurologic status. For patients in respiratory
distress, brief attempts at an exam may need to be interspersed between periods of rest in an oxygen chamber.
Observation of the patient’s respirations with attention
to chest wall and abdominal movement may also provide
information as to the cause of distress. Emphasis should
be placed on thoracic auscultation to help discern the
cause of distress, noting stridor, air movement or
increased/decreased lung sounds. If the patient is not
breathing or is ineffectively moving air, intubation and
manual ventilation is required.
The heart should be ausculted while peripheral pulses
are palpated. If heartbeat and pulses are absent, CPR
must be instituted immediately (see Chapter 37). If the
heart is beating and pulses are absent or irregular, further investigation and intervention are required to
restore effective circulation. During heart auscultation,
the heart rate and rhythm should be noted and heart
sounds should be evaluated for presence of murmurs or
muffled nature.
The patient’s neurologic status should be evaluated
and continuously monitored for alterations or deterioration. Particularly with trauma, signs of spinal cord injury
should be sought and appropriate stabilization initiated
prior to further manipulation of the patient. If traumatic
brain injury is suspected, efforts to increase cerebral perfusion and decrease intracranial pressure (ICP) should
be instituted, including blood pressure support, head
elevation, and minimal jugular vein occlusion. Judicious
IV fluid therapy is recommended to restore blood pressure to a minimum of a systolic of 90 mmHg or a mean of
60 mmHg.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

348

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

Occasionally, emergency interventions are necessary
at the time of examination to stabilize the patient so that
further examination and diagnostics can be performed
and an overall treatment plan composed. If it is possible
to complete a comprehensive exam at the time of initial
evaluation, it should done.

­History
A complete history is required for appropriate care of a
critical patient. During triage and emergency presentation, the need for speed and efficiency often prevents the
gathering of a thorough history. Once the patient’s condition allows, further history to be discovered includes
past medical problems, past and recent surgical interventions, origin and travel history, and general wellness
and preventive care (vaccines, flea/tick/parasite prevention) schedule. Medications administered by the owner
should be determined, with specific questioning about
vitamins, supplements, and over‐the‐counter medications. Efforts should be made to obtain copies of medical
records from other veterinary facilities where the patient
has been treated recently and in the past. These records
should be carefully reviewed to identify areas in the
patient’s history that the owner may have forgotten or
misunderstood.

­Assessment
After the history and physical exam have been completed, time should be taken to document the information and to form an active problems list. The initial list
may consist of an identified problem without an underlying cause. Initial therapeutic interventions directed at
the current problem(s) should be initiated and the problem list and eventual diagnosis list updated as indicated
by response to therapy or results of additional diagnostics. While a written problem list is commonly used by
beginning clinicians and then discarded as clinicians
gain experience, with complicated cases it remains
essential to ensure best patient care.

­Record Keeping
Not only are formal medical records required by law,
they help the clinician keep the case documented and
organized and assist in transfer between clinicians and
facilities. Medical records also provide information for
follow‐up care after discharge and in the future. The
medical record should consist of the presenting history

and physical exam, a problem list, a diagnosis list, and
results of laboratory and imaging procedures. For the
duration of hospitalization, a minimum of one physical
exam should be documented daily as well as an updated
problem/diagnosis list and an updated treatment and
diagnostic plan. The ideal medical record will also document communications between the treating veterinarian
and owner and any consulting veterinarians that have
been involved.

­Client Communication
The assessment and medical management of a critical
patient are complicated and challenging enough. Adding
to the difficulty is the need for the clinician to communicate effectively and compassionately with the owner. As
the case evolves, the client needs to be informed of the
working diagnosis, financial costs, and short‐ and long‐
term prognosis for the current condition. Apprising the
owner of the risks and benefits of each proposed treatment or therapy is necessary in order for them to make
an informed decision. As many of these patients are
unstable, a CPR resuscitation code is a required topic of
conversation to ensure that the owner’s wishes are followed in the event of an arrest. Detailed written client
communications should be kept as part of the formal
medical record. These notes help all clinicians involved
with a case to know what has been discussed and when.
They are also invaluable should a case go to litigation.

­Referral
When treating a critically ill patient, a large consideration is whether the current facility can offer the patient
and client the level of care that they need and want.
While many facilities may be able to meet the minimum
standard of care, it is always best to inform the owner of
the option of referral, making sure to communicate the
pros and cons of transfer as well as the expected financial cost of treatment at another facility. While some
owners may opt to not pursue referral, many will elect
to transfer to a hospital that has 24‐hour doctor care or
other advanced capabilities. For many general practitioners, referral to a 24‐hour facility for any patient
requiring overnight IV fluids or observation is common. Cases may also need referral for advanced diagnostics including imaging (ultrasound, computed
tomography, magnetic resonance imaging), advanced
surgical procedures (soft tissue and orthopedic), or for
advanced therapeutics (long‐term ventilation, transfusion, dialysis).

VetBooks.ir

35 Approach to the Patient in the Critical Care Setting

Prior to referral of critically ill patients, the treating clinician should call the intended receiving facility and
speak to the specialist who will be taking control of the
case to ensure the transfer is made as safe and efficient as
possible. All available medical records should be copied
and should accompany the pet in a hard copy format.

­The “Rule of 20”
In addition to serial physical exams and frequent reevaluation of the active problem list, there are a multitude of
critical parameters that need to be evaluated at least
daily in the critical patient. Developed by Rebecca Kirby,
a founding Diplomate of the American College of
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, the “Rule of 20”
provides a comprehensive tool to guide the continuous
evaluation and integration of a patient’s organ systems,
laboratory findings and treatment and many critical care
specialists find it useful to refer to the “Rule of 20” on a
daily basis with critically ill patients. Each element will
be discussed below, many of which will be covered in
detail in other chapters.
Fluid Balance
Fluid therapy is a common treatment in critical patients
with a goal to reestablish and maintain hydration and to
ensure circulating volume is maintained. Often dehydration and hypovolemia require rapid fluid replacement in
the form of boluses. After initial volume expansion and
rehydration, each patient’s “maintenance” fluid needs
will differ due to underlying conditions, ongoing losses,
and variations in metabolism. Each patient will also have
a unique ability to tolerate administered fluids. The consequences of overhydration or inappropriate fluid redistribution include pulmonary edema, peripheral edema,
and third spacing of fluids within body cavities.
Assessment of response to administered fluids requires
monitoring of many parameters, including mucous
membrane color and moistness, skin turgor, heart rate,
and body weight. Each of these parameters should be
assessed several times per day. Monitoring of blood
­pressure and urine output can provide additional information on a patient’s needs. Monitoring of central
venous pressures and changes in blood gas variables
­(lactate, base deficit) are used for advanced monitoring
of fluid therapy.
Blood Pressure and Perfusion
There are many methods to monitor blood pressure,
including direct (via an arterial catheter and pressure

transducer) and indirect (Doppler and sphygmomanometer or oscilllometric measurements) options. A
good general goal is to maintain a mean arterial blood
pressure >60 mmHg and a systolic blood pressure
>90 mmHg for optimal organ and tissue perfusion.
Hypotension that is nonresponsive to fluid therapy
may indicate the presence of an underlying acid–base
or electrolyte disorder or the need to begin therapy
with a vasoactive agent. Central venous pressure and
lactate monitoring can provide additional information
on the need for vasopressor therapy. While less commonly encountered clinically, monitoring for and
treatment of hypertension are useful to prevent complications including retinal detachment, neurologic
impairment, and end‐organ injury.
Cardiac Function
Heart function should be evaluated not only by heart rate
and rhythm but also ability to effectively pump blood
forward through evaluation of peripheral limb temperatures and capillary refill time. Electrocardiographically
confirmed arrhythmias should be treated if perfusion is
compromised. Echocardiography is helpful in identifying
underlying structural heart disease as well as visualizing
cardiac filling and contractility. Additional treatments
directed at optimizing cardiac function, including IV
­fluids, inotropic support or afterload reduction, should
be introduced as indicated.
Albumin
Albumin is a blood protein produced by the liver that
plays an essential role in a multitude of physiologic
processes, including fluid balance, drug transport, tissue healing, and coagulation. Synthetic colloids can be
used to maintain fluid in the intravascular space but
they do not substitute for albumin’s other roles in the
body and may be associated with acute kidney injury.
Albumin levels <2 g/dL have been associated with a
poor prognosis in critically ill patients and may indicate the need for replacement with plasma (frozen or
fresh ­frozen) or canine albumin transfusions.
Oncotic Pull
Adequate oncotic pressure is required to maintain
appropriate intravascular volume and prevent interstitial fluid loss that can propagate hypovolemia and
edema formation. Oncotic pressure changes in direct
correlation with albumin concentration and can therefore be augmented with administration of natural
colloids.

349

VetBooks.ir

350

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

Oxygenation and Ventilation
Oxygenation can be assessed by arterial blood gas measurement (PaO2) or pulse oximetry (SpO2), and allows a
clinician to evaluate how well a patient is moving oxygen
into the blood. A PaO2 <80 mmHg or a SpO2 <96% indicates the need for supplemental oxygen which can be
provided by flow‐by oxygen, nasal oxygen cannula, an
oxygen chamber or endotracheal intubation with 100%
oxygen. Ventilation is evaluated by assessing the arterial
PaCO2 or indirectly by using end‐tidal CO2 concentration. End‐tidal CO2 monitoring can be used on intubated
as well as nonintubated patients using a tight‐fitting
facemask or a nasal cannula. In situations of hypoventilation, hypercarbia (PaCO2 >60 mmHg) should be treated
with supplemental oxygen and mechanical ventilation if
needed. Repeated measurements are required to monitor response to therapy.
Glucose
Ideally, glucose should be maintained in the normal
range (75–120 mg/dL). Hypoglycemia can manifest as
peripheral weakness, altered neurologic function (obtundation, stupor or seizures), and hypotension. Severe
infection, synthetic liver failure, neoplasia, and hypoadrenocrticism are common causes of hypoglycemia in
critical patients. Young and undernourished animals are
predisposed to developing hypoglycemia. Administration
of supplemental dextrose in IV fluids is indicated if
­normoglycemia cannot be maintained via enteral nutrition. Hyperglycemia due to diabetes requires exogenous
­insulin administration to prevent ketoacidosis, hyperosmolarity, and dehydration due to osmotic diuresis.
Hyperglycemia associated with trauma is associated with
a worsening prognosis. Although well described in the
human medical literature, the benefits of tight glycemic
control for hyperglycemia in veterinary medicine are
unproven and should only be attempted at a 24‐hour
critical care facility.
Electrolyte and Acid–Base Balance
Critically ill patients often have significant acid–base
and electrolyte disorders that contribute to their overall
clinical condition. Important electrolytes to be monitored include sodium, potassium, ionized calcium, chloride, magnesium, and phosphorus. Many disease states
are associated with particular electrolyte arrangements
and care should be taken to customize monitoring to an
individual patient’s signs and diagnosis. Critical patients
should have electrolytes monitored at least once daily
while on IV fluid therapy. Acid–base derangements can
be the result of metabolic or respiratory conditions, or a

combination of the two. In addition to pH, PCO2 and
HCO3−, lactate levels should be evaluated to assist in
identifying the origin of an acid–base disorder. Most
hyperlactatemia is the result of impaired oxygen delivery
and rapid resolution is generally associated with better
patient outcome.
Mentation and Intracranial Pressure
Close monitoring and documentation of a patient’s mentation is necessary to allow prompt detection of any
changes that may indicate progression of intracranial
disease or a hemodynamic or metabolic disease with
neurologic consequences. Elevated ICP is common in
patients with head trauma and inflammatory encephalitides. It should be remembered that not all mentation
changes are due to structural changes or ICP alterations.
Hypotension and hypoglycemia can manifest as altered
mentation. Hepatic diseases resulting in encephalopathy
can lead to neurologic signs that may indicate progression of a disease process.
Coagulation
Impaired coagulation in the critical patient due to thrombocytopenia or clotting factor deficiency is easy to
­identify. It is more difficult to evaluate patients for hypercoagulability, which can result in thromboembolic
sequela and secondary complications. Hypercoagulability
can be due to systemic inflammation from trauma, infection or neoplasia as well as a multitude of underlying
metabolic and endocrine disorders. Advanced diagnostics, including thromboelastography, are required to
fully evaluate a patient for hypercoagulability. As underlying conditions predisposing to a hypercoagulable state
are identified, clinicians should weigh the benefits versus
risks of initiating thromboprophylaxis.
Red Blood Cell and Hemoglobin
Concentration
Adequate oxygen delivery is important for all patients,
but is especially crucial for critical patients whose
systems are already taxed by underlying conditions.
­
Hemoglobin is necessary for oxygen transport and delivery and red blood cell transfusions should be administered in response to clinical signs associated with anemia,
including tachycardia, increased respiratory rate, hypotension, and weakness. While there is no standard transfusion “trigger” point, each patient should be individually
assessed for the need for a transfusion based on clinical
signs, underlying disease processes, and anticipated
losses. Evaluation of venous oxygen saturation may allow
early identification of inadequate oxygen delivery.

VetBooks.ir

35 Approach to the Patient in the Critical Care Setting

Utilizing a goal‐directed approach, red blood cell transfusion to maintain a hematocrit >30% is recommended if
central venous oxygen saturation (ScvO2) >70% is not
maintained despite supplemental oxygen and normalization of intravascular volume and systemic blood
pressure.
Renal Function and Urine Output
Kidney function should be frequently evaluated in critically ill patients as hypotension, thrombosis, and nephrotoxic medications can cause temporary or permanent
injury resulting in renal insufficiency. Urine output
should be at least 1 mL/kg/h but oliguria should be evaluated in light of fluid input for an individual patient. An
indwelling urinary catheter, and recording fluid in and
fluid out, assists in evaluating a patient’s overall fluid status. In addition to urine output, insensible losses, losses
from surgical drains, chest tubes or wounds should also
be accounted for. Commonly accepted insensible loss
rates are 10–20 mL/kg/day. Fluid input includes IV fluids
(crystalloids and colloids) as well as nutritional support
in the form of parenteral or enteral nutrition. In patients
with possible renal impairment, close monitoring of
fluid ins/outs may assist in maintaining fluid balance.
Daily monitoring of serum BUN and creatinine is recommended to detect potential renal injury early. Especially
in patients with normal renal values at the time of presentation, even mild changes in BUN or creatinine (even
within the reference range) can be a harbinger of renal
injury or multiorgan failure. Early detection and aggressive treatment can have a dramatic impact on patient
outcome. Analyzing urine for casts, glucose, and protein
is also used to identify renal injury and dysfunction.
Immune Status and Antibiotic Coverage
Critically ill patients are often battling infections and
may have overextended or overwhelmed immune systems. Empirical antibiotic therapy is recommended for
patients with suspected infections and antibiotic selection should be based on presumed site of infection, likely
organism involved, and hospital surveillance profiles.
When empirical antibiotics are used, initial broad‐spectrum coverage is recommended with deescalation based
on results of culture and sensitivity panels. In addition to
bacterial infections, clinicians should be aware of the
concern for rickettsial, protozoal, fungal, and parasitic
infections that may require additional antimicrobial
therapies. In all critical patients, care should be taken to
practice aseptic techniques when examining and treating
them. Clinicians and nurses should practice good hygiene
with frequent hand washing. Exam gloves should be
worn at all times when handling any patient and the use

of isolation gowns should be considered if the patient is
severely immunocompromised.
Gastrointestinal (GI) Motility and Integrity
Many underlying conditions can result in gastric and
intestinal ileus and compromise of the GI mucosal barrier. Decreased intestinal motility results in stasis of
intestinal contents and overgrowth of normal bacterial
flora. An altered mucosal barrier results in an increased
risk for bacterial translocation and subsequent sepsis.
Gastric and small intestinal stasis may result in vomiting,
while large intestinal derangements may lead to diarrhea, which can create and/or exacerbate hypovolemia.
Medical intervention (promotility medications, physical
activity) to increase GI motility and protect the mucosal
barrier is recommended. If possible, enteral nutrition is
recommended to maintain enterocyte health, decrease
villous atrophy, increase GI motility, and improve
mucosal integrity.
Drug Metabolism and Dosage
Medication doses and routes should be reviewed daily
for accuracy, safety (side‐effects, metabolism, and drug
interactions) and continued necessity. In the face of
altered renal or hepatic function, it may be prudent to
reduce the dose or increase the interval of medications
to decrease the risk of toxicity and side‐effects. Highly
protein‐bound drugs should be used with caution in
hypoalbuminemic patients due to the potential for
higher than expected plasma levels.
Nutrition
All attempts should be made to provide appropriate
nutritional support to critical patients in order to avoid a
negative energy balance contributing to organ dysfunction, delayed healing, immunocompromise, and GI
­dysfunction. Enteral nutrition is ideal and can be accomplished by voluntary patient eating or feeding tubes (e.g.,
nasogastric, esophageal, gastrostomy or jejunostomy
tubes). Total or partial parenteral nutrition is an option
for providing nutritional support to patients with a contraindication to enteral nutrition (severe ileus, intractable vomiting, malabsorptive conditions).
Analgesia
Appropriate pain management is necessary to improve
patient comfort and decrease the secondary effects of
pain. Common signs of pain include increased heart rate,
agitation, and discomfort upon palpation of wounds.
Multiple pain scoring systems have been validated for

351

VetBooks.ir

352

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

use in veterinary medicine and provide a systemic and
repeatable approach to evaluating pain and a patient’s
response to pain medications.
Nursing Care and Patient Mobility
While focusing on the medical care of a critically ill
patient, it is easy to overlook patient comfort and
husbandry. In patients that require extensive nursing
­
care, these measures may be skipped due to the time and
staffing they require, especially in larger patients that may
require multiple people to move and support them. Many
of these patients are nonambulatory and physical therapy
should be provided several times a day. Passive range of
motion of limbs keeps muscles and joints flexible and can
improve circulation. For patients with peripheral limb
edema, tissue massage from distal to proximal can assist
in resolution. Deep bedding and frequent repositioning
are necessary to prevent pressure sores, lung atelectasis,
and edema formation. Standing sessions are useful and
allow patients to attempt supported ambulation. If possible, underwater treadmill therapy is an option for assisted
mobility to increase flexibility, strength, and circulation.
Efforts should be made to frequently take nonambulatory
patients out of their cages and, if feasible, outside for a
“visual vacation.” For patients with lung consolidation
from pneumonia or other conditions, positional coupage
based on afflicted region can be useful in resolving consolidation. In patients with surgical incisions or traumatic
tissue injury, cold laser therapy can be considered to
improve tissue blood supply and increase healing. Patients
should be diligently cleaned to prevent skin irritation and
burns from urine and feces soiling.

peripheral edema can rapidly develop and cause wraps
or bandages to become tight and constricting. Soiled or
wet bandages should be immediately changed as they
provide an excellent source of infection. Wounds and
incisions should be closely monitored for healing and
any changes that occur, including bruising, odor, swelling, and discharge, should be immediately investigated.
Tender Loving Care
Amongst all the medications, procedures, and treatments, time should be taken to simply sit with a patient
to provide comfort and affection. Once again, this is an
area that is easy to omit when a patient has intense medical treatments and support staff is spread thin. Patients
that require many treatments are often mislabeled as
being “difficult cases” rather than appreciated for the
multiple levels of complex care they require to support
their severe disease states. Many times patients will only
eat when being petted. Owner visits should be encouraged and efforts made to allow visits to occur outside the
hospitalization area to allow patients stress‐free periods
during which they may eat or rest. In 24‐hour care facilities, efforts should be made to allow the patients to have
treatment‐free periods during which uninterrupted rest
can occur. Clinicians should attempt to arrange treatments in groupings to establish greater intervals of time
when the patient is not being handled or interacted with.
Especially during evening hours, further emphasis
should be placed on treatment‐free periods. During
these evening times, lights should be dimmed and
attempts made to decrease ambient noise. There may be
benefit to playing relaxing music such as soft classical or
nature sounds.

Bandage and Wound Care
All IV catheters should be routinely changed and catheter insertion sites evaluated for infection and inflammation. Each facility should establish a protocol for the
placement and maintenance of peripheral IV catheters
and advanced catheters such as central IV catheters and
arterial catheters. At a minimum, daily bandage changes
should be required but other considerations include
acceptable indwelling duration, flushing/locking procedures, level of sterility during placement and handling,
and a protocol for investigation and treatment of
suspected catheter site infections. Indwelling urinary
­
catheters also require set protocols for placement and
maintenance including prepuce/vulva flushing, collection system handling/changing, acceptable indwelling
duration, and a protocol for investigation of suspected
infections due to catheterization. Bandages placed on
wounds require frequent changing to evaluate for
changes in underlying wounds. During critical illness,

­Euthanasia
For many critical patients, compassionate euthanasia
may be the most humane treatment available. As a case
progresses, lines of communication regarding euthanasia should remain open between owners and the medical
staff. Despite being common in veterinary medicine,
some owners may not know it is an option for their pets.
Broaching the subject of euthanasia can be difficult and
needs to be handled with special attention. Even in cases
with a grave or guarded prognosis, owners may not
­consider euthanasia due to religious or ethical beliefs.

­Conclusion
Each critical patient will require a unique and customized approach to every element of their care. While the

VetBooks.ir

35 Approach to the Patient in the Critical Care Setting

care for these cases is more complicated, with it comes a
greater feeling of success when a patient is discharged to
its family. Many critically ill patients will not have a positive outcome and often the deciding factor in outcome is
determined by the attention provided to the patient and
owner. It is easy to influence a client to terminate care for
a patient with a guarded prognosis, but experience and

clinical knowledge should be used to assist clients in
making the best decision for them and their pet.
The care of critical patients can be exhausting for the
entire medical team. Clinicians should take the time to frequently discuss the details of these cases with support staff
to ensure that they understand the importance and motivation behind medical treatments and owners’ decisions.

­Further Reading
Downing R. The role of physical medicine and
rehabilitation for patients in palliative and hospice care.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2011; 41(3):
591–608.
Hackett T. Physical examination. In: Silverstein D, Hopper
K, eds. Small Animal Critical Care Medicine. St Louis,
MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2008, pp. 2–5.
Hopper K, Powell L. Basics of mechanical ventilation for
dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2013; 43(4): 955–69.

Pachtinger G. Monitoring of the emergent small animal
patient. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2013;
43(4):705–20.
Prittie J. Optimal endpoints of resuscitation and early goal
directed therapy. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2006; 16(4):
329–39.
Rule of 20. http://files.dvm360.com/alfresco_images/
DVM360//2013/11/11/b67d4ee5‐e8cd‐4002‐8d45‐
39e6ce9bd68f/article‐804765.pdf (accessed May 22,
2019).

353

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

355

36
Fluid Therapy
Teresa Rieser, DVM, DACVECC
Veterinary Specialty Care, Mt. Pleasant, SC, USA

Intravenous fluids are a commonly used treatment in
small animal medicine. A full understanding of the indications and potential fluid choices allows clinicians to
reap the maximum benefit from fluid therapy while minimizing possible complications.

­Vascular Access
Catheter Types
Fluid therapy can be administered via a number of different routes, including intravenous, subcutaneous, and
intraosseous. In order to administer fluids intravenously,
venous access must first be established. Most commonly,
this involves the placement of a catheter within a peripheral vein or within the jugular vein. There are a variety of
catheter types currently available, including winged needle (butterfly catheters), over the needle, through the
needle and catheters that are placed using a guide wire.
When placing an intravenous catheter, a number of
questions should be considered to ensure the most
appropriate catheter is selected.
Butterfly‐type catheters are rigid needles with a plastic
“butterfly” at the needle hub to make handling easier.
The needles are then attached to a length of tubing that
can be connected to a syringe for bolus drug delivery or
blood sample collection. This type of catheter is useful
for instances where the catheter does not need to be
maintained within the vein. An example would be an IV
bolus injection of medication or a single episode of venipuncture to collect blood samples.
If a catheter needs to be maintained within a peripheral
vein for any duration of time then an over‐the‐needle
type catheter is most commonly used. Theses catheters
are relatively easy to place and can be maintained within
a vessel for a number of days with diligent nursing care. If
placed in the critically ill, emergent or surgical patient,
the short length of the catheter coupled with a reasonable

diameter allows for rapid bolusing of fluids. This type of
catheter is usually secured in place with medical tape.
Through‐the‐needle catheters are also widely available. This type of catheter tends to be greater in length
and is used when central venous access is desired for
repeated blood sampling or the administration of a
hyperosmolar solution such as total parenteral nutrition.
Catheters placed using a guide wire can be single lumen
or multilumen and are placed into a central vein. This
type of ­catheter allows for blood sampling, fluid administration, including the concurrent administration of
noncompatible fluids through separate lumens, as well
as the administration of hyperosmolar solutions that
would cause significant phlebitis if administered peripherally. Placement of a central venous catheter also allows
for monitoring of central venous pressure in patients to
guide fluid therapy.
Intravenous catheters may be made of a number of different materials, including polyurethane, Teflon®, and
silicon elastomer (silastic). Polyurethane and Teflon
catheters are most commonly used, as they are cost‐
effective and relatively easy to insert. Silicon elastomer
(Silastic®) catheters are very flexible and less likely to
result in catheter‐related thrombophlebitis but they are
more expensive and technically challenging to place.
Silastic catheters are used for long‐term catheterization,
while Teflon or polyurethane catheters are reasonable
choices for shorter term catheterization.
The placement of intravenous catheters is common in
small animal veterinary medicine. Peripheral catheters
are most commonly placed in the cephalic, medial or lateral saphenous or femoral vein. In some animals, the
veins of the ear can also be used for catheterization.
Central catheters are placed within the jugular vein or
threaded from a peripheral vein into the vena cava. In
order to preserve the integrity of the catheter and minimize discomfort and inflammation, catheters should not
cross a joint. Common sense would also dictate that the

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

356

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

patient’s disease process might make one catheterization
site preferred over another. An example is the parvoviral
enteritis patient with voluminous diarrhea; a hind leg
catheter should not be the first choice, as it would probably become soiled in short order.
The area selected for placement should be clipped and
aseptically prepared, taking care not to abrade the skin,
as this can increase the rate of catheter‐related complications. In addition to preparing the patient, staff members
should also wash their hands and wear gloves. Once the
catheter is seated within the vein, it is flushed with sterile
saline. There has been no proven benefit to using heparinized saline in lieu of sterile saline as a catheter flush.
Peripheral catheters are secured to the limb with medical
tape. It is common to suture central lines in place and
then to protect them further with a bandage. Catheter
sites should be kept clean and dry and inspected at least
daily for evidence of inflammation.
Catheter‐Related Complications
Catheter‐related complications are common but can be
minimized with relative ease. Any material used for an
intravenous catheter will cause some inflammation
within a vessel so it is important to diligently assess catheter sites for indication of not only infection but also
thrombophlebitis. Catheter sites should be inspected
daily for swelling, pain, or induration of the vessel. An
indurated vessel will feel firm and ropey when palpated.
It is also important to monitor patient response when
infusing medications. As catheter integrity degrades, the
animal may object when drugs are infused.
The possibility of infection or thrombophlebitis should
be suspected in any patient who has an intravenous catheter and develops signs of infection or exhibits a reaction
to injections that were previously well tolerated. A
patient who develops a low‐grade fever in hospital without another potential nidus of infection or inflammation
should have all catheter sites promptly inspected. While
in the past it has been recommended that catheters be
removed after 72 hours to prevent infection, multiple
studies have shown that the rate of infection does not
increase if catheters are allowed to remain in place for
longer periods of time and that it is more important to
keep the area clean and the catheter dressing unsoiled.
Infiltration occurs when a catheter moves out of a vein
into the surrounding tissue. Any fluids or drugs administered through the catheter are therefore infiltrated into
that area instead of being delivered to the vein. Most
commonly, infiltration is identified by swelling and
­tenderness at the catheter site. If vesicant medications
are administered perivascularly, the term used is extravasation. The sequelae of extravasation can be more severe
and may include heat, pain, redness, swelling, and

­induration. Sloughing of the skin and the perivascular
tissue can then follow. If the catheter is a central line, it
may not be immediately evident that the position of the
catheter has changed. Infiltration of fluid in this instance
can result in mediastinal or pleural fluid accumulation
that can be severe enough to cause dyspnea.
The key to preventing catheter‐related complications
is vigilance. Place catheters away from joints and avoid
using rigid materials, like a butterfly catheter, for prolonged infusion. Inspect the catheter site frequently.
Before infusing drugs, aspirate the catheter for blood (a
“flash”) and then flush with saline to ensure proper placement and patency of the catheter.
Catheter foreign bodies occur when a portion of the
catheter becomes free within a vessel and lodges (most
commonly) in the heart or a pulmonary artery. Catheter
foreign bodies may occur when catheters are accidently
cut during removal or when a through‐the‐needle catheter is cut off by the introducer needle. It can also occur
when an over‐the‐needle catheter is partially advanced
and then replaced on the needle while seated within a
vein. Infrequently, the shaft of a catheter can become
disconnected from the catheter hub. These types of
­
­mishaps can be associated with serious complications,
including cardiac perforation, endocarditis, pulmonary
embolism, sepsis, and arrhythmias. Options for management of catheter foreign bodies include surgical retrieval,
endovascular retrieval, or leaving the catheter in situ. In
human medicine, attempted retrieval of the foreign body
is preferred. Successful retrieval of intravascular foreign
bodies using endovascular techniques has been reported
in five dogs, a goat, and a horse.
Air emboli occur when air is introduced into the vascular system through a catheter. This can be seen when a
central line is advanced into the thoracic cavity and the
change in pressure draws air into the system. More commonly, air can be introduced through incorrectly prepared IV lines or when air is injected into rigid fluid
containers to speed an infusion. Small emboli are usually
clinically silent. Large air emboli can result in a dramatic
increase in pulmonary vascular resistance followed by
pulmonary edema formation and dyspnea. If a large
enough bolus of air is delivered, the right ventricular outflow tract can be obstructed. If a central line is in place
when an air emboli occurs, aspirating the air out of the
heart is the best choice for treatment.

­Body Fluid Compartments
Body Water Distribution
Approximately 60% of body weight is water. This
­percentage can change based on age, gender or body

VetBooks.ir

36 Fluid Therapy

composition. Both humans and dogs have been shown to
have a decrease in total body water with age. Body composition also plays a role and it is useful to base fluid
therapy recommendations on lean body mass as opposed
to body weight. In the normally fleshed animal, the lean
body mass is approximately 80% of total body weight. In
obese patients, fat (which has a lower water composition
than other tissues) is abundant, so lean body mass can be
estimated as 70% of body weight. By contrast, in the
underconditioned animal, measured body weight is
equivalent to the lean body weight.
Total body water is further divided into body fluid
compartments. The largest portion of total body water is
found within the cells, with the intracellular fluid (ICF)
compartment accounting for roughly two‐thirds of total
body water. The remaining one‐third is found in the
extracellular fluid (ECF) compartment. The ECF compartment is further divided into the interstitial space,
which contains roughly 75% of the water of the ECF, and
the vascular space, which contains the remaining 25% as
plasma volume. While it is useful to describe total body
water based on its location, it is important to remember
that fluid balance is dynamic and movement between
fluid compartments is occurring constantly.
Body fluids contain varying concentrations of solutes
in addition to water. The ECF and ICF have vastly different solute concentrations but the total numbers of
­cations and anions in all body fluids must be equal to
maintain electroneutrality. In the ECF, sodium is the
major cation and chloride and bicarbonate are the most
common anions. By contrast, within the cell, the most
common cations are potassium and magnesium and the
most common anions are phosphates and proteins. Body
fluid compartments are dynamic and the relative volume
within the fluid compartments is dependent on the number of osmotically active particles present within the
space. The normal plasma osmolality (tonicity) is
300 mOsm/kg in the dog and 310 mOsm/kg in the cat.
Approximately 95% of total serum osmolality in the
normal animal results from the presence of sodium,
­
potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, urea, and glucose
while large molecules such as albumin have little effect
on osmolality.
The body must balance daily fluid losses with intake.
In addition to pathologic fluid losses, all animals have
insensible fluid losses via the urinary tract, gastrointestinal tract, and respiratory system. When fluid and solutes
are lost from the body, the relative effect on the different
body compartments is dependent on the tonicity of the
fluid lost. Lost fluid can be hypertonic to plasma, isotonic, or hypotonic. Usually fluid is lost from the ECF.
When hypotonic fluid is lost from the ECF, the ECF
becomes hypertonic relative to the ICF. Because the
­solutes (sodium, potassium, and chloride) are effective

osmoles, the majority of equilibration will occur by the
movement of water from the ICF to the ECF. This results
in a decrease of the ICF volume but a bolstering of the
ECF. An example of hypotonic fluid loss would be polyuria seen with renal disease. When isotonic fluid is lost,
there is no change in the tonicity between the ECF and
ICF. For this reason, there is no net fluid movement
between fluid compartments and the volume lost results
in an absolute decrease in the volume of the ECF. An
example of isotonic fluid loss would be acute hemorrhage. Finally, in the case of hypertonic fluid loss from
the ECF, the ECF becomes hypotonic relative to the ICF
and water moves from the ECF into the ICF, which further exacerbates the volume loss. It is important to recognize that an animal can have hypovolemia without
dehydration but dehydration cannot occur without some
degree of hypovolemia.
Water Movement
Movement of fluid between body fluid spaces is g­ overned
by Starling’s law.
Fluid flux k f

Pc Pi

c

i

In this equation, kf is a filtration coefficient unique to
each tissue bed that reflects the relative permeability of
the capillary wall within that tissue bed, Pc refers to the
hydrostatic pressure within the capillary and Pi refers to
the hydrostatic pressure within the interstitium.
Similarly, πc and πi refer to the oncotic pressure in the
capillary and interstitium respectively. Recall that
oncotic pressure differs from osmolality/osmolarity and
refers to the force exerted by large, impermeant molecules to hold water within either the capillary or interstitial space. Clinically, oncotic pressure is referred to as
colloid osmotic or colloid oncotic pressure (COP). The
balance between these opposing forces determines the
direction and degree of net fluid movement.
When fluids are administered too aggressively, the
intravascular space is overexpanded. This results in an
increase in hydrostatic pressure within the capillaries
that exceeds the oncotic pressure in the vessels and
favors the movement of fluid into the interstitium, which
is composed of a meshwork of collagen and glycosaminoglycans as well as proteins and electrolytes in solution.
There are three mechanisms, known as tissue safety factors, that prevent fluid accumulation within the interstitium and their relative importance varies between
tissue types. As fluid moves in, the hydrostatic pressure
rises rapidly due to the nondistensible nature of the
interstitium and opposes further fluid accumulation.
Opposition to the movement of fluid into the interstitium also occurs as interstitial oncotic pressure drops due

357

VetBooks.ir

358

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

to dilution. Finally, as the hydrostatic pressure increases
in the interstitium, lymphatic drainage is increased. If
increased capillary hydrostatic pressure persists, however, these safety factors can be overwhelmed and the
meshwork within the interstitium can be disrupted.
When this occurs, the resistance to further fluid accumulation becomes minimal and manifests clinically as
pitting edema, chemosis, and, in rare circumstances,
pulmonary edema.
Fluid dynamics in pulmonary tissue have unique characteristics. The pulmonary capillary pressure is usually
lower than in other tissues and the interstitial pressure is
more negative (some tissues actually have a negative
interstitial pressure) while the COP is higher than other
tissues. The fact that the pulmonary capillaries are relatively permeable to protein contributes to this higher
COP. In addition, the alveolar epithelial cells actively
transport sodium into the interstitial space, promoting
movement of fluid out of the alveolar space and into the
interstitium. The net result of these characteristics is
that fluid movement from the alveoli into the interstitium and then to the lymphatics is favored. This tendency
is overcome when the pulmonary capillary pressure
exceeds 25 mmHg, at which point fluid will accumulate
within the alveoli. If the animal also has an increase in
pulmonary capillary permeability such as occurs in sepsis or systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS),
or if the animal is hypoalbuminemic, pulmonary edema
will occur at lower hydrostatic pressures.

­Intravenous Fluid Types
In order to make logical choices with fluid therapy, it is
important to understand the components and behavior
of the different classes of intravenous fluids available in
clinical practice.
Crystalloid Fluids
Crystalloid fluids are the most common type of fluids
used in veterinary medicine. Crystalloids are defined as
fluids containing electrolyte and nonelectrolyte solutes
that are capable of entering all the body fluid compartments. They can further be described as “balanced” or
“unbalanced.” A balanced crystalloid has a composition
similar to that of the ECF. An example would be lactated
Ringer’s solution (LRS) or Normosol‐R®. An unbalanced
crystalloid’s composition does not mimic that of the ECF.
An example would be 0.9% NaCl.
Crystalloids can also be described by their osmolarity.
An isotonic crystalloid has an osmolarity similar to normal plasma osmolarity (300–310 mOsm/L) while the
osmolarity of a hypotonic solution is less than that of

normal plasma and a hypertonic solution is greater than
normal plasma. An example of this can be seen with the
different sodium chloride‐based crystalloids: 0.9%NaCl
is an isotonic crystalloid solution (308 mOsm/L), 0.45%
NaCl is a hypotonic crystalloid (154 mOsm/L), and 7.2%
NaCl is a hypertonic crystalloid (2464 mOsm/L).
Finally, crystalloids can be described as replacement
fluids or maintenance fluids. The composition of these
two categories is quite different and warrants a brief
explanation. When a crystalloid fluid is administered
intravenously, the majority of the volume given will move
out of the vascular space and into the interstitium. When
a 1 L bolus of an isotonic crystalloid is given, it can be
anticipated that after one hour only 25% of the delivered
volume remains within the vascular space. The majority
of the delivered volume has moved into the interstitium
and for this reason, a replacement fluid is designed to
approximate the fluid composition of the ECF. By contrast, a maintenance fluid is designed to meet the ongoing insensible losses of the patient and has a lower
sodium concentration and usually a higher potassium
concentration. A unique crystalloid fluid that does not
fall within the replacement versus maintenance classification scheme is 5% dextrose in water (D5W) that is
composed entirely of dextrose and water. When given,
D5W is effectively equivalent to administering pure
water, as the dextrose is rapidly metabolized to CO2 and
water.
Specific clinical presentations may respond most
effectively to specific crystalloid choices but in the
majority of instances, a balanced, isotonic crystalloid is
appropriate for initial fluid therapy. Some of the clinical
presentations where one fluid may be preferred over
another include hypochloridemic metabolic alkalosis
and Addisonian crisis (0.9% NaCl) and urethral obstruction (LRS or Normosol‐R), among others.
Additives such as 50% dextrose, potassium chloride,
magnesium sulfate, and calcium gluconate can be incorporated into crystalloid fluids to meet specific patient
needs; however, not all fluid additives are compatible
with all isotonic crystalloids. Investigation into compatibility is required before fluid supplementation is undertaken. Certain crystalloids such as 0.9% NaCl and D5W
are often used as carriers for a variety of drugs, including anesthetics, inotropes, vasopressors, and insulin,
but compatibility should always be verified before
administration.
Hypertonic saline is available in a variety of concentrations ranging from 3.0% to 7.5% and is a potent expander
of the vascular volume. With an osmolarity of
2567 mOsm/L, 7.5% NaCl will effectively increase the
extracellular fluid volume by five times the administered
volume due to the movement of water from the intracellular and interstitial spaces into the intravascular space

VetBooks.ir

36 Fluid Therapy

in response to the profound osmotic gradient created.
However, like other crystalloid solutions, the intravascular volume expansion will not remain for long if administered alone. For this reason, hypertonic saline is often
combined with a synthetic colloid to extend the duration
of effect. Because the action of hypertonic saline is
dependent on movement of volume from the interstitial
space to the intravascular space, it is relatively contraindicated in dehydrated patients. Hypertonic saline is a
popular choice for small‐volume resuscitation and is the
preferred choice for the resuscitation of the hypotensive
head trauma patient. In addition, it may also be used in
patients with intracranial hypertension with, or in lieu
of, mannitol.
Synthetic Colloids
Colloids are molecules of high molecular weight, which
exert osmotic activity and thus promote the movement
of fluid from the interstitium into the vascular space.
Colloids can first be described as natural or synthetic. An
example of a natural colloid is the albumin molecule.
Synthetic colloids can further be divided into three
classes: gelatins, dextrans, and hydroxyethyl starches
(HES). The most commonly used class of synthetic colloid is the hydroxyethyl starches, which are plant‐derived
proteins that have undergone modification to prevent
rapid degradation.
When describing hydroxyethyl starches, a number of
parameters are used. First is the molecular weight, which
affects the degree of “oncotic pull” exerted by the solution, with lower molecular weight solutions generally
exerting a greater effect. Molecules in HES formulations
tend to be polydisperse and can range in size from a few
thousand to a few million kilodaltons. The distribution
within a solution follows a bell‐shaped curve. By convention, the molecular weight used to describe the solution
is the average molecular weight.
The second parameter used in description of HES
solutions is the degree of substitution, determined by
measuring the number of substituted glucose molecules
and dividing by the total number of glucose molecules.
HES solutions with a higher rate of substitution resist
hydrolysis more effectively than molecules with lower
substitution rates and thus persist in the body for a
longer period of time, extending duration of action. The
rate of substitution is used to describe the fluid and while
it is common in veterinary medicine to refer to all
hydroxyethyl starches as “hetastarch,” this is a misnomer;
in fact, a substitution rate of 0.6 is termed a hetastarch,
0.5 is a pentastarch, and 0.4 is a tetrastarch.
The final parameter that can be considered when evaluating HES solutions is the carrier solution. Classically,
the majority of HES solutions are provided in 0.9% NaCl.

Some solutions are also available in balanced crystalloid
solutions such as LRS.
The use of synthetic colloids is somewhat controversial. Studies in both the human and veterinary literature
have shown impaired coagulation and decreased platelet
clump strength as determined by thromboelastography.
The higher the rate of substitution, the greater effect on
coagulation. For this reason, HES solutions with a lower
rate of substitution such as the tetrastarches are considered theoretically safer as their effect on coagulation is
less.
Overzealous administration of any of the HES s­ olutions
can still result in a dilutional coagulopathy. In addition to
effect on coagulation, synthetic colloids can impact
serum total protein and urine specific gravity (USG)
measurements. The administration of HES (670/0.75)
has been previously shown to elevate the urine specific
gravity. In one study, the largest increase in USG occurred
150 minutes following administration with a mean USG
of 1.070 +/− 0.021.
Both hydroxyethyl starch and dextran 70 have been
shown to affect total solids measured by refractometry.
When evaluated using a refractometer, HES will yield a
reading of 4.5 g/dL, therefore when administered in vivo,
the refractometric measurement of total solids will trend
to 4.5 g/dL. For this reason, total solids should be interpreted with caution in patients receiving synthetic
­colloids. In addition, serum amylase may be elevated
200–250% due to binding with hydroxyethyl starch
­molecules, leading to a decrease in clearance.
Ideally, the efficacy of synthetic colloids is monitored
through serial measurement of the COP using a membrane osmometer. In practice, this technology is not
widely available and the response to therapy is used
instead to guide treatment.
Finally, in human medicine, in particular in the subset
of patients with refractory sepsis, concerns have been
raised about HES administration and renal injury based
on an increase in the need for renal replacement therapy
in patients receiving hydroxyethyl starches. At this time,
this concern appears to be related to the cumulative dose
of HES administered. There have been some studies
examining the issue in small animal medicine but the
topic remains controversial.
Dextrans are neutral glucopolysaccharides based on
glucose monomers. Dextrans are described based on
their average mean molecular weight as well as the tonicity of the fluid. Examples of dextrans include products
such as dextran 40, dextran 60, and dextran 70. In
humans, dextran administration has been associated
with anaphylactoid reactions as well as being implicated
in the development of renal failure in critically ill
patients. This has not been documented in veterinary
patients.

359

VetBooks.ir

360

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

The last class of synthetic colloid is the gelatins –
polydisperse molecules derived from bovine collagen.
These solutions have a mean molecular weight of 35 000
daltons and are rapidly excreted upon infusion. As a
result, they are far less effective than the hydroxyethyl
starches or dextrans for sustained volume expansion. In
addition, the gelatins are associated with the highest rate
of anaphylactoid reactions among the synthetic colloids.
As a class, gelatins are not available in the United States.
Albumin
Physiologically speaking, albumin is an extremely important protein. It contributes roughly 80% of the COP
within the vascular space. In addition to its osmotic
activity, albumin has many other roles in the body and
functions as a carrier for a variety of substances, including bilirubin, as well as many different drugs. Albumin
also plays a role in platelet function and in the scavenging of free radicals. The ability of albumin to create
colloid osmotic pressure is enhanced by its negative
­
charge as well as the Gibbs–Donnan effect that describes
how charged molecules may not be equally dispersed
across a semipermeable membrane due to the relative
­permeability of the membrane.

­Indications for Fluid Therapy
Rapid Volume Expansion
The rapid administration of IV fluids is indicated for the
treatment of hypoperfusion. Rapid volume expansion is not
appropriate if hypotension is the result of forward cardiac
failure for any reason other than cardiac tamponade. The
goal of rapid volume expansion is to restore the effective
circulating volume (ECV) to levels that permit adequate
perfusion and thus tissue oxygenation. Serial monitoring of
perfusion parameters is used to guide therapy during rapid
volume expansion. Parameters that are commonly monitored include physical examination parameters such as
heart rate, pulse rate, pulse quality, mucous membrane
color, and capillary refill time (CRT). In addition, monitoring may also include toe‐web to core body temperature gradient, urine output, central venous pressure, and blood
lactate measurements. A full discussion of end‐points of
resuscitation can be found in Chapter 37.
The dosing of IV fluids for the treatment of shock varies with the type of fluid chosen for resuscitation as well
as the patient’s response to therapy. The most common
fluid types used for rapid volume expansion are isotonic
crystalloids. Classically, a full “shock” bolus is considered
to be 90 mL/kg in the dog and 45–60 mL/kg in the cat.
These amounts approximate one blood volume. Boluses

can be administered over a specific amount of time (for
example, a 250 mL bolus of 0.9%NaCl over 10 minutes),
or in profoundly compromised patients as rapidly as possible. Frequently, one‐quarter of the calculated shock
bolus is administered as a starting point for resuscitation. After the bolus is complete, the animal is reassessed.
If their perfusion parameters have not responded adequately, additional fluid therapy is indicated. It should be
remembered that when using an isotonic crystalloid for
rapid volume expansion, that crystalloid should be
devoid of fluid additives such as supplemental dextrose,
potassium chloride or magnesium sulfate.
Synthetic colloids such as Hespan® or Vetstarch® can
also be used for rapid volume expansion. Because synthetic colloids are osmotically active, they promote the
movement of water from the interstitium into the vascular space. This movement of fluid between body fluid
compartments as well as the volume of colloid administered collectively results in the expansion of the ECV. An
initial shock bolus of synthetic colloid would be 5 mL/kg
administered over 10–15 minutes.The total shock dose is
equal to the recommended total daily dose of 20 mL/kg
in the dog. In the cat, the total daily dose is somewhat
lower at 10 mL/kg. Rapid administration of hydroxyethyl
starch has been associated with nausea and vomiting in
the cat. Again, reassessment of the patient following
completion of the bolus will guide further fluid therapy.
If the response to therapy has not been adequate, additional fluids should be administered until the animal has
been stabilized. If the animal is unstable but is deemed to
be volume replete, other therapies such as inotropes or
vasopressors may be needed. It should be remembered
that synthetic colloids are potent osmotic agents so overzealous administration can result in volume overload as
well as dilutional coagulopathy.
Hypertonic saline can also be used for rapid volume
expansion. Hypertonic saline is commonly supplied as a
7–7.5% NaCl solution. The initial shock bolus is 4–6 mL/
kg over 10–15 minutes. Hypertonic saline should not be
administered at a rate exceeding 1 mL/kg/min as vagally
mediated bradycardia, hypotension, and bronchoconstriction may be seen with too rapid administration. If
needed, this initial bolus can be repeated once; further
administration of hypertonic saline can result in serious
complications such as hypernatremia and hyperchloridemia. Hypertonic saline administered alone will not
expand the vascular space for much time, and is usually
combined with a synthetic colloid to prolong its volume‐
expanding effects. Hypotonic crystalloids such as 0.45%
NaCl are not appropriate for rapid volume expansion.
In certain situations, fluid resuscitation with whole
blood or blood component therapy may be indicated.
This fluid choice not only provides volume expansion
but, in the case of whole blood or packed red blood cells,

VetBooks.ir

36 Fluid Therapy

it also provides oxygen‐carrying capacity that may be
crucial in the anemic, hypoperfused patient.
One concern that has been visited many times over the
years is the risk of aggressive volume resuscitation in
patients that are actively bleeding. Concern centers on
the disruption of immature clots and the worsening of
bleeding. The classic example of this in veterinary medicine is the patient that presents with a hemoabdomen
due to splenic trauma. The animal is aggressively resuscitated which results in a short‐term improvement in
hemodynamic stability (i.e., blood pressure) followed by
a decline as the clots forming on the traumatized spleen
are disrupted and active bleeding worsens.
“Delayed resuscitation” refers to the practice of not
administering fluid support to correct hemodynamic
instability until definitive control of hemorrhage has
been achieved. “Hypotensive resuscitation” is the practice of administering rapid volume expansion to the
hemodynamically unstable patient but only resuscitating to a mean arterial pressure of around 60 mmHg.
Here, the goal is to strike a compromise between the
need to perfuse vital organs and the desire to avoid supraphysiologic resuscitation that may worsen injuries
such as pulmonary contusions and abdominal bleeding.
Any of the fluids appropriate for rapid volume expansion can be used for hypotensive resuscitation. When
considering the use of either hypotensive or delayed
resuscitation, it is important to keep in mind that these
techniques were designed for human trauma patients
with penetrating injuries, where the time from presentation to definitive treatment rarely exceeds one hour.
There has been limited research in veterinary medicine
to examine their efficacy in small animal patients. If
definitive treatment is not possible or will not be pursued then delayed or hypotensive resuscitation should
not be attempted.
“Small‐volume resuscitation,” which is also known as
limited‐volume resuscitation, uses resuscitative fluids in
small volumes to achieve moderate increases in hemodynamic stability. In this type of resuscitation, synthetic
colloids and hypertonic saline take center stage as they
allow for expansion of the effective circulating volume in
excess of the administered fluid volume. Again, the goal
here is to minimize the deleterious effects seen with
overaggressive crystalloid resuscitations. Endpoints with
this style of resuscitation include a mean arterial pressure of 70 mmHg, a systolic pressure of 90 mmHg, and
clinical improvement of perfusion parameters.
Dehydration
The assessment and correction of dehydration remains
one of the more challenging parts of fluid therapy. The
challenge lies in the poor sensitivity of physical and labo-

ratory parameters to quantify dehydration. It is important to grasp just how limited these parameters really
are. It has been shown that an animal can range from 5%
to 16% dehydrated based on body weight and yet have a
normal skin turgor. This flies in the face of commonly
accepted guidelines where the percentage of dehydration
is estimated based on the presence or absence of certain
physical parameters. In reality, all of these parameters
are flawed to a greater or lesser degree.
As skin turgor essentially assesses the interstitium, it
can be altered not only by the water balance within the
interstitium but also by alterations in the other components of the interstitium. For example, in the geriatric or
cachectic patient, changes in collagen content may alter
the skin turgor so that the animal appears more profoundly dehydrated than it truly is. By contrast, the obese
patient may have dehydration but a normal skin turgor.
Skin turgor is also affected by the location at which it is
assessed, the posture of the animal (standing versus
supine), age, and body condition.
Although the use of percentage dehydration based on
physical parameters is crude, it does still provide a
starting point for selecting an initial fluid rate. Usually
changes in skin turgor with normal hemodynamic
parameters are consistent with mild dehydration of
about 5–7% body weight. As dehydration becomes
more severe and approaches 10–12% dehydration,
hypovolemia may also be evident when perfusion
parameters are evaluated. This is evidenced by tachycardia, poor pulse quality, prolonged capillary refill
time, and cool extremities. Another indicator of profound dehydration is the presence of sunken eyeballs
(enophthalmos).
If hypoperfusion is present, rapid volume expansion to
stabilize the patient is indicated prior to attempting correction of interstitial or intracellular fluid deficits. When
the tissue safety factors of the interstitium are understood, it is clear that rapid volume expansion is not effective for correcting interstitial deficits. This type of deficit
must be corrected slowly over at least 12–24 hours.
When fluids are administered at an aggressive rate in the
hope of shortening the time needed for correction, the
results are unrewarding. This is due to the characteristics of the interstitium which oppose rapid expansion.
Aggressive fluid administration will result in rapid
increases in interstitial hydrostatic pressure as well as
decreases in interstitial oncotic pressure. This in turn
will increase lymphatic driving pressure and promote
lymphatic flow. The end‐result is the clearance of volume via the kidneys instead of a more rapid rehydration
of the interstitial space.
Commonly assessed laboratory parameters should
provide more insight into fluid balance, but they, too, are
limited. Alterations in hematocrit and total solids have

361

VetBooks.ir

362

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

not correlated reliably with alterations in fluid balance
based on weight. This may be due to a variety of reasons
and is most probably a result of the patient’s underlying
disease process.
Serum sodium can be used as an indicator of free water
balance in most situations. It should be kept in mind that
serum sodium does not reflect total body sodium but
instead is a reflection of the water balance within the
body. Serum sodium is of no value in determining the
presence of hypovolemia or the need for rapid volume
expansion. The most common types of volume lost are
isotonic or hypotonic fluid loss. In the case of hypotonic
fluid loss, free water is lost in excess of sodium. As a
result, serum sodium concentration elevates. To correct
free water deficit, a solution providing free water such as
0.45% NaCl or D5W is used. Interstitial fluid deficits
should be corrected before free water deficits are
addressed. In addition, when correcting free water deficits, it is imperative to consider the duration of the free
water deficit. When free water deficits are long‐standing,
the brain will synthesize idiogenic osmoles. These are
osmotically active particles that oppose the movement of
fluid out of the brain in response to hypertonicity.
Idiogenic osmoles require several days to be metabolized
so it is best to correct long‐standing free water deficits
slowly over a number of days. Overzealous correction of
long‐standing hypernatremia can result in cerebral
edema. If hypernatremia is acute then it can be corrected
more rapidly.
To replace the free water deficit, the volume of the
deficit can be calculated using the following equation:
Free water deficit Weight kg
Na present / Na normal 1
Example : A 10 kg dog with serum sodium
concentration of 180 mEq / L
Water deficit L

10

180 / 145

1

2.4
In this example, the patient had a free water deficit of
2.4 L. This volume will need to be replaced after the
interstitium is replete and additional fluids are indicated
to meet insensible losses as well as ongoing losses that
may be quantifiable.
Maintenance Fluids
Maintenance fluids are designed to meet sensible and
insensible losses. In a normal animal, these needs are
met through the intake of food and water. In the patient
where this is not possible, or intake is inadequate to meet
fluid requirements, a maintenance fluid may be used.

As mentioned earlier, the composition of maintenance
fluids is different from that of replacement fluids. In
­general, maintenance fluids have a lower sodium concentration and a higher potassium concentration than
replacement fluid. Maintenance fluid requirements will
vary with the size, age, and metabolic needs of the
patient, taking physiologic derangements into consideration. Smaller and younger patients tend to have higher
maintenance fluid requirements. These requirements
may also be increased with pyrexia and panting. Diet
composition may also affect daily fluid requirements due
to the amount of water provided by the food source as
well as the relative nutrient composition of the diet. In
critically ill or sedentary animals, maintenance fluid
requirements may be decreased.
The calculation of maintenance fluid requirements can
be done in several ways. One commonly used shortcut is
40–60 mL/kg/day. When using this formula, it should be
remembered that larger dogs will usually have maintenance needs near the lower end of the dose range while
small dogs will likely have requirements toward the
higher end of the range. Another way to consider maintenance requirement is to link it to daily energy requirements. With this approach, the maintenance requirement
is roughly 1 mL of water per 1 kilocalorie (kcal) of energy
expended. Maintenance energy requirements can be calculated using the following formula:
140 kcal body weight kg

0.73

Alternatively, the basal energy requirements can be calculated and then multiplied by a factor of 2 to approximate maintenance energy requirements. In critical
patients, water requirements may be decreased and
therefore the use of maintenance energy requirement
calculation may overestimate what is required. In this
instance, basal energy requirements may be more reflective of true water requirements. Basal energy requirements (BER) can be calculated using the following
formula in the dog:
97 body weight kg

0.655

In the cat, BER is roughly 50–60 kcal/kg/day.
Once the degree of dehydration has been estimated
and the maintenance fluid requirement and free water
deficit calculated, consideration must also be given to
ongoing losses. This may be due to loss of volume from
the GI tract, urinary tract or third space losses. Also
remember to take into consideration the possibility of
iatrogenic loss of volume. An example of this would
be when residual gastric volumes are discarded following aspiration of a gastric tube. The volume of estimated ongoing losses is then added in to the fluid
prescription.

VetBooks.ir

36 Fluid Therapy

Albumin Replacement

Constant Rate Infusions

In critically ill veterinary patients, it may become necessary to address albumin deficiency due to ongoing
albumin loss (e.g., protein‐losing nephropathy, septic
­
peritonitis) or decreased albumin production (e.g., acute
phase response, liver failure). The majority of total body
albumin actually resides within the interstitial space so
correction of an albumin deficit can be difficult to
achieve using albumin‐containing products such as fresh
frozen plasma. Existing interstitial albumin deficits must
be replaced before improvement of plasma albumin concentrations will be seen.
Albumin concentrate is administered as either a 5%
solution or a 25% solution. The 5% solution of human
serum albumin (HSA) has a COP of about 20 mmHg and
an albumin concentration approximately equal to plasma
while the 25% solution has a much higher COP of about
70 mmHg and an albumin concentration five times that
of plasma. In veterinary medicine, both 5% and 25% HSA
have been administered for albumin replacement in
both dogs and cats. Studies have shown both acute and
delayed hypersensitivity reactions in dogs. The incidence
of these reactions appears lower in critically ill patients
but the studies that have investigated the use of these
solutions have been limited. In patients with significant
albumin deficits, the volume of plasma that would need
to be administered to effect change in serum albumin
often precludes its use as an effective therapy. For this
reason, concentrated albumin products such as 25%
HSA or canine lyophilized albumin (a canine albumin
product has been introduced to the US market but little
has yet been published regarding its use) are more effective in correcting albumin deficits. When correcting
albumin, the following equation can be employed:

In addition to their uses in volume expansion and the
correction of dehydration, intravenous fluids are often
used as carriers for drugs that are best administered by
constant rate infusion (CRI). Examples include vasopressors, some inotropes, and some vasodilators. Also, CRIs
for the administration of anesthetics and analgesics are
commonplace. Before starting a CRI, the compatibility of
the drug and carrier fluid must be determined. In most
instances, 0.9% NaCl or 5% dextrose in water are acceptable choices.
Constant rate infusions are dosed based on both
weight and time. For example, a CRI of dopamine might
be started at a dose of 5 μg/kg/min. This dose of drug is
then administered in a specific volume of fluid. The volume of fluid administered is determined based on the
patient’s body weight and fluid status, and the concentration of drug that requires delivery. To calculate a CRI, the
following information must be known.

Albumin deficit grams 10
[desired albumin g / dL patient albumin g / dL ]
body weight kg 0.3

One of the great challenges of fluid therapy is to meet the
patient’s ongoing requirements and replace deficits without overloading the body’s ability to cope with the
volume. An understanding of the behavior of fluids
­
within the body as well as body fluid compartment
dynamics helps to avoid complications. When attempting to assess the adequacy of fluid therapy, various
parameters can be monitored.
Perfusion parameters such as heart rate, respiratory
rate, capillary refill time, and pulse quality are valuable in
determining the need for rapid volume expansion but
they do not provide information regarding the correction of dehydration. Perfusion parameters can be normal
in the dehydrated animal, although the profoundly dehydrated animal will exhibit signs of hypovolemia.
Patients should be weighed at least once daily to track
alterations in fluid balance, keeping in mind that 1 L of
water is effectively equivalent to 1 kg of weight. The

As an example, to increase the albumin in a 10 kg dog
from 1.5 to 2.0 g/dL:
Albumin deficit 10

2.0 1.5

10 0.3 15 grams

Assuming an albumin concentration of 5 g/dL of canine
plasma, this patient would require approximately 300 mL
of plasma (identical volume to 5% HSA). By contrast, this
patient would require 60 mL of 25% HSA. Given the current costs of HSA versus canine plasma, this could result
in a significant saving to the client. The recommended
dose for the lyophilized canine albumin product has
been reported to be 800–884 mg/kg IV.

Patient weight (kg).
Drug dose (5 μg/kg/min, for example).
●● Starting rate of fluid administration (5 mL/h, for
example).
●● Concentration of the drug administered.
●● Total volume of carrier fluid to be supplemented.
●●
●●

To be precise, when formulating a CRI, an equivalent
volume of carrier fluid should be removed and replaced
by the drug being delivered. For examples of CRI formulation, the reader is referred to supplemental materials
available online.

­Monitoring of Fluid Therapy

363

VetBooks.ir

364

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

importance of body weight monitoring is especially true
in the patient in which the potential for third space loss
is a concern.
Quantification of urine output allows assessment of
adequacy of urine output, especially if oligoanuria from
renal injury or polyuria from underlying disease processes is of concern. In addition, serial measurements of
USG may provide insight into fluid balance. For example,
consider the patient on crystalloid fluid therapy who has
a decrease in urine output. Once technical complications
such as catheter patency and placement have been considered and it has been determined that perfusion is
adequate, USG will help to differentiate between physiologic and pathophysiologic oliguria. Recall that the use
of hydroxyethyl starches will invalidate the use of ­specific
gravity measurement in the urine.
The venous side of the circulation is a capacitance system. As such, it has a relatively low pressure until fully
replete and distended. Once the venous side of the circulation has no further ability to distend, pressure within
the vasculature will rise. This can be correlated to the
volumes and pressures within the heart. Based on
Starling’s law, it is known that initial expansion of ventricular volume will increase cardiac output and cardiac
contractility. Overdistension of the ventricles proves
maladaptive and results in decreased cardiac contractility as well as increased intravascular pressures. Central
venous pressure is generally reflective of venous volume
status and can be a useful invasive monitoring technique
to guide fluid therapy. When measuring central venous
pressure (CVP), a catheter is placed in the jugular vein in
close proximity to but not within the right atrium of the
heart. When measured in the absence of pulmonic
obstruction or pulmonary hypertension, CVP approximates right atrial pressure. CVP can be measured manually using a water manometer or continuously using a
pressure transducer. Normal CVP is considered to be
0–10 cmH20 (1 mmHg is roughly 1.36 cmH2O). CVP
should ideally be measured at the end of expiration in the
spontaneously breathing or mechanically ventilated

patient but the use of positive end‐expiratory pressure
(PEEP) will increase CVP measurements.
Although serum lactate is used commonly as an indicator of hypoperfusion, its usefulness as an indicator of
dehydration is limited since dehydration must be severe
enough to result in decreased oxygen delivery to result in
hyperlactatemia. Elevations in serum lactate can also
occur due to severe liver dysfunction and spurious elevations in lactate can be seen when difficulty is encountered with sample acquisition.

­Conclusion
Fluid therapy is an integral part of small animal practice.
Approaching a patient’s fluid needs in a logical fashion
where the needs for rapid volume expansion versus correction of dehydration or electrolyte abnormalities are
identified and then targeted will maximize the benefits
of fluid therapy. Each patient is unique. Each of the commonly available fluid types has properties that can be
leveraged to the advantage of our patients. This chapter
illustrates how perfusion, hydration, and water and electrolyte balance affect not only the type of fluid therapy
that is indicated but also the rate and route of fluid
administration. By understanding the physiology of fluid
balance in the body, clinicians can tailor their fluid prescription to address interstitial dehydration, correct free
water and albumin deficits, and manage electrolyte
abnormalities safely. This knowledge also allows fluid
choices to be altered during rapid volume expansion to
meet the special challenges of each case.
The decision to use a specific fluid should be based on
the goals of therapy and how effectively that fluid choice
will achieve that goal, instead of a knee‐jerk response.
Veterinary patients are dynamic and the unique needs of
each patient vary. The need to identify our patients’
fluid needs and to address them appropriately, even if
their clinical presentation is unusual, cannot be
overestimated.

­Further Reading
Boldt J. Modern rapidly degradable hydroxyethyl starches:
current concepts. Anesth Analg 2009; 108: 1574–82.
Craft EM, Powell LL. The use of canine‐specific albumin in
dogs with septic peritonitis. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2012;
22(6): 631–9.
Hansen B, DeFrancesco T. Relationship between hydration
estimate and body weight change after fluid therapy in

critically ill dogs and cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2002;
12(4): 235–43.
Valverde A, Gianotti G, Rioja‐Garcia E, Hathway A. Effects
of high‐volume, rapid‐fluid therapy on cardiovascular
function and hematological values during isoflurane‐
induced hypotension in healthy dogs. Can J Vet Res
2012; 76: 99–108.

VetBooks.ir

365

37
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
Nathan Peterson, DVM, DACVECC
VCA West Los Angeles Animal Hospital, Los Angeles, CA, USA

Approximately 330,000 people die of acute cardiac arrest
in the United States annually. The incidence of unexpected cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA) in veterinary
patients is currently unknown. What is known is that
survival rates for dogs and cats that receive cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) range from 2.6% to 25%.
The reported survival rates for people experiencing CPR
are equally dismal, with overall survival rates following
in‐hospital arrest ranging from 3% to 27%. The reason
for the wide range in outcomes is due in part to the variance in the nature or cause of cardiopulmonary arrest.
What the literature generally agrees on is that the chance
of a patient surviving to discharge after CPA is small. The
likelihood of survival increases if CPA was due to an
anesthetic event rather than the culmination of a chronic
or traumatic disease process. While the survival statistics are dismal, the long‐term neurologic outcomes of
patients surviving CPA are generally good to excellent,
making CPR a worthy endeavor.
In 2010, veterinary‐specific CPR guidelines were developed using an evidence‐based approach modeled on the
American Heart Association’s CPR guidelines. The result
of this effort was the publication of the Reassessment
Campaign on Veterinary Resuscitation (RECOVER) in
2011. The RECOVER initiative (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/10.1111/vec.2012.22.issue‐s1/issuetoc) has provided veterinarians for the first time with evidence‐based
clinical guidelines for performance of CPR.
The progression from severe illness to cardiopulmonary arrest in the veterinary patient is complex. Diseases
that can lead to CPA in veterinary medicine include but
are not limited to sepsis, pulmonary failure, neoplasia,
polytrauma, head trauma, and cardiac failure. Although
not all animals progressing toward CPA follow the same
clinical course, some physical exam findings that may
indicate impending CPA include decreasing level of consciousness, hypothermia, bradycardia, hypotension, and
changes in respiratory patterns. Once CPA occurs, all

patients will exhibit loss of consciousness, absence of
spontaneous ventilation, absence of heart sounds during
auscultation, and absence of palpable pulses.
The importance of recognizing CPA quickly is underscored when the hemodynamic impact is considered.
Following the onset of CPA, the aortic blood pressure
drops precipitously, with intrathoracic aortic pressure
dropping from a normal of approximately 120 mmHg to
20 mmHg within 30 seconds. Additionally, carotid blood
flow decreases from an average of 190 mL/min to 15 mL/
min within 15 seconds and to 0 mL/min within four minutes. Coronary perfusion pressure likewise drops from
60 mmHg to 15 mmHg within 15 seconds and to 0 mmHg
within four minutes.
Although the underlying cause of CPA may not be
immediately apparent to the clinician, the nature or
cause of the arrest can have an impact on the expected
outcome and should be ascertained as soon as possible.
If a patient is known to have suffered respiratory arrest
prior to cardiac arrest, the likelihood of resuscitation
may be diminished due to the continued depletion of
oxygen from circulating blood resulting in severe hypoxemia at the onset of cardiac failure and institution of
CPR. Conversely, if an animal suffers sudden cardiac
arrest, the blood oxygen content would be expected to be
high at the onset of CPA and subsequent CPR, possibly
making successful resuscitation more likely than in the
previous instance.

­Principles of CPR
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation is intended to provide
blood flow to the heart and brain, preserving them until
return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) is achieved.
Subsequently, the quality of chest compressions is of
the utmost importance, since this is the mechanism by
which circulation is generated. Whatever the ­technique,

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

366

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

the provision of chest compressions is an inefficient
way to move blood out of the heart and into systemic
circulation. Even ideal chest compressions are only
capable of generating 25–30% of normal cardiac output
(CO). However, to maximize the efficiency of chest
compressions, the provider should attempt to achieve
30–50% compression of the thoracic diameter. Good–
quality chest compressions consist of a 50% duty cycle,
meaning 50% of the entire compression cycle is spent
with the chest wall being compressed and 50% is spent
allowing the chest wall to recoil. Failure to allow complete recoil of the thoracic wall can result in severe
impairment to cardiac filling during the noncompression phase. It is often helpful to lift the heel of the hand
off the chest wall to ensure that complete recoil has
been accomplished.
Hand position during CPR in veterinary patients is not
standardized and is left to the individual providing compressions to find what works best for them. In small dogs
and cats, a one‐handed technique can be employed by
placing the sternum in the palm of the hand with the
thumb and fingers centered over the heart on opposite
sides of the chest. The heart is then compressed between
the thumb and fingers in a rhythmic pattern. For larger
dogs, it may be necessary to use one or two hands to
achieve the desired amount of chest wall compression. In
small dogs (<15 kg) and cats, the compressions should be
located directly over the heart in an effort to take advantage of direct compression of the ventricles forcing blood
forward through the semilunar valves. This is termed the
cardiac pump theory. In larger dogs (>15 kg), the compressions should be located at the widest part of the thorax, realizing that this may be at the caudalmost portion
of the costal arch. In this case, the clinician is reliant on
the intrathoracic pressure generated during chest
­compressions to compress the vascular structures in the
thorax forcing blood forward. This is called the thoracic
pump theory.
An oft‐overlooked facet of chest compressions is
patient positioning relative to the compression provider.
It is important that the position of the provider is comfortable and will allow for the best‐quality compressions
with the least amount of fatigue. Therefore, having the
patient at approximately waist level or lower is ideal. If
the patient’s position is fixed then the provider should
stand on a step stool to achieve the desired amount of
leverage. If compressions are provided on a table, the
tabletop should be rigid and would ideally be incapable
of conducting electricity. Wet tables should be avoided.
Larger dogs can often be more comfortably resuscitated
on the floor with the compression provider kneeling next
to the patient. An adjustable height hydraulic table
should be considered if CPR is performed on a regular
basis.

­Diagnosing Cardiopulmonary Arrest
Prompt recognition of cardiopulmonary arrest is paramount to the success of CPR. Therefore any nonresponsive, apneic patient should be immediately evaluated for
CPA and resuscitative measures should be started. The
clinician should spend no more than 10 seconds
attempting pulse detection and cardiac auscultation
before beginning chest compressions. The risk of causing serious injury to a patient by providing unnecessary
chest compressions is quite small. In a study of human
patients receiving unnecessary chest compressions, the
injury rate was less than 2% with no life‐threatening
injuries present, leading to the conclusion that the provision of CPR is not harmful, while inaction may prove
fatal.
If the patient is found to be only in respiratory arrest
following the brief pulse evaluation then the clinician
should proceed with securing an airway with an endotracheal tube or tracheostomy tube. After the airway is
secure, the patient should be manually ventilated with
100% oxygen. If not already obtained, attempts at venous
access should be made at this time and the patient should
be monitored for progression to cardiac arrest. If, on the
other hand, the patient is found to be in cardiac arrest at
the time of the pulse check then basic life support (BLS)
should be instituted immediately.

­Basic Life Support
Chest Compressions
While the definitive order in which BLS measures are
implemented is not established, it is reasonable to continue using the Airway, Breathing, Circulation approach
in which ventilation precedes compressions. Practically,
however, instituting compressions does not require any
equipment and can often be started earlier than an airway can be secured. Therefore, BLS begins with high‐
quality chest compressions performed at a rate of
100–120 beats per minute, making every effort to avoid
interruptions. During the first cycle (two minutes) of
chest compressions, the patient should be instrumented
with an electrocardiograph (ECG) and capnography if
available. Attempts can also be made to achieve intravenous access if this has not already been done. Intubating
or securing an airway can be attempted during this first
round of compressions while minimizing interruptions.
It is often easier to perform the first cycle of compressions while other members of the arrest team obtain
proper sized endotracheal or tracheostomy tubes and
laryngoscope and mobilize the crash cart to the location
of the arrest.

VetBooks.ir

37 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation

Following the first round of compressions, the first
ECG rhythm check will be performed and a definitive
attempt will be made to secure an airway. The purpose of
the rhythm check is to determine if a cardiac rhythm
may be amenable to electrical conversion. If no such
rhythm is identified then chest compressions are immediately resumed. Ideally, the chest compression provider
is changed at this time. This two‐minute cycle is repeated
as needed, alternating the compression provider at each
planned rhythm check (i.e., every two minutes) or sooner
if fatigue occurs.
There are four arrest rhythms, two of which are responsive to electrical defibrillation: pulseless electrical activity
(PEA), asystole, ventricular fibrillation, and pulseless ventricular tachycardia. The most common arrest rhythms
in veterinary medicine are asystole, which accounts for
72% of arrest rhythms, and pulseless electrical activity,
neither of which is responsive to defibrillation.
Interruptions in chest compressions must be minimized during CPR. Following each interruption in chest
compressions, it takes approximately 60–90 seconds to
return CO to the preinterruption level. Eliminating
hands‐off time is therefore a major focus in improving
both veterinary and human CPR. Minimizing interruptions during CPR must be balanced with the need to
­prevent compression provider fatigue. Many studies in
human CPR providers document a tendency to lean during the provision of chest compressions. This tendency
increases as the duration of compressions increases. The
effect of leaning on a patient during CPR decreases cardiac filling and the overall efficiency of CPR by at least
25%. CPR is hard work and two minutes of high‐quality
chest compressions on even a small to medium‐sized
dog should be exhausting.
Airway
Orotracheal intubation of dogs and cats is relatively easy,
making rapid intubation possible in most circumstances.
In the majority of patients that experience cardiopulmonary arrest, an airway can be secured via routine orotracheal intubation. Occasionally, the glottis is obscured by
vomit, fluid or saliva. If suction is available, it can be
helpful in clearing the oropharynx of excess fluid. If suction is unavailable a gauze 4 × 4 or paper towel can be
used to swab the area free of fluid or debris. Care should
be taken to avoid excessive manipulation of the epiglottis
as this can induce a vagal response. A laryngoscope
should be used to facilitate intubation.
If the glottis cannot be visualized, the orotracheal
route may still be considered for intubation if the epiglottis can be palpated. A blind intubation is performed by
palpating and depressing the tip of the epiglottis and
directing the endotracheal tube through the glottis

dorsally. Successful intubation can be confirmed by
­
direct visualization of the endotracheal tube between the
arytenoid cartilages or visualization of normal chest rise
­during positive pressure ventilation. Capnography may
be useful but should not be used as the sole means of
­confirming correct placement of an endotracheal tube
­during CPA since end‐tidal CO2 in CPA patients may be
0 due to lack of pulmonary blood flow.
Once an endotracheal tube is placed and correct positioning is confirmed, the tube should be secured to the
patient with tape, gauze tie or rubber band to prevent
tube dislodgment. The cuff on the endotracheal tube
should be inflated to ensure an airtight seal. This will
allow the patient to be effectively ventilated with positive
pressure during chest compressions. In some cases, orotracheal intubation may not be possible due to severe
swelling, inability to open the mouth or severe facial
trauma necessitating emergency tracheostomy.
Ventilation
Positive pressure ventilation with 100% oxygen is begun
once an airway is secured. Breaths can be provided by a
number of means, including rescue bag, anesthesia
machine or mechanical ventilator. Hyperventilation is
common in the clinical CPR scenario and can be caused
by an excessive respiratory rate, tidal volume or inspiratory time. Regardless of the cause, hyperventilation is
detrimental to outcome. During positive pressure ventilation, venous return occurs during the expiratory phase
and if insufficient expiratory time is allowed (due to
either excessive rate or inspiratory time), cardiac filling
will be reduced. Hyperventilation can also lead to
decreased cerebral carbon dioxide levels and subsequent
cerebral vasoconstriction, further impairing blood flow
to the brain during the critical time of resuscitation.
No clear association has been made regarding the timing of rescue breathing with compressions and it is not
recommended to attempt to synchronize breaths with
compressions. Current recommendations for ventilation
are a rate of 8–10 breaths per minute with a tidal volume
of approximately 10 mL/kg and an inspiratory time of
one second. Assigning the role of rescue breathing to a
single team member and providing them with clear
­ revent
instructions on ventilation rates is the best way to p
hyperventilation.

­Advanced Life Support
Advanced life support (ALS) consists of all resuscitative
measures that are not included in the BLS algorithm,
including vasopressor therapy, vagolytic therapy, fluid
and electrolyte therapy, and electrical defibrillation.

367

VetBooks.ir

368

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

The rationale for the use of vasopressor therapy is
grounded in the fact that cardiac output during CPR is a
fraction of that during spontaneous circulation, making
it imperative that the limited cardiac output is directed
to the organs that need it most. Therefore, the provision
of vasopressors is intended to increase peripheral vascular resistance, forcing more blood into the central circulation and subsequently improving the perfusion of vital
structures (i.e., brain and heart).
Stimulation of the alpha‐1 receptor results in peripheral vasoconstriction whereas stimulation of the beta‐1
receptor increases both inotropy and chronotropy. While
epinephrine is a balanced alpha‐ and beta‐adrenergic
agonist, its utility during CPR comes primarily from its
action at the alpha‐1 receptor. In fact, the effects of
beta‐1 stimulation may be detrimental as they can lead
to increased myocardial oxygen consumption and predispose to arrhythmias if ROSC is achieved. The best
dose for epinephrine use during CPR has been a topic of
debate for many years, with mixed evidence. High‐dose
epinephrine (0.1 mg/kg IV) has been shown to result in
slightly higher rates of ROSC but has not been shown to
confer a survival benefit. Based on the lack of documented improved survival, the use of low‐dose epinephrine (0.01 mg/kg) is currently recommended early in
CPR efforts, with high‐dose epinephrine being reserved
for cases of prolonged CPR. Epinephrine should be
administered following the first cycle of BLS and then
following every other cycle.
Adrenergic receptors have been demonstrated to be
less responsive in acidotic conditions, such as those
found during CPA, making an alternative drug that is not
dependent on catecholamine receptors an appealing
option. Vasopressin acts on the V1 receptors of vascular
smooth muscle cells independent of the alpha‐1 receptor. In addition, it maintains its efficacy in the face of acidosis. Due to the lack of adrenergic effects, vasopressin
does not cause increases in inotropy or chronotropy,
minimizing its impact on myocardial oxygen consumption. The human literature regarding the usefulness of
vasopressin in CPR is mixed, with promising results in
small trials but failure to demonstrate any clear advantage over epinephrine in larger metaanalyses. The successful use of vasopressin in CPR has been reported in
the veterinary literature. Administration of vasopressin
(0.8 U/kg IV) in place of or in conjunction with epinephrine may be considered, with subsequent doses administered following every other cycle of BLS.
The use of atropine in ALS is somewhat unique in that
atropine is a parasympatholytic drug intended to ameliorate high vagal tone during cardiac arrest rather than
directly stimulating catecholamine receptors. The use of
atropine should be considered in animals that have
asphyxia‐induced cardiac arrest or other co‐morbid

­conditions that would be likely to increase vagal tone. A
dose of 0.04 mg/kg IV is recommended as higher doses
are more likely to result in severe tachycardia and subsequently, increased myocardial oxygen consumption if
ROSC is achieved. Repeated dosing of atropine is unlikely
to be of benefit (assuming actions directed at the underlying cause have been taken) and should be considered
carefully due to the potential for severe tachycardia if
resuscitation is successful.
Corticosteroids currently have no place in the CPR
algorithm and their use is not recommended. Given the
lack of documented improvement in outcome and the
known deleterious side‐effects, especially in patients
with perfusion impairment, this is unlikely to change.
The administration of ALS drugs by intravenous or
intraosseous routes (interchangeable in the context of
CPR) is always preferred to the intratracheal route. If IV
or IO access is not available or not possible then intratracheal administration of drugs can be considered while
efforts to attain venous or intraosseous access are continued. If this route is utilized, a long catheter should be
advanced through the endotracheal or tracheostomy
tube to the level of the carina or beyond. Drugs should be
diluted with saline or sterile water. The optimal dosing of
drugs for intratracheal administration is not established
but doses up to 10 times the normal dose have been recommended. Once established, the IV or IO route should
be used for all subsequent drug administrations.
The need for rapid volume expansion with IV crystalloid or colloid solutions during CPR is dependent on the
underlying cause of CPA. Animals suffering CPA from
severe hemorrhage or hypovolemia should be aggressively resuscitated with IV fluids to reestablish normal
circulating volume. Since coronary perfusion pressure is
determined by the difference between diastolic aortic
blood pressure and right atrial pressure, care should be
taken to prevent overresuscitation. IV fluids accumulate
in the venous compartment, increasing the central
venous and right atrial pressure and consequently reducing coronary perfusion pressure. In general, animals that
were euvolemic or hypervolemic (congestive heart failure) do not require volume expansion during CPR and
routine use of IV fluids during CPR on these patients is
not recommended.
Electrolyte and acid–base disturbances are common
during CPA. Severe acidemia occurs frequently during
CPA, especially later in the course of resuscitation, and
can result in vasodilation, predisposition to arrhythmias,
and impaired neurologic function. The administration of
1 mEq/kg sodium bicarbonate can be considered in prolonged instances of CPA lasting 10–15 minutes. The
most common electrolyte disturbances during CPA
include hyperkalemia and hypocalcemia. Because of the
lack of documented improvement in outcomes and the

VetBooks.ir

37 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation

potential complications associated with over‐ or undercorrection, the management of electrolyte derangements
during CPA should be reserved for animals with confirmed rather than assumed disturbances.
Recently, the use of an impedance threshold device
(ITD) intended to increase cardiac output during CPR
has been described in canine patients and results appear
promising. Unfortunately, the use of an ITD is limited to
patients greater than 10 kg.

­Defibrillation
The purpose of defibrillation is to depolarize as many
cardiac myocytes as possible, making them temporarily
refractory, allowing the native pace‐making cells to
resume organized electrical conduction. Electrical defibrillation should only be attempted on rhythms that are
potentially responsive to it. Of the four arrest rhythms,
only two are responsive to electrical defibrillation: ventricular fibrillation (most significant in veterinary medicine) and pulseless ventricular tachycardia. Any attempts
at converting nonresponsive rhythms will not result in
return of spontaneous circulation and will only needlessly expose team members to accidental defibrillation
and increase time spent without compressions.
There are two types of defibrillators commonly used in
veterinary medicine. Monophasic defibrillators function
by passing a single electrical current from one electrode
through the heart to a receiving electrode. Biphasic defibrillators pass a current from one electrode to the other;
the current then reverses direction and is passed back to
the original electrode. This technology allows effective
defibrillation to be performed using less energy than
monophasic defibrillation, resulting in less myocardial
injury. If available, biphasic defibrillation is preferred.
Being familiar with the type of defibrillator in the ­practice
is important due to the difference in energy selection,
with monophasic defibrillator doses beginning at 4–6 J/
kg and biphasic defibrillator doses beginning at 2–4 J/kg.
If defibrillation is not successful following the first
attempt, the dose delivered can be increased by 50% for
subsequent defibrillation attempts.
Historically, it was recommended to administer three
stacked defibrillation attempts (discharges in rapid succession) prior to resuming chest compressions. The
advent of biphasic defibrillators and the recognition that
delays in resumption of chest compressions can have a
negative effect on outcome have made this recommendation obsolete. It should be remembered that successful
defibrillation means that fibrillation has been stopped,
not that ROSC has been achieved. Successful defibrillation therefore can result in asystole or an electrocardiographically normal rhythm. However, resumption of

normal electrical function does not necessarily correlate
with return of normal mechanical function of the heart
(i.e., PEA). It is therefore recommended that a single
defibrillation attempt be made followed by immediate
resumption of chest compressions for a full two‐minute
cycle prior to ECG evaluation. This improves coronary
blood flow to the myocardium, making successful defibrillation with resumption of mechanical activity more
likely.
Performing defibrillation begins with selecting appropriately sized paddles. Most defibrillators come equipped
with standard‐sized adult paddles, which are suitable for
most patients larger than 15 kg. Smaller pediatric paddles are usually available as a clip‐on attachment and
should be used for smaller dogs and cats to ensure
focused delivery of the shock through the heart.
Defibrillator paste or contact gel is generously applied to
the paddles. The animal is typically placed in dorsal
recumbency and the defibrillator paddles are placed on
either side of the thorax at the level of the costochondral
junction with the heart centered between the paddles.
The patient is firmly grasped between the paddles and is
maintained in dorsal recumbency by the person delivering the defibrillation. Once the patient is positioned,
depressing the charge button on the paddles or on the
base unit charges the defibrillator. To maintain safety, the
patient should be positioned prior to charging the paddles to lessen the likelihood of accidental discharge.
Once the defibrillator is charged, the provider should
ensure that no one is in contact with the patient or metal
tabletop. Verbal commands to “CLEAR” the patient are
effective. Once all rescue providers are clear of the
patient, the shock is delivered by depressing the shock
delivery buttons on the paddles or defibrillator base unit.
Animals with thick undercoats that inhibit paddle contact should be rapidly clipped at the intended paddle
locations prior to defibrillation attempts. The use of
alcohol to improve paddle contact should be strictly
avoided due to the risk of fire.
Alternative defibrillation techniques involve the use of
defibrillation pads attached directly to the patient and
left in place while connected to the defibrillator base
unit. The pads are placed on the chest in the same location as the paddles. If pads are used then clipping of the
hair is mandatory to ensure good contact between the
pads and the patient. The advantage to the use of pads is
that no rescue providers have to be in contact with the
patient and patient positioning is minimally interrupted.
The disadvantage is the necessity of clipping the hair that
results in longer time without chest compressions. The
use of a posterior paddle assembly, a flat paddle replacement resembling a spatula, may be the best method for
delivering defibrillation in veterinary patients. The paddle assembly is coated with paste or gel, as a normal

369

VetBooks.ir

370

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

­paddle would be. The assembly is then placed under the
patient in lateral recumbency using the normal paddle
positioning recommendations. A standard paddle is then
used on the upward‐facing thoracic wall. This technique
allows the patient to remain in lateral recumbency while
eliminating the need to clip the area as for defibrillator
pads.
Nonelectrical methods of cardiac defibrillation include
both chemical and mechanical means. Historically,
chemical defibrillation with magnesium or antiarrhythmic drugs has been considered acceptable. Based on the
current understanding of CPA in both human and veterinary patients, the use of antiarrhythmic agents is no
longer routinely recommended. Among the possible
agents available, only amiodarone has been found to be
routinely effective. Magnesium salts have only proven to
be useful for the treatment of torsades de pointes and
electrical defibrillation should always be considered as
the best option for ventricular fibrillation or pulseless
ventricular tachycardia. The use of a precordial thump
has been described as a method for providing mechanical defibrillation. Given the superiority of electrical
­defibrillation, a precordial thump should only be considered if a defibrillator is not available.

­Monitoring During CPR
Monitoring during CPR can be difficult due to lack of
normal physiologic responses. The two modalities
most useful during CPR are ECG and capnography.
Electrocardiography is monitored to determine if an
arrest rhythm is amenable to defibrillation while ETCO2
can be utilized as a measure of the effectiveness of chest
compressions, as an adjunct to verify placement of the
endotracheal tube, and to determine when ROSC occurs.
Traditionally, patients with CPA would be subjected to
pulse detection attempts before and during CPR.
Unfortunately, pulse detection takes time, is technically
difficult in some cases and can lead to increased “hands‐
off ” time, with the patient receiving fewer chest compressions. Capnography has allowed CPR providers a
method to monitor not only the effectiveness of chest
compressions but also whether or not ROSC has
occurred. Following CPA, blood flow through the pulmonary circulation decreases rapidly and ETCO2 levels
drop to near 0 since carbon dioxide is not being returned
to the alveoli for exhalation. During CPR, pulmonary
blood flow is generated by chest compressions. Therefore,
any change in ETCO2 levels can be attributed to the
­cardiac output achieved by the chest compressions, provided the minute ventilation is held constant. ETCO2 is
also useful for the detection of ROSC, with a rapid and
sustained rise in ETCO2 indicating ROSC due to the

much more efficient delivery of blood to the pulmonary
circulation by spontaneous cardiac contraction than that
achieved during manual chest compressions.
Following the initiation of chest compressions and
attainment of an airway, the patient should be instrumented with ETCO2 monitoring if available. Patients
with higher ETCO2 levels (15 mmHg dogs, 20 mmHg
cats) are more likely to have ROSC than those with lower
levels. During CPR, if ETCO2 is less than 15 mmHg,
efforts should be made to improve the quality of chest
compressions. If compression providers have not been
rotated and ETCO2 is found to be low or is decreasing, a
rotation should be considered.
Blood gas monitoring during CPR is challenging but is
the only way to identify the severe electrolyte and acid–
base derangements that are common during CPA.
Ideally, a blood sample (venous or arterial) is obtained
shortly after the onset of CPA and is evaluated for any
abnormalities. Interventions should be directed at
severely abnormal results, understanding that complete
resolution is not likely and may not be necessary. If sampling is possible, blood gas analysis should be performed
every 5–10 minutes during CPR as long as collection of
samples does not interfere with the actual provision of
rescue efforts. Information regarding acid–base and
electrolyte status during CPA and outcome is lacking
and should not be used to predict the likelihood of
ROSC.

­Open Cardiac Massage
Open chest cardiac massage is capable of generating better cardiac output during CPR than closed chest compressions. However, the procedure is invasive and
requires significant resources both during and after
resuscitation. Therefore, its use is reserved for patients
with a clear indication including significant intrathoracic
disease (tension pneumothorax, severe pleural effusion),
major chest wall defect (flail chest) or pericardial
effusion.
To perform open chest CPR, the patient is placed in
right lateral recumbency. The fur is rapidly clipped over
the 4th–6th intercostal spaces and the skin is quickly
wiped with alcohol. The skin is incised at the 5th–6th
intercostal space with a scalpel blade. The intercostal
muscles are incised with Mayo scissors and the incision
is extended from the costochondral junction to the proximal one‐third of the rib. Care should be taken to avoid
laceration of the lung tissue during this process.
Respiration can be temporarily held during this time to
further reduce the risk of iatrogenic trauma to the lung.
The ribs are then spread with manual retraction or a
Fineccheto retractor. The pericardial sac is incised at the

VetBooks.ir

37 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation

apex of the heart to avoid the phrenic nerve and the sac
is then reflected dorsally to the base of the heart. The
heart should be compressed from the apex to the base at
a rate of 100–120 compressions per minute. This can be
done with one or two hands, depending on patient size.
In some patients, the descending aorta can be briefly
(10–15 minutes) cross‐clamped to help direct blood flow
to the cerebral and coronary circulation.
If ROSC is achieved, the patient should be maintained
in an anesthetized state while a thoracostomy tube is
placed and the thoracotomy site is closed. Volatile gas
anesthetics have profound vasodilator effects and may
be detrimental to a recently resuscitated patient. All
efforts should be made to avoid hypotension and total IV
anesthesia may be the best option during this time.
Prophylactic antibiotics should be considered for
patients that have undergone open chest CPR due to the
likelihood of contamination.

­Postresuscitation Care
Despite initial reported ROSC rates of 35–45% in veterinary medicine, survival to discharge rates range from 2%
to 10%. This highlights the need for continued aggressive
critical care following ROSC. Initial postcardiac arrest
(PCA) care should focus on preventing rearrest, specifically targeting hemodynamic stability and pulmonary/
respiratory function. Specific goals of hemodynamic stabilization should include normalization of central venous
oxygen saturation, central venous pressure, cardiac output, arterial blood pressure, and arterial oxygen content.
IV fluid therapy should be judicious and efforts should be
made to prevent overresuscitation. Ventilatory function
may be altered in PCA patients with resultant hyper‐ or
hypoventilation. Ventilation should be assessed and
positive pressure ventilation should be provided as
­
needed to maintain normocapnia (PaCO2 35–45 mmHg).
Supplemental oxygen or mechanical ventilation is used
as needed to maintain normoxemia (PaO2 90–100 mmHg).

As the PCA period increases, focus should be directed
at preventing or minimizing secondary organ damage
and neuroprotection. The routine use of corticosteroids,
hyperosmotic fluids, and anticonvulsants is not recommended. If evidence of increased intracranial pressure is
present then treatment with mannitol or hypertonic
saline is warranted. Should generalized seizures develop
then appropriate treatment with an anticonvulsant
should be started. Prophylactic treatment with anticonvulsant medications may be considered in animals demonstrating global cerebral signs (coma, compulsion) in
the postarrest period. The use of corticosteroids has not
been documented to improve outcome and their use
should be restricted to animals with a clear indication
due to the potential for severe adverse effects.
Induction of mild therapeutic hypothermia is rapidly
becoming the standard of care in human PCA management. Its use has been described in the veterinary literature but is not widespread at this time. Due to the risks
associated and the technical difficulty of safely inducing
and maintaining appropriate hypothermia, it is not currently recommended. If, however, mild hypothermia
develops spontaneously, the patient should not be
aggressively warmed; rather, the return to normothermia
should be gradual (0.25–0.5 °C/h).

­Discontinuing CPR
The decision to terminate CPR generally lies with the
clinician. When making the decision to withhold or
terminate CPR, several factors should be considered
including the inciting cause of the arrest, interval from
onset of arrest to initiation of CPR, duration of CPR,
and long‐term prognosis associated with the underlying disease process. Although no definitive guidelines
exist, continuing efforts for 15–20 minutes is reasonable, after which time the likelihood of a good neurologic outcome is exceedingly small and CPR can be
discontinued.

­Further Reading
Boller M, Kellett‐Gregory L, Shofer FS, et al. The clinical
practice of CPCR in small animals: an internet‐based
survey. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2010; 20(6): 558–70.
Fletcher DJ, Boller M, Brainard BM, et al. RECOVER
evidence and knowledge gap analysis on veterinary CPR.
Part 7: Clinical Guidelines. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2012;
22(S1): S102–S131.
Lee SG, Moon HS, Hyun C. The efficacy and safety of
external biphasic defibrillation in toy breed dogs. J Vet
Emerg Crit Care 2008; 18(4): 362–9.

Plunkett SJ, McMichael M. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
in small animal medicine: an update. J Vet Intern Med
2008; 22: 9–25.
Waldrop JE, Rozanski EA, Swanke ED, et al. Causes of
cardiopulmonary arrest, resuscitation management, and
functional outcome in dogs and cats surviving
cardiopulmonary arrest. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2004;
14(1): 22–9.

371

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

373

38
Respiratory Monitoring in Critical Care
Mathew Mellema, DVM, PhD, DACVECC
Applaud Medical, San Francisco, CA, USA

­Purpose
The purpose and goals of respiratory monitoring in critical care typically include the following:
identification of patients in respiratory distress and
those experiencing dyspnea
●● determination of response to specific or empiric
therapies
●● assessment of the adequacy of alveolar ventilation
●● assessment of the adequacy of oxygenation
●● evaluation of gas exchange efficiency
●● evaluation of pulmonary mechanics in order to categorize disease states, explain other related clinical
findings, or monitor response to therapy.
●●

­Identifying Respiratory Distress
and Dyspnea
Respiratory distress is a state in which breathing efforts
are excessive or inadequate relative to the healthy state
or the patient’s current requirements. While many definitions rely on inadequate oxygenation or ventilation,
such approaches fail to account for patients in whom
adequate gas exchange is obtained only with excessive
effort. Tachypnea (increased respiratory rate) and hyperpnea (increased respiratory effort and/or chest excursions) are often considered the hallmarks of respiratory
distress; however, a smaller subset of patients may present with hyponea (decreased respiratory effort and/or
chest excursions), bradypnea (decreased respiratory
rate), or both. This second type of patient is also in respiratory distress.
Dyspnea is a term often used synonymously with respiratory distress in veterinary practice, although it has
been suggested that this convention is not ideal. In
human medicine, dyspnea refers to the unpleasant

­sensations of feeling unable to catch one’s breath or being
consciously aware of one’s breathing effort. The three
subcategories of dyspnea sensations identified in humans
are air hunger, increased work/effort, and asthmatic
chest tightness. Experimental evidence exists to suggest
that vertebrates other than humans are able to experience the first two of these. To date, no experimental
approaches have been developed to determine if animals
are likely to experience asthmatic chest tightness. Ideally,
the term dyspnea would be reserved for consideration of
the sensory experience (akin to pain) and respiratory distress would be used to describe what clinicians might
observe (akin to nociceptive responses). Serial monitoring of patients for signs of respiratory distress or dyspnea
is the cornerstone of respiratory monitoring. Respiratory
monitoring may include many other tools, but these are
always best evaluated in light of current patient status
and clinical context.
Clinical Signs of Respiratory Distress
Box 38.1 provides an outline of broad categories of clinical signs that may be present in a patient with respiratory
dysfunction or distress. Two categories of sounds may
herald respiratory distress: those heard with the ear and
those heard with the stethoscope. Stertor and stridor are
sounds that typically do not require a stethoscope to be
audible. Stertor is the presence of snoring‐like noises
during respiration. It is the result of abrupt displacement
of upper airway soft tissue structures and altered gas
flows. It is typically low‐pitched, discontinuous, and
nonmusical in character. It may be evident on inspiration, exhalation, or both. Stridor is a high‐pitched, musical respiratory sound generated by altered gas flows in
the large airway. It is more typically heard on inspiration.
Either stertor or stridor can indicate an abnormality of
the proximal upper airways (i.e., cranial to the thoracic
inlet).

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

374

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

Box 38.1 Categories of signs associated
with respiratory distress in dogs and cats
Abnormal sounds
Heard without a stethoscope
–– Stertor
–– Stridor
⚪⚪ Heard with a stethoscope
–– Diminished breath sounds
Regional
Focal
–– Adventitious sounds
Crackles
Wheezes
Rhonchi
–– Borborygmus
●● Changes in position/posture/orientation
⚪⚪ Orthopnea
⚪⚪ Trepopnea
⚪⚪ Neck extension
⚪⚪ Upright stance (flexed pelvic limbs, extended
­thoracic limbs)
–– Sternal recumbency (Sphinx pose)
⚪⚪ Abducted elbows
●● Reflex compensatory changes due to hypoxemia
and hypercapnia
⚪⚪ Tachypnea
⚪⚪ Tachycardia
⚪⚪ Hyperpnea
●● Signs associated with reduced/altered gas flow
velocities
⚪⚪ Phase prolongation
–– Inspiration
–– Exhalation
–– Both
⚪⚪ Inability to vocalize
●● Adaptive responses which reduce respiratory system
resistance
⚪⚪ Open‐mouth breathing
–– Retracted commissures of the lips
⚪⚪ Nares flaring
⚪⚪ Neck extension
●● Signs secondary to marked hypoxemia
⚪⚪ Cyanosis
⚪⚪ Obtundation
●● Abnormal or excessive abdominal motion
⚪⚪ Passive abdominal motion due to hyperpnea
⚪⚪ Active expiratory abdominal muscle contraction
⚪⚪ Paradoxical motion
●● Signs of the sensation of dyspnea
⚪⚪ Obtundation
⚪⚪ “Anxious” expression
⚪⚪ Dilated pupils
⚪⚪ Poorly tolerant of restraint/fractious
⚪⚪ Not eating, drinking, sleeping, and/or grooming
●●

⚪⚪

Altered breath sounds can also herald respiratory distress in small animal patients and may also aid in the
determination of the underlying cause. Breath sounds
may be altered in their distribution, their volume (i.e.,
loudness), and their character. Diminished breath sounds
in the nondependent lung fields may indicate accumulation of gas in the pleural space, whereas the same finding
in the dependent lung regions suggests pleural fluid
accumulation or nonventilated lung (or both). Focal
absence of breath sounds may indicate that one or more
lung lobes are obstructed, consolidated, collapsed,
torsed, infiltrated, or compressed by an intrathoracic
mass lesion. In addition, adventitious sounds (crackles,
wheezes, rhonchi) may indicate lower airway and pulmonary parenchymal pathology. Crackles are explosive,
discontinuous, nonmusical sounds generated by small
airways abruptly opening. They may be fine or harsh in
character. While often heard on inspiration (opening
during expansion), they may also be present during
exhalation in some settings. Wheezes are higher pitched,
musical, and of longer duration than crackles. They are
often the result of diffuse lower airway narrowing.
Rhonchi are similar to wheezes but substantially lower in
pitch. Abnormal sounds that might be ausculted over the
thorax also include borborygmus, which may indicate a
compromise of the diaphragm with displacement of
intestinal viscera into the thoracic cavity.
Changes in body position/posture, orientation of the
head and limbs, respiratory rate, and the magnitude of
inspiratory excursions all may indicate respiratory system compromise. Patients in respiratory distress often
assume an upright posture with the pelvic limbs flexed
and the thoracic limbs extended. This posture allows the
weight of the abdominal contents to rest on the pelvis
rather than the diaphragm and reduces the work of
breathing. In cats, a more typical posture is to sit propped
in sternal recumbency (sphinx pose). Patients that
exhibit greater respiratory distress when in recumbency
are termed orthopneic and this may manifest as a reluctance to lie down or be restrained. The head is often held
in dorsoflexion with the neck extended. This position
reduces the work of breathing by straightening the trachea and minimizes narrowing. Moreover, by fixing the
head position in this way, accessory respiratory muscles
(e.g., serratus ventralis muscle) can be utilized to promote expansion of the cranial thorax. Elbow abduction
and fixing the position of the forelimbs allows for the
recruitment of other accessory respiratory muscles and
reduces the impact of the weight of these limbs on chest
expansion. Respiratory compromise that is more severe
in one lateral recumbency than the opposite is termed
trepopnea and often is due to asymmetric pulmonary
parenchymal disease.
Increases in respiratory rate are often the earliest sign
of respiratory system compromise. Tachypnea at rest
may frequently precede more overt signs in patients with

VetBooks.ir

38 Respiratory Monitoring in Critical Care

chronic cardiac or respiratory disease. Tachypnea and
hyperpnea with exertion are also considered early signs
in this same setting. Both tachypnea and hyperpnea are
adaptive responses in most settings, but not all. These
responses represent the clinically apparent consequences
of attempts to maximize alveolar ventilation. However,
they may be triggered by pain, hypotension, and other
factors. In patients with upper airway disease, these
responses are generally maladaptive as they increase the
work of breathing and may promote further airway narrowing via the Venturi effect.
Tachypnea must be distinguished from panting which
occurs in hyperthermic (not febrile) animals with the
mouth open. Febrile animals have a reset thermoregulatory set‐point and thus the elevation in body temperature will only result in occasional panting when body
temperature temporarily exceeds this threshold.
Tachypnea does not imply open‐mouth breathing
whereas this is a hallmark of panting. Panting does not
alter ventilatory status whereas tachypnea may result in
hyperventilation in some settings but not others.
Respiratory monitoring also includes assessing patients
for clinical signs relating to reduced respiratory gas flow
velocity. Such flow reductions may manifest as prolongations of the inspiratory (upper airway disease) or expiratory (intrathoracic airway disease) phases of respiration.
Both phases of respiration may be affected concurrently
in some disease states. One example is feline asthma.
Bronchoconstriction results in increased resistance to
both inspiratory and expiratory flows, although the
increase is generally more marked during exhalation. An
inability to vocalize indicates a severe reduction in expiratory gas flows and should prompt immediate assessment of upper airway patency.
Several clinical signs that manifest in veterinary
patients with respiratory distress represent adaptive
responses that serve to reduce airway resistance. Neck
extension as discussed above is one example. Flaring of
the nares represents recruitment of the dilator naris
muscle and is stimulated by hypoxemia and hypercapnia and inhibited by pulmonary stretch receptor
activation. Breathing through an open mouth also
­
reduces respiratory system resistance while foregoing
the benefits of gas conditioning (humidification, particle trapping) by the nasal passage. Animals in respiratory distress often breathe with their mouths open
although other conditions (pain, hyperthermia) can
also elicit this same response. Animals in respiratory
distress typically do not hang the mouth passively
open, but rather actively retract the commissures of
the lips and extend the tongue outward. Activity of the
genioglossus muscle may be synchronized with the
respiratory cycle, resulting in cyclic protrusion of the
tongue outwards.
Cyanosis is a severe but unreliable sign of respiratory
compromise. When present, it generally indicates severe

hypoxemia. However, in anemic patients, the amount of
deoxygenated hemoglobin present in the capillary beds
may be too low to result in a color change detectable to
the clinician.
Abnormal or excessive abdominal motion during respiration may indicate respiratory distress. Passive
abdominal motion and increased abdominal effort are
not the same thing, although they may look similar from
a distance. More pronounced outward motion of the
abdomen on inspiration is passive and caused by
increased contraction of the diaphragm. Active contraction of the abdominal muscles (e.g., rectus abdominis)
represents recruitment of accessory respiratory muscles
whereas passive displacement of the abdominal contents
during inspiration does not. The clinician may need to
palpate the ventral abdominal muscles during exhalation
to distinguish between the two conditions. Tensing of
the rectus abdominis during exhalation can usually be
clearly felt when increased abdominal effort is truly present. Activation of the abdominal muscles during respiration actively aids exhalation and passively assists
inspiration. Increasing intraabdominal pressure (and
thus passively increasing intrathoracic pressure) raises
the pressure driving expiratory gas flows. This increase
in abdominal pressure also serves to place the diaphragm
in a more cranial position prior to the next inspiratory
effort. This diaphragmatic shift places it in a more
favorable orientation for contraction and thus abdominal muscle activity can enhance diaphragmatic performance. True increased abdominal effort generally
indicates expiratory flow limitation due to intrathoracic
airway narrowing or collapse.
Some patients may have atypical abdominal wall
motion. Paradoxical motion (abdomen moving inward
on inspiration) may be seen with diaphragmatic hernia,
fatigue, or paralysis. A more focal inward movement of
the abdominal wall adjacent to the costal arch is often
seen in patients with pleural effusion. Any significant
motion of the soft tissues in the region overlying the
thoracic inlet may indicate abnormal or increased
­
r­ espiratory effort.
Clinical Signs of Dyspnea
Small animal patients may also exhibit clinical signs that
one might attribute to the unpleasant sensation of dyspnea. Such signs include a blunted response to the environment (obtundation) as the patient focuses solely on
the act of breathing. An “anxious” facial expression with
dilated pupils bilaterally is common. Such patients are
typically not eating, drinking, or sleeping adequately. A
patient that has been in respiratory distress and is now
devoting energies to these other needs is likely improving. In cats, the absence of grooming behaviors may be
associated with sensations of dyspnea. Returning to
­normal hygiene routines often accompanies a marked

375

VetBooks.ir

376

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

improvement in respiratory status. Patients that are
experiencing dyspnea are often excessively fractious and
resistant to physical restraint.
Respiratory monitoring in the critically ill veterinary
patient should include initial and serial evaluation for the
presence of all the above physical exam findings. Serial
evaluation often allows the clinician to put quantitative
data (see later) into their proper context. The response to
specific or empiric therapies is best assessed based on a
combination of these physical exam findings, imaging,
and quantitative laboratory assay results.

­Determination of Response
to Specific or Empiric Therapies
Respiratory monitoring plans are frequently designed with
the goal of assessing response to therapy. Serial monitoring of respiratory rate is perhaps the most widely used
approach in most settings (e.g., monitoring response to
diuretics in presumed congestive heart failure patients).
Other examples might include the assessment of pulse oximetry, respiratory effort, and breathing ­pattern in response
to oxygen supplementation. Such minimally invasive
approaches can be quite useful but in other cases, more
invasive procedures such as intubation, positive pressure
ventilation, and arterial blood gas sampling are required
both to correct the problem and to monitor progression.
Marked improvement in respiratory status following
intubation is expected for upper airway obstruction in
the absence of other co‐morbidities. Likewise, hypoxemia
due solely to hypoventilation should resolve with oxygen
supplementation in all cases short of apnea or agonal
breathing. Failure of hypoxemia to resolve with oxygen
supplementation typically indicates significant venous
admixture and physiologic or anatomic right‐to‐left
shunting. Hypoxemia that resolves with oxygen supplementation in a patient that simultaneously demonstrates

little or no improvement in clinical signs of respiratory
distress can be indicative of pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE). Respiratory monitoring plans should be
tailored to the individual patient and the pathology
­
believed to be present.

­Assessment of the Adequacy
of Alveolar Ventilation
The alveolar gas equation or “PCO2 equation” (PACO2 ~
VdotCO2/VA) provides the rationale for all forms of ventilatory status monitoring. The equation states that the
partial pressure of carbon dioxide in alveolar gas varies
directly with CO2 production and inversely with alveolar
ventilation. The adequacy of alveolar ventilation is
defined by the alveolar partial pressure of carbon dioxide. If alveolar ventilation is adequate for the current
level of CO2 production then PACO2 will be within the
normal range. If alveolar ventilation is inadequate or
excessive, the PACO2 will be increased or decreased,
respectively. The rate of production of carbon dioxide
(VdotCO2) is largely irrelevant. Ventilatory adequacy is
defined relative to current carbon dioxide production no
matter what that current level might be. In extreme cases
such as malignant hyperthermia, carbon dioxide production exceeds the level that any healthy respiratory
system could remove from the system; however, those
patients are still defined as hypoventilating despite having normal (or even exceptional) respiratory function.
Alveolar gas composition is not uniform across all aveoli and is exceedingly difficult to sample. Thus, the partial pressure of carbon dioxide from other sites serves as
a surrogate in clinical practice. Clinically useful surrogate samples include arterial blood, venous blood (mixed,
central, or peripheral), and end‐tidal exhalate. Typical
canine blood values for PCO2 are shown in Table 38.1.

Table 38.1 Blood gas analysis reference intervals

pH

Arterial
(cat)

Arterial
(dog)

Mixed venous
(dog)

Central venous
(dog)

Peripheral
venous
(dog)

7.39 +/−0.08

7.40 +/−0.03

7.36 +/−0.02

7.35 +/−0.02

7.36 +/−0.02

PCO2

31 +/−5

37 +/−3

43 +/−4

42 +/−5

43 +/−3

Base deficit

−2 to +8

−4 to 0

−2 to 0

−4 to 0

−2 to 0

Bicarbonate

18 +/−4

21 +/−2

23 +/−2

22 +/−2

23 +/−1

Total CO2

N.D.

22 +/−2

24 +/−2

23 +/−2

24 +/−2

PO2

105 +/−10

102 +/−7

53 +/−10

55 +/−10

58 +/−9

Source: Adapted from Ilkiw et al. (1991). Values are presented as mean +/− standard deviation.
N.D., not determined.

VetBooks.ir

38 Respiratory Monitoring in Critical Care

The adequacy of each of these sample types is dependent
on patient factors as will be discussed later.
Arterial blood is often an ideal surrogate sample for
evaluating ventilatory status. Carbon dioxide is highly
soluble and diffusible and alveolar partial pressures typically reach equilibrium with those in the bloodstream as
venous blood is arterialized. Diseases that result in
impaired diffusion of respiratory gases (e.g., emphysema)
often result in fatal hypoxemia before becoming sufficiently severe to cause meaningful limitations in carbon
dioxide diffusion, although hypercapnia may develop in
these patients by other mechanisms. However, extremes
of ventilation–perfusion mismatching can result in a dissociation of arterial (PaCO2) and alveolar (PACO2) carbon dioxide tensions. Even with this limitation, PaCO2
remains the preferred surrogate sample for defining the
adequacy of alveolar ventilation.
Venous blood PCO2 can be useful in the assessment of
ventilatory status in certain settings. As shown in
Table 38.1, the carbon dioxide tensions in venous and
arterial blood are not the same; however, in a hemodynamically stable patient the difference between the two
is suitably constant (~5–7 mmHg) so as to allow reasonably accurate prediction of what current arterial values
are likely to be. Venous values also define the maximal
value that may be present in arterial samples at that time.
For example, if the PvCO2 is 55 mmHg then the PaCO2 is
likely to be 49 mmHg and will not be greater than
55 mmHg. Unfortunately, the utility of venous blood
samples for defining ventilatory status is strongly
dependent on cardiovascular performance. As cardiac
output falls, the difference between PvCO2 and PaCO2
becomes progressively larger. In patients in shock or
other low‐flow states, venous samples are poor surrogate
samples for the assessment of the adequacy of alveolar
ventilation.
End‐tidal CO2 (ETCO2) is an important means of
monitoring ventilation in critically ill animals and encompasses both capnometry (numeric value only) and capnography (waveform representation). Of the various
surrogate markers for alveolar CO2, ETCO2, when it is
working well, is the closest to actually measuring PACO2.
End‐tidal plateau partial pressures of carbon dioxide
largely reflect the levels in alveolar gas. End‐tidal CO2
monitoring is the only tool that currently provides continuous, real‐time assessment of the adequacy of alveolar
ventilation. In addition, respiratory rate can be determined via this methodology as well. Capnography has the
added benefit of allowing waveform inspection, which can
be used to monitor for rebreathing, airway obstruction/
bronchospasm, apnea, dyssynchronous alveolar emptying,
valve malfunctions, and many other events.
Capnography and capnometry can also be useful in
determining the status of the cardiovascular system.

Exhaled carbon dioxide originates in the tissues and
requires cardiac pumping activity to generate venous
return and CO2 delivery. Cardiac arrest is associated
with an abrupt decline in ETCO2 levels. Conversely, the
adequacy of cardiac compressions can be assessed by
capnography or capnometry.
Many modern capnography systems (e.g., NICO2®)
include a flow disrupter and differential pressure transducers within the same disposable unit that is attached to
the patient’s breathing circuit. This allows for monitoring of respiratory mechanics as well as single‐breath capnography (CO2 plotted against cumulative exhaled
volume instead of over time). Single‐breath capnography
provides additional data relating to airway dead space,
gas distribution, and perfusion that cannot be obtained
easily (or at all) with standard time‐plotted capnography.
The disadvantages of end‐tidal capnography are that it
can add considerable apparatus dead space volume in
small (<2 kg) patients and promote rebreathing and
reduced alveolar ventilation. End‐tidal capnography also
becomes dissociated from arterial carbon dioxide tensions when significant alveolar dead space is present. A
larger gap between arterial and end‐tidal carbon dioxide
tensions develops in the setting of pulmonary thromboembolism or in cardiovascular instability/profound
hypotension.
Hypercapnia and hypocapnia represent (and define)
inadequate or excessive alveolar ventilation. The absolute values used to define these states will vary with the
analyzer used and the species. Typically, normocapnia is
defined as PCO2 of 35–45 mmHg in veterinary species.

­Assessment of the Adequacy
of Oxygenation
Hypoxemia is the term used to indicate inadequate partial pressure of oxygen in an arterial blood sample (PaO2).
The values at which samples are considered to indicate
hypoxemia vary slightly by region/elevation. At sea level,
PaO2 of less than 80 mmHg and 60 mmHg are considered
to indicate hypoxemia and severe hypoxemia, respectively. Hypoxemia does not always equate with reduced
arterial oxygen content, however. Polycythemic patients
may have near‐normal arterial oxygen content (~20 mL
O2/dL of blood) despite mild‐to‐moderate hypoxemia.
The increased hemoglobin concentration can allow for
the preservation of total content even when partial pressure of oxygen is reduced.
Determination of the adequacy of oxygenation is relatively straightforward. An arterial blood sample is
obtained and the determination of whether hypoxemia is
present is made. Alternatively, a surrogate can be used in
the form of pulse oximetry. With pulse oximetry, the

377

VetBooks.ir

378

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

­partial pressure of oxygen can be inferred from the saturation due to the known relationship between the two
(the oxyhemoglobin equilibrium curve). If pulse oximetry were to be employed for this purpose then the c­ ut‐
offs for hypoxemia and severe hypoxemia become 95%
and 92%, respectively.
Hypoxemia may be due to hypoventilation, low
inspired partial pressure of oxygen (PiO2), or venous
admixture. Hypoventilation typically only results in
hypoxemia when the patient is breathing room air.
Supplemental oxygen is sufficient to overcome hypoxemia due to increased alveolar carbon dioxide tension in
all cases (except apnea). Low inspired partial pressure of
oxygen (PiO2; often incorrectly interpreted as FiO2) can
commonly be due to decreased total inspired gas
­pressure (low barometric pressure at elevation) or on
very rare occasion to a decreased fraction of inspired
oxygen (e.g., rebreathing circuit with inadequate oxygen
inflow rates; asphyxiation).
Venous admixture is a term to describe all the means
by which venous blood may fail to properly equilibrate
with alveolar oxygen tensions during pulmonary perfusion. The principal means by which venous admixture
occurs are as follows: (1) right‐to‐left anatomic shunting
(congenital defects predominantly, although acquired
shunting may occur if pulmonary hypertension develops), (2) ventilation–perfusion mismatch (most ­common
cause), and (3) diffusion impairment (rarely a sole cause,
but contributes to a degree any time alveolar surface area
is lost due to collapse or flooding). Ventilation–perfusion
mismatching may be severe enough to result in physiologic shunting when perfusion is maintained to alveoli
that are receiving no fresh gas via ventilation. The other
extreme (ventilation of nonperfused alveoli) results in
increased dead space ventilation and does not directly
lead to hypoxemia.
Both PaO2 and SpO2 tell one very little by themselves
about the adequacy of oxygen delivery. In an anemic
patient, the PaO2 and SpO2 may be normal while total
arterial oxygen content is completely inadequate. It
serves little purpose to assess PaO2 or SpO2 in isolation
from other factors. If one is seeking to determine the
adequacy of oxygen delivery to the tissues then venous
partial pressures (PvO2) and saturations (SvO2) are more
informative in this setting. PvO2 cannot be used to evaluate pulmonary oxygenating performance as the blood
has already been modified by cellular oxygen extraction.
Properly handled samples can inform the clinician of the
lowest value that PaO2 could be (i.e., if PvO2 is 64 mmHg
then the patient cannot be severely hypoxemic as PaO2
must be at least 64 mmHg).
PvO2 serves as a reasonable marker of tissue hypoxia.
The partial pressure in the venous blood will be a reflection of the partial pressure present in the end‐capillary

blood. Mixed and central venous samples are preferable
as they represent a larger pooled sample than those
obtained from a peripheral vein. Values for PvO2 below
30 mmHg should prompt the clinician to assess global
or regional perfusion and oxygen delivery. Values below
20 mmHg should prompt immediate patient assessment and intervention. Recently published work has
suggested that central venous hemoglobin saturations
greater than 68% are associated with improved outcomes in critically ill small animal patients. This value
was obtained on an instrument not validated for canine
blood and may only be directly relevant when that
instrument is used; however, the value reported is
intriguingly similar to that reported for critically ill
humans and titrating therapy to maintain ScvO2 in the
high 60s is likely to be associated with improved outcomes in populations, if not necessarily in each individual patient.
Analysis of venous blood gases reinforces an important point: adequate partial pressure and adequate total
oxygen content are both required for optimal oxygen
delivery. Total content is essential to ensure that sufficient oxygen is available to be extracted due to oxygen’s
poor solubility in plasma. Partial pressure must also be
high enough to drive diffusion from capillary beds to
mitochondria. Neither inadequate carrying capacity
(hemoglobin concentration) nor inadequate partial
p
­ ressure (PaO2) will allow for optimal cellular utilization
of oxygen. Adequate partial pressure maintenance is particularly important when the diffusion distance is
increased by tissue edema. The combination of
­hypoxemia and anemia represents a major challenge to
homeostasis and oxygen supplementation is advisable
while blood products are being obtained.

­Evaluation of Gas Exchange
Efficiency
As mentioned earlier, PaO2 and SpO2 evaluation taken in
isolation may tell one very little about the adequacy of
oxygen delivery. They also poorly define lung function
when the clinical context is not considered. When one
evaluates either parameter, the following factors must be
considered at the time the reading was obtained: (1) the
nature of the gas the patient is currently breathing and
(2) the patient’s current ventilatory status. A low PaO2 on
room air may be a result of poor lung function and
venous admixture or it may be simply due to hypoventilation. An SpO2 reading of 96% on room air may be
acceptable, whereas it is cause for significant concern on
100% oxygen. These other factors cannot be ignored if
any PaO2 and SpO2 readings are to be correctly interpreted. One approach to incorporating these factors into

VetBooks.ir

38 Respiratory Monitoring in Critical Care

a more holistic approach to interpreting oxygenation
parameters is to consider gas exchange efficiency.
Gas exchange efficiency measures are a means of taking a given PaO2 and SpO2 value and asking, “What alveolar partial pressure of oxygen was required to achieve
that value?” These tools are primarily a means of assessing how efficient the lung is at bringing pulmonary capillary and alveolar partial pressures of oxygen into
equilibrium. When patients are breathing room air, the
most widely used tool for this purpose is the alveolar‐
arterial PO2 gradient (A‐a gradient). This approach is
based on the ideal alveolar gas equation (equation 1),
which provides a means by which alveolar PO2 may be
approximated.
[PAO2

FiO2 * (PB PH2O ) PaCO2 / RQ ] (Eq. 1)

In order to perform the calculation, one must know
the following factors which are assumed or obtained
from an arterial blood gas analysis: (1) FiO2, the fraction
of inspired oxygen (0.21 on room air), (2) PB, barometric
pressure (760 mmHg at sea level), (3) PH2O, water vapor
pressure (varies with body temperature, but usually
taken as 50 mmHg), (4) PACO2, alveolar carbon dioxide
tension (arterial value is usually substituted), and (5) RQ,
respiratory quotient (which varies with metabolic substrate used as a fuel source, 0.8–0.9 typically used). A
simplified version (equation 2) is often used clinically.
PAO2

FiO2 (PB 50) 1.2(PaCO2 )

(Eq. 2)

Once one has calculated PAO2, the measured value of
PaO2 is subtracted from it to obtain the difference
between the two (A‐a gradient). Lower values indicate
more efficient pulmonary gas exchange, with values less
than 15 considered normal and greater than 20
abnormal.
The normal range for the A‐a gradient is affected by
the inspired oxygen concentration. One rule of thumb is
that a normal animal may have a gradient of 1 mmHg for
each percent oxygen they are inspiring (e.g., up to a
20 mmHg gradient is normal on room air and up to a
100 mmHg gradient is normal on 100% oxygen). These
values are rough approximations only, however, and
serial comparisons are best made on room air whenever
possible. A‐a gradients greater than 20 mmHg indicate
that venous admixture is present and contributing to
hypoxemia. This does not rule out hypoventilation as a
secondary contributor (both may be present). Conversely,
hypoxemia with concurrent hypoventilation and a normal (<20 mmHg on room air) A‐a gradient suggests that
hypoventilation is the sole cause of hypoxemia.
The “Rule of 120” is a nonquantitative shortcut for
assessing whether venous admixture is present. If one
takes any physiologically plausible value for PACO2 and
calculates what the resultant PAO2 (using equation 1

above) would be on room air then subtracts 20 mmHg
from that value, one obtains the lowest value for PaO2
that could be present with that level of ventilation and no
venous admixture. One finds that the PACO2 and PaO2
obtained this way always add up to greater than
120 mmHg. Thus, for an arterial blood gas result
obtained on room air, the finding that the PaCO2 and
PaO2 add up to more than 120 mmHg suggests that
venous admixture is unlikely to be the cause of hypoxemia (if present). This is essentially a rapid, nonquantitative means of determining whether the A‐a gradient is
greater or less than 20–mmHg using an arterial blood
gas obtained on room air. It is the author’s understanding
that this clever shortcut was developed by Dr Steve
Haskins at UC Davis. It has proven to be an effective and
efficient screening tool for venous admixture in critically
ill dogs and cats.
The A‐a gradient performs more poorly when
patients are receiving supplemental oxygen because of
the wide range of gradients that can be obtained from
normal, healthy animals under these conditions. In this
setting, the ratio of PaO2 to FiO2 (or P:F ratio) is more
typically employed. Healthy animals have P:F ratios
approximating 500 (unitless). For example, a healthy
dog with a PaO2 of 105 mmHg on room air (21% or 0.21
oxygen) would have a P:F ratio of 500 (i.e., 105/0.21 =
500). Humans and animals with acute lung injury (ALI)
typically have P:F ratios of less than 300. This equates
to a PaO2 of less than 63 mmHg on room air. Humans
and animals with P/F ratios of less than 200 are considered to have lung function comparable to patients with
acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). The P:F
ratio is of no use on room air. All that would represent
is a transformation (x/0.21) of the PaO2, which would
provide no additional information. Moreover, since the
P:F ratio does not take ventilation into account, abnormal values obtained from patients breathing room air
could suggest that lung injury/venous admixture is present when in fact hypoventilation is the sole cause of
hypoxemia.
The P:F ratio is best used to compare gas exchange
efficiency using values obtained from the same patient
while receiving supplemental oxygen or on mechanical
ventilation (or both). However, the P:F ratio is highly
labile and prognostication and lung recovery assessment
are best performed with many serial measurements
rather than just two.
Recently, it has been suggested that the ratio of SpO2 to
FiO2 might serve as a noninvasive alternative to the P:F
ratio. This approach has been validated in human
patients with ARDS, but as of this writing no such validation has been published in the veterinary literature. One
small pilot study tends to support the utility of this
approach.

379

VetBooks.ir

380

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

­Use of Pulmonary Mechanics
to Categorize Disease
In the critically ill veterinary patient, the evaluation of
pulmonary mechanics is perhaps most often performed
via inspection of ventilator waveforms. A discussion of
the topic of ventilator waveform analysis herein is prevented by time and space restrictions. Instead, the reader
is referred to the recommended readings, which cover
the topic in great depth.

­Conclusion
The physical exam is arguably the most valuable tool in
respiratory monitoring. Blood gas analysis and capnography can provide useful diagnostic and prognostic information that complements exam findings. Ventilation,
oxygenation, the adequacy of oxygen delivery, and gas
exchange efficiency can all be assessed to a degree with
arterial and venous blood samples. Each of these parameters can be assessed separately, but greater diagnostic
value is obtained when they are taken as a whole.

­Further Reading
Bradbrook CA, Clark L, Dugdale AH, Burford J, Mosing
M. Measurement of respiratory system compliance and
respiratory system resistance in healthy dogs undergoing
general anaesthesia for elective orthopaedic procedures.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(4): 382–9.
Calabro JM, Prittie JE, Palma DA. Preliminary evaluation
of the utility of comparing SpO(2)/FiO(2) and PaO(2)/
FiO(2) ratios in dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2013; 23(3):
280–5.
Corona TM, Aumann M. Ventilator waveform
interpretation in mechanically ventilated small animals.
J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2011; 21(5): 496–514.

Hackett TB. Pulse oximetry and end tidal carbon dioxide
monitoring. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2002;
32(5): 1021–9.
Hoareau GL, Jourdan G, Mellema M, Verwaerde P.
Evaluation of arterial blood gases and arterial blood
pressures in brachycephalic dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2012;
26(4): 897–904.
Ilkiw J, Rose J, Martin I. A comparison of simultaneously
collected arterial, mixed venous, jugular venous and
cephalic venous blood samples in the assessment of
blood‐gas and acid‐base status in the dog. J Vet Intern
Med 1991; 5: 294–8.

VetBooks.ir

381

39
Acute Respiratory Failure
Matthew Mellema, DVM, PhD, DACVECC
Applaud Medical, San Francisco, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Acute respiratory failure occurs when an insult to the
respiratory system that is sudden in onset or short in
duration results in levels of alveolar ventilation or pulmonary oxygen transfer (or both) that are insufficient to
maintain vital metabolic processes and homeostasis.
This term does not imply that chronic respiratory compromise is not present concurrently. In a subset of cases,
the acute exacerbation of a chronic process or the sudden development of a secondary complication (e.g., respiratory tract infection) may lead to signs of acute
deterioration in clinical status. Similarly, chronic pulmonary compromise may lead to fairly abrupt fatigue of the
muscles of respiration and provoke an acute crisis. The
proximate cause of the acute crisis in such a case is the
suddenly inadequate ventilatory capacity; however, the
ultimate underlying cause may be an unsustainable
workload due to a chronic disease process (e.g., progressive dynamic airway collapse, parenchymal fibrosis, etc.).
Categorization schemes for acute respiratory failure
are typically multitiered in their organization. The first
level of differentiation is often based on the predominant
arterial blood gas alteration. With this approach, one
often finds acute respiratory failure initially divided into
three main subcategories: (1) hypercapneic respiratory
failure, (2) hypoxemic respiratory failure, and (3) mixed
respiratory failure.
Hypercapneic Respiratory Failure
Hypercapneic respiratory failure includes those conditions that result in a severe, sustained reduction in alveolar ventilation. By definition, a respiratory acidosis is
present. Acidemia, or a reduction in blood pH, may or
may not be present concurrently, depending on a host of
other factors such as the current capacity of the extracellular hydrogen ion buffering systems. Generally, in acute

hypercapneic respiratory failure, inadequate time has
passed to allow for generation of maximal compensatory
responses and acidemia is present more often than not.
The cut‐off value for CO2 at which hypercapneic respiratory failure is deemed to be present varies, but is
typically in the 50–60 mmHg range when arterial or end‐
tidal exhalate sampling is utilized. A PaCO2 of greater
than 60 mmHg is often listed among the indications for
mechanical ventilation in the veterinary literature, which
can thus serve as de facto evidence of respiratory failure
in many instances.
Hypercapneic respiratory failure (and hypercapnia in
general) is the result of one or more of the following circumstances: (1) inadequate or inappropriate ventilatory
drive, (2) insufficient ventilatory capacity, or (3) an excessive mechanical or chemical load imposed on the respiratory system. Inadequate or inappropriate ventilatory
drive results from intracranial disease, medications/
anesthetics/sedatives, or extracranial encephalopathies.
The respiratory centers reside in the medulla with inputs
from both the pons and cerebrum. Diseases resulting in
compromise of these pontine and medullary centers may
lead to marked alterations in respiratory pattern (e.g.,
Cheyne–Stokes breathing, apneusis, etc.) or alternatively
a reduction in respiratory rate and/or tidal volume with
little alteration in pattern of breathing. In the setting of
hypercapneic respiratory failure due to intracranial disease, hypercapnia may be both a result and a cause of
elevated intracranial pressure and imminent herniation.
Inadequate or inappropriate respiratory drive is typically
identified in the laboratory setting by determining the
relationship between minute ventilation and PaCO2 or
PaO2. This relationship is rarely defined quantitatively in
the clinical setting, however. Qualitatively, a clinician
may note that a hypoxemic patient has failed to hyperventilate as would be expected. Such a finding would
suggest altered ventilatory drive or inadequate ventilatory capacity.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

382

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

Insufficient ventilatory capacity is the second general
mechanism for hypercapneic respiratory failure and is
typically the result of compromise of the respiratory
muscles or the neural input to them. Respiratory drive
may be sufficient (although it is difficult to assess in this
setting), while the transmission or end‐effector systems
are dysfunctional. The problem may lie anywhere along
the myoneural axis. High cervical myelopathies (cranial
to the C5 spinal segment) can disrupt transmission at a
level cranial to the formation of the phrenic nerve roots.
Low cervical myelopathies may impair the intercostal
nerves while sparing phrenic nerve transmission (which
is usually sufficient on its own to maintain ventilatory
status). The nerve roots may be impacted by disease as is
seen in polyradiculoneuritis (coon hound paralysis).
Similar forms of ascending paralysis (tick paralysis, botulism, some snake envenomations) may result in hypercapneic respiratory failure that appears quite similar in
nature although occurring via different mechanisms.
The phrenic nerve itself may become compromised
(phrenic neuropathy) due to trauma (surgical or external), demyelinating diseases, disruption by tumor
growth, or idiopathic causes. Unilateral phrenic neuropathy is often well tolerated, while bilateral dysfunction
can require mechanical ventilatory support.
Disorders of the neuromuscular junction can lead to
hypercapneic respiratory failure. Junctionopathies may
be subclassified as presynaptic, synaptic, or postsynaptic in nature. Presynaptic disorders include those that
increase (e.g., low serum magnesium and some envenomations such as black widow spider bites) as well as
decrease (e.g., hypocalcemia, botulism, tick paralysis,
aminoglycoside antibiotics) acetylcholine release into
synaptic clefts. Synaptic cleft disorders include diseases
that alter the removal of acetylcholine from this site
(e.g., cholinesterase inhibitors, organophosphates).
Postsynaptic disorders can include forms of myasthenia
gravis as well as administration of depolarizing and nondepolarizing muscle relaxants (e.g., succinylcholine).
Myopathies are a potential cause of reduced ventilatory capacity as well. Specific myopathies of the respiratory muscles are rarely diagnosed in veterinary patients
except for traumatic myopathies. Traumatic diaphragmatic herniation or avulsion is perhaps the most frequently recognized myopathic process leading to
hypercapnia and respiratory failure. Another uncommon but well‐recognized myopathy of small animals that
may profoundly reduce ventilatory capacity is potassium
depletion polymyopathy of cats. While hypokalemic
myopathies are more fully characterized in cats than
dogs, it should be noted that profound hypokalemia also
may result in hypoventilation in dogs. Other causes of
diaphragmatic myopathies reported in humans are rarely
reported in veterinary species, seldom associated with

respiratory failure, or limited to select lines of highly
inbred animals (e.g., Duchenne muscular dystrophy, thyrotoxicosis, myxedema, hyperadrenocorticism, systemic
lupus erythematosus). Severe abnormalities of the sternum or chest wall may compromise diaphragmatic function by placing it at an unfavorable orientation or resting
length.
An excessive mechanical or chemical load imposed on
the respiratory system is the third general mechanism of
acute hypercapneic respiratory failure. In this case, the
respiratory system may be functioning at a high level but
has been required to perform its duties in the face of a
mechanical or chemical load that would exceed the
capacity of any healthy respiratory system. Mechanical
loads that are excessive may be the result of reductions in
compliance of the chest wall or pulmonary parenchyma,
increases in respiratory system resistance, or both.
Reductions in compliance can result from alterations in
the biomechanical properties of the structural elements
themselves or alterations in surface tension forces. In the
former instance, such alterations are typically the result
of chronic disease processes and excessive fibrosis.
However, acute changes can be superimposed iatrogenically in the form of tight wraps on the trunk at either
the thoracic or abdominal level (e.g., spica splints, etc.).
Elevated intraabdominal pressure (intraabdominal
hypertension, abdominal compartment syndrome) can
secondarily result in reduced respiratory system compliance and can develop acutely in the setting of hemoabdomen or other forms of rapid peritoneal fluid
accumulation. Likewise, pleural filling disorders can
compromise the tidal volume achieved with a given
degree of respiratory muscular effort. A given volume of
air may reduce tidal volume to a larger degree than an
identical volume of fluid in the pleural space. Unlike
fluid, air can expand and such expansion during inspiration can compromise tidal volume beyond the effect that
results from disruption of pleural contact forces alone.
Acute reductions in the compliance of the pulmonary
parenchyma and interstitium are often seen concurrently
with disruption of surface tension forces in inflammatory
and edematous lung diseases. Pulmonary edema, pulmonary hemorrhage, near‐drowning, pneumonitis, and
pneumonia all may lead to reduced pulmonary compliance both via tissue edema formation and increased surface tension due to surfactant dilution and alveolar
collapse. While these effects are important, each of the
diseases mentioned in this context is far more likely to
cause hypoxemic respiratory failure than the hypercapneic form. Acute hypoventilation often occurs only when
respiratory muscle fatigue develops or the airway becomes
occluded with exudate, fluid, or foam.
Increased airway resistance is another important cause
of hypercapneic respiratory failure due to an excessive

VetBooks.ir

39 Acute Respiratory Failure

mechanical load. Many commonly diagnosed diseases in
small animal practice can lead to excessive airway resistance, which is the resistance to the flow of gases during
inhalation and exhalation. Airway resistance can impact
both total gas flow into the system as well as intrapulmonary redistribution of gas after bulk flow has ceased
(pendelluft). Many common diseases in small animal
practice can cause life‐threatening increases in airway
resistance at the level of the extrathoracic (e.g., laryngeal
paralysis, brachycephalic syndrome) or intrathoracic
(e.g., feline asthma, tracheobronchial malacia) airways.
These conditions are often chronically active with sudden deterioration resulting from additional factors such
as increased environmental temperatures, inhaled particulates and antigens, respiratory tract infections, or
atypical activity/exertion. Alternatively, disease progression may lead to a new manifestation that represents an
intolerable burden (e.g., the onset of new, or higher
grade, laryngeal or pharyngeal collapse).
Focal/localized intrathoracic airway narrowing or collapse typically needs to be quite proximal to significantly
impair ventilation (e.g., tracheal or lobar bronchial collapse). Diffuse collapse or narrowing of large intrathoracic airways can severely impair ventilation and limit
expiratory flow substantially. Narrowing or collapse of
smaller intrathoracic airways generally needs to be diffuse in nature to significantly impair ventilation. Feline
asthma and bronchiolitis in dogs (e.g., secondary to
canine adenovirus infection) serve as examples of diseases encountered in small animal practice that result in
diffuse small airway narrowing.
Increased alveolar dead space ventilation also represents a form of excessive mechanical load. In this setting,
an atypically high proportion of respiratory muscular
work is being devoted to ventilating alveolar units that
are not participating in gas exchange. The effective alveolar ventilation is reduced although total minute ventilation may be normal (or more likely increased). This
reduction in alveolar ventilation is identified (and
defined) by the accompanying rise in alveolar and arterial carbon dioxide tensions. However, end‐tidal concentrations become dissociated and reduced. This increase
in the gradient between arterial and alveolar carbon
dioxide tensions is due to the simultaneous emptying of
those alveolar units that did and those that did not participate in gas exchange. Thus dead space gases dilute the
carbon dioxide in the exhalate from perfused alveoli.
Increased alveolar dead space may result from pulmonary vascular occlusion (e.g., pulmonary thromboembolism) or from decreased pulmonary capillary hydrostatic
pressures in hypovolemia and other forms of severe cardiovascular impairment when intraluminal pressures are
below alveolar pressures (i.e., extraluminal pressures
exceed intraluminal pressures).

An excessive chemical load on the respiratory system
can also manifest as hypercapneic respiratory failure. In
this context, the high chemical load is in the form of
excessive carbon dioxide and this CO2 burden exceeds
that which any healthy respiratory system might be able
to eliminate. An excessive CO2 load can be the result of an
abrupt and marked increase in carbon dioxide production (VdotCO2) as is seen in malignant hyperthermia or
status epilepticus. Alternatively, the excessive CO2 load
can be the result of rebreathing exhaled carbon dioxide.
Rebreathing may occur in several clinically relevant settings such as a maintaining a patient in a poorly ventilated, confined space (e.g., anesthetic induction box),
excessive apparatus dead space (e.g., end‐tidal monitoring and other devices attached to orotracheal tubes in
very small patients), or exhausted soda lime in a rebreathing anesthetic circuit. The greater density of carbon dioxide relative to oxygen and nitrogen has raised concerns
that a gradient may develop over time when animals are
delivered supplemental oxygen via an improvised oxygen
hood or nonpurpose‐built oxygen cage (i.e., Elizabethan
collar with plastic wrap cover). Convention is often to
place the venting site upwards (12 o’clock) so that heat
may readily escape; however, periodic shifting of the vent
site to a downward location (6 o’clock) may be useful to
reduce carbon dioxide accumulation. Typically, patient
movement is sufficient to periodically shift the vent orientation without clinician intervention, but active repositioning may be required in moribund patients.
Hypoxemic Respiratory Failure
Respiratory failure that is categorized as hypoxemic
largely results from venous admixture in various forms.
Venous admixture is a term for the co‐mingling of deoxygenated venous blood with arterialized blood during
flow from the right heart to the left heart. Some authors
prefer to use the term true venous admixture to describe
right‐to‐left shunting through an abnormal anatomic
conduit (e.g., right‐to‐left patent ductus arteriosus). In
such frameworks, the mixing of deoxygenated venous
blood with arterialized blood that occurs in the pulmonary veins in conditions such as increased ventilation–
perfusion mismatching is termed venous admixture‐like
in nature. Such distinctions offer little advantage in the
author’s opinion. A more clinically relevant approach
might be to define venous admixture as those conditions
which produce hypoxemia with an accompanying
increase in alveolar‐to‐arterial PO2 gradient (A‐a gradient). The predominant mechanisms resulting in hypoxemia are listed in Box 39.1.
Hypoventilation results in hypoxemia by reducing
alveolar oxygen tensions. The retention of carbon dioxide
within the alveolar spaces reduces the partial pressure

383

VetBooks.ir

384

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

Box 39.1 Mechanisms of hypoxemia
Associated with a normal A‐a gradient (no venous
admixture)
●●
●●

Hypoventilation
Decreased PiO2

Associated with an increased A‐a gradient (venous
admixture)
Right‐to‐left shunting (anatomic shunting)
Perfusion of nonventilated alveoli (no V–Q; physiologic
shunting)
●● Ventilation–perfusion mismatching (low V–Q)
●● Diffusion impairment
●●
●●

of oxygen via dilution to a degree, but it is ultimately the
failure to provide adequate inflow of oxygen to replace
what has been taken up that reduces PAO2. For this reason, hypoxemia due to hypoventilation may be readily
corrected by restoring appropriate levels of alveolar ventilation, by increasing the proportion of inspired gas that
is oxygen (i.e., FiO2), or both. Hypoventilation is thus best
considered as a form of hypercapneic respiratory failure
rather than a truly hypoxemic form. Hypoventilation is an
implausible mechanism of hypoxemia in patients receiving supplemental oxygen if one excludes complete apnea
from the discussion.
Decreased PiO2 is an often incorrectly or incompletely
categorized cause of hypoxemia. Many authors will list
decreased FiO2 instead of PiO2 as the mechanism. A
truly decreased fraction of inspired oxygen is quite rare
as the proximate cause of hypoxemia and would generally only be encountered if a patient were on a rebreathing circuit with inadequate fresh gas inflow. One would
hope that this is a rare occurrence. Low PiO2 in contrast
is quite common and occurs any time an animal is taken
significantly above sea level unless they are maintained
in a suitably pressurized environment such as an aircraft.
The hypoxemia that develops at elevation is the result of
a decrease in PiO2 with a normal FiO2 (i.e., the atmosphere is still 21% oxygen, but total pressures and thus all
partial pressures are decreased). For a patient breathing
room air at sea level, decreased PiO2 is not a reasonable
differential diagnosis for hypoxemia. In the case of both
hypoventilation and decreased PiO2, the hypoxemia that
is observed is due to a decrease in PAO2. This decrease is
accompanied by a proportional decrease in PaO2 and
thus the A‐a gradient remains within the normal range.
As mentioned above, causes of hypoxemia that are
associated with an increased A‐a gradient are those that
fall under the overarching category of venous admixture.
Venous admixture includes all mechanisms by which
blood passing from the right heart to the left heart fails

to be properly oxygenated despite an adequate alveolar
partial pressure of oxygen (PAO2). Calculation of the A‐a
gradient is covered in Chapter 38.
Right‐to‐left shunting (anatomic shunting) is a relatively uncommon cause of hypoxemia in veterinary practice relative to other forms of venous admixture. Tetralogy
of Fallot is perhaps the most common congenital defect
in which right‐to‐left shunting occurs routinely. In many
other conditions, a potential shunting conduit may be
present but right‐to‐left shunting does not occur unless
cardiac pressures on the right side exceed those on the
left (e.g., septal defects). Similarly, pathology involving
the great vessels such as patent ductus arteriosus would
not be expected to result in right‐to‐left shunting unless
significant pulmonary hypertension, profound systemic
hypotension, or both were present. In such cases, differential cyanosis may alert the clinician to the presence of
this pathology. When significant anatomic right‐to‐left
shunting is present, hypoxemia may become refractory to
correction with supplemental oxygen. When shunt flow
reaches 30% of cardiac output, hypoxemia is largely unresponsive to supplemental oxygen, with no improvement
expected at all when shunt flow approaches 50% of total
blood flow. The shunt equation is slightly cumbersome
and a clinically useful shortcut is to estimate 5% extra
shunting (5% is normal so this is additional shunting
added to the 5% baseline value) for every 100 mmHg that
the PaO2 is below the expected value for that FiO2. For
example, if a patient has a PaO2 of 200 mmHg on 100%
oxygen then one would estimate the shunt fraction to be
20% (expected PaO2 is 500 mmHg on 100% oxygen).
Physiologic shunting occurs when perfusion is maintained to nonventilated alveoli. This situation could be
considered a failure of hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction. Inflammatory mediators and drug agents can compromise the function of both the sensing and effector
arms of this response system. As alveolar oxygen tensions drop, the expected response is that the local vascular resistance to those alveoli will increase, thus diverting
flow to better‐ventilated alveoli. In the case of zero alveolar ventilation, the optimal response would be to reduce
perfusion to that region as well. Failure to do so results in
physiologic shunting. The effect is the same as if the lung
were not there at all and the blood was passing through
an anatomic shunt. This mechanism explains why
obstruction of ventilation to a lung lobe during lung
lobectomy (e.g., during one‐lung ventilation for thoracoscopic lung lobectomy) results in hypoxemia, but the
subsequent lung lobectomy itself does not. Removal of
an excessive amount of lung tissue (e.g., all the lung lobes
on the right side) can result in hypoxemia, but this is due
to ventilation–perfusion mismatching (excessive perfusion relative to ventilation) in the remaining lung lobes
rather than physiologic shunting. Much as is observed

VetBooks.ir

39 Acute Respiratory Failure

with anatomic shunting, physiologic shunting, when
excessive, can result in hypoxemia that is unresponsive
to oxygen supplementation. In this setting, the clinical
priority is to restore ventilation to the nonventilated
alveoli, which often mandates mechanical ventilation
with positive end‐expiratory pressure (PEEP).
Ventilation–perfusion (V–Q) mismatch is perhaps the
most common cause of hypoxemic respiratory failure in
small animal practice. Aspiration pneumonia, cardiogenic edema, and noncardiogenic edema are commonly
encountered causes of hypoxemia in small animal
patients and can each result in respiratory failure. Pleural
filling disorders can result in V–Q mismatch as well as
hypoventilation. Atelectasis and pulmonary thromboembolism each result in V–Q mismatch as well, albeit by
vastly different mechanisms. Pulmonary hypertension is
increasingly recognized as a major health concern in veterinary species and can result in substantial V–Q abnormalities. Figure 39.1 illustrates the basic concepts of
V–Q matching and mismatching.
In the ideal lung, ventilation and blood flow would be
delivered proportionally to alveoli. An increase in ventilation relative to blood flow (high V:Q ratio) is akin to dead
space ventilation and does not directly cause hypoxemia
since blood flowing to such alveoli encounters alveolar
oxygen tensions that are normal or slightly above typical
values. Perfect one‐to‐one matching likewise produces
conditions that are favorable for pulmonary capillary and
alveolar oxygen tensions to reach equilibrium, assuming
blood flow rates are not excessive (and they rarely are
except in extreme circumstances). It is in those alveolar
units where perfusion is disproportionately high relative
to ventilation that hypoxemia develops. In this setting,
Figure 39.1 Ventilation–perfusion
mismatching. Partial pressure values are in
units of mmHg. Flow to normal and high V–Q
regions produces appropriately arterialized
blood. The blood perfusing the region with
reduced alveolar ventilation (far left alveolus)
produces hypoxemic blood. The final mixture
is hypoxemic due to the disproportionate
decrease in saturation in the blood (70% vs
97%) from the low V–Q regions and the
minimal increase (99.4% vs 97%) in saturation
in the blood from the high V–Q regions.
Moreover, the low V–Q region has
disproportionately high flows relative to the
high V–Q regions (1.0 L/min vs 0.05 L/min).

blood encounters atypically low alveolar oxygen tensions
and saturation is submaximal. The mixing of this poorly
arterialized blood with the blood draining high and normal V–Q regions results in systemic hypoxemia. The
shape of the oxyhemoglobin equilibrium curve precludes
the high V–Q regions from “compensating” for the low
V–Q regions. The flat portion observed at high PO2 values prevents an increase comparable to the decrease
observed at lower PO2 values (the steep portion).
Moreover, the low V–Q regions may be of that nature
because of high flow (not just low ventilation) and are
thus contributing a disproportionately high volume to the
final mixture. Likewise, the high V–Q regions may represent areas with normal ventilation but lower perfusion
and are thus contributing relatively less volume to the
final mixture.
As with physiologic shunting, V–Q mismatch may be
considered a failure of hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstrictive responses in many settings. Whether the problem
arose due to a reduction in ventilation or an increase in
perfusion, adaptive compensatory adjustments would be
expected in any otherwise healthy animal. In other circumstances, inadequate hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction may not be primarily responsible for the V–Q
inequality. In massive pulmonary thromboembolism
(PTE), the portion of the lung to which blood flow is
compromised is now a high V–Q region. It has become
physiologic dead space and is not directly responsible for
hypoxemia (high V–Q regions provide well‐oxygenated
blood). In this setting, if cardiac output does not fall substantially then the remaining lung is now overperfused
and represents a large region of low V–Q alveolar units.
In this way, hypoxemia can result indirectly.
Room Air Ventilation
PIO2 = 150

Mixed
venous
blood

V/Q
= 0.05

V/Q = 1
3.95

in

L/m
1.0

PVO2 = 37.8
PVCO2 = 47.9
Sat = 66%
Content = 13.0

PO2 = 40.2
PCO2 = 47.7
Sat = 70%
Content = 13.7

V/Q
= 20
L/min

PO2 = 144
PCO2 = 10.7
Sat = 99.4%
Content = 19.8

0.05 L/m
in

PO2 = 101
PCO2 = 40.6
Sat = 97%
Content = 19.2

Arterial blood
PaO2 = 64.6
PaCO2 = 42.2
Sat = 91.5%
Content = 18.0

385

VetBooks.ir

386

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

This explanation seems insufficient to explain clinical
experiences with this disease process, however. Surgically
removing a similarly sized region of lung would presumably produce the same level of overperfusion, but does
not typically result in hypoxemia. The missing portion of
the mechanism for hypoxemia in this setting is likely to
be altered bronchomotor tone. It was first demonstrated
in 1942 that pulmonary thromboembolism (or external
mechanical occlusion of a pulmonary artery) results in
bronchospasm in the dog. The hypoxemia seen in PTE,
but not following lung lobectomy, is likely the result of
overperfusion combined with regional decreases in ventilation. Relief in sensations of dyspnea in humans is
reported following theophylline administration. This
may be due to a reduction in bronchospasm or reduced
activation of pulmonary C‐fibers via adenosine receptor
antagonism.
Diffusion impairment is a common contributor to
hypoxemia in small animal patients, but rarely a sole or
primary cause of such. Fick’s law of diffusion details the
major contributing factors to gas or solute flux via diffusion: (1) concentration or partial pressure difference, (2)
length of the diffusion pathway, and (3) surface area
available for diffusion. With these factors in mind, both
hypoventilation and low PiO2 represent a reversible
form of diffusion impairment. Many of the diseases listed
above under V–Q mismatch result in alveolar flooding
or collapse which represents a loss of surface area for diffusion. In a similar manner, PTE results in the formation
of excessive alveolar dead space, which also represents a
loss of surface area for diffusion. Among the diseases
common to small animal practice, chronic congestive
heart failure likely represents the best example of
increased diffusion distance. Remodeling of the alveolar
epithelial–capillary endothelial interface in chronic congestive heart failure can result in thickening of this barrier and an increased diffusion distance.
Despite these many examples of means by which
common disease processes can compromise the process, diffusion limitation is considered to be a primary
cause of hypoxemia on only rare occasion. In human
medicine, emphysema can result in a massive sustained
loss of surface area and diffusion limitation is considered a more significant cause of hypoxemia in that
­species. The limited role of diffusion impairment in
producing hypoxemia in small animal species is perhaps best illustrated in the setting of chronic congestive
heart failure. In this syndrome, some degree of diffusion limitation is likely chronically present yet hypoxemia is rarely noted in the absence of pulmonary edema
with alveolar flooding and V–Q mismatch. Pioneering
work by Norman Staub has previously demonstrated in
acute models of canine congestive heart failure that
interstitial pulmonary edema is insufficient to produce

hypoxemia in the absence of alveolar flooding in this
species. Many clinicians have reported the experience
of managing congestive heart failure patients in which
clinical signs of respiratory distress have resolved yet
thoracic radiographs still demonstrate persistent interstitial edema. Such experiences may reflect resolution
of hypoxemia prior to clearance of excessive fluid accumulation in the pulmonary interstitium.
Diffusion impairment may be overcome by increasing
the partial pressure gradient by raising PAO2 or instead
by recruiting additional surface area (or both). The
recruitment of additional surface area can involve both
recruitment maneuvers (breath hold) and the application of PEEP during mechanical ventilation.

­Epidemiology
The epidemiology of respiratory failure in small animal
patients is largely unknown. The epidemiology of respiratory failure in human medicine is also poorly understood. Most definitions of respiratory failure are based
on arterial blood gas values. In human pediatrics, noninvasive tools are widely employed for the assessment of
pulmonary function (e.g., pulse oximetry, cutaneous gas
monitoring systems, etc.). Conservative estimates suggest that as many as 35% of respiratory failure patients in
pediatrics are excluded because noninvasive monitoring
methods were employed. Similar concerns are raised in
studies of the epidemiology of respiratory failure in adult
humans to a lesser degree. Between 2001 and 2009, hospitalizations for acute respiratory failure rose from 1 million cases to 1.9 million cases per year in the United
States alone. The associated healthcare costs rose from
$30 billion to $54 billion. A decrease in mortality has
been observed over this period despite overall rates of
mechanical ventilation remaining unchanged.
Attempts could be made to estimate the prevalence
or incidence of small animal respiratory failure based
on previously published large retrospective studies
of mechanical ventilation in small animal patients.
However, such data are heavily biased and likely poorly
represent small animal patient populations as a whole.
Patients in such studies represent only those with the following characteristics: (1) patients that were presented
to a secondary or tertiary care center that offers long‐
term (>24 h) mechanical ventilation, (2) patients in
whom respiratory failure was recognized by the attending clinician, (3) cases in which mechanical ventilation
was offered, (4) cases in which clients elected to pursue
this therapeutic option, and (5) cases which were not
excluded from the analysis. Such reports almost certainly document only a small fraction of respiratory failure cases cared for by small animal practitioners.

VetBooks.ir

39 Acute Respiratory Failure

One recent study examined the distribution of disease
type/localization in dogs presenting for respiratory distress (termed dyspnea by the authors) [1]. In this study,
upper airway disease, lower respiratory tract disease,
pleural filling disorders, and cardiac disease represented
32%, 33%, 19%, and 12% of the cases, respectively. If one
were to assume that each of these was equally likely to progress to respiratory failure then period prevalence rates
might be estimated. However, this is clearly not the case.
For example, pleural filling disorders are likely to be managed effectively via drainage methods before overt respiratory failure becomes persistent. Dogs in this study with
lower respiratory tract disease were less likely to survive to
hospital discharge. It is likely that these patients and
patients with upper airway disease are more representative of patients that develop acute respiratory failure. Dogs
with upper airway disease and pleural filling disorders
were younger on average than dogs with cardiac disease.
This finding may impact the epidemiology of respiratory
failure if such data were to become available.
While respiratory distress is widely recognized as a
common presenting complaint in small animal practice,
the epidemiology of respiratory failure in veterinary
medicine will remain largely unknown until consensus
definitions and routine surveillance measures become
commonplace.

­Signalment
Acute respiratory failure can result from diverse disease
processes and thus the signalment varies widely with the
precipitating cause. Certain breeds may be associated with
diseases that can predispose them to the development of
respiratory failure. Select examples of such diseases for
which breed dispositions have been reported include feline
asthma, laryngeal paralysis, brachycephalic syndrome, cervical myelopathies, pulmonary fibrosis, tracheal collapse,
bronchomalacia, metastatic neoplasia, congenital diaphragmatic hernia, mitral valve insufficiency, dilated cardiomyopathy, and myasthenia gravis. The signalment will
thus be heavily dependent on the underlying cause. As
mentioned above, dogs with upper airway disease and
pleural filling disorders were younger on average than dogs
with cardiac disease presenting for respiratory distress.
Such associations might also be found in respiratory failure
case series, but such has not yet been reported.

­History and Clinical Signs
History and clinical signs commonly associated with acute
respiratory failure will again vary substantially with the
underlying cause. For example, aspiration pneumonia will

typically be associated with an historical finding of vomiting, regurgitation, or a recent anesthetic procedure.
Alternatively, respiratory failure patients may present with
a history of generalized weakness, regurgitation or dysphagia, and megaesophagus if myasthenia gravis is present
concurrently. Laryngeal paralysis may be identified more
typically in patients with a history of recent voice change,
persistent panting, and heat or exercise intolerance. Many
other examples could be provided, but space constraints
preclude an exhaustive accounting of all the historical and
clinical signs that may precede respiratory failure.
What are likely to be uniformly noted among all
patients with acute respiratory failure are signs of respiratory distress that precede overt failure. Tachypnea
and hyperpnea are commonly, yet not uniformly noted.
Patients with hypercapneic ventilatory failure (excluding
those with excessive respiratory workload) may present
with hypopnea or bradypnea which are often less obvious than other findings in this setting. A more extensive
accounting of the signs of respiratory distress and dyspnea may be found in Chapter 38.

­Diagnosis
The diagnosis of acute respiratory failure is traditionally
based on arterial blood gas analysis. A sustained, repeatable PaCO2 of greater than 60 mmHg is often sufficient
to diagnose acute hypercapneic respiratory failure. End‐
tidal carbon dioxide monitoring may serve as a surrogate
for PaCO2 in many patients, but may have reduced sensitivity in patients with cardiovascular compromise and
reduced pulmonary blood flows. Venous blood gas
measurements serve as poor surrogates for PaCO2 when
cardiac output is diminished and should be used cautiously, if at all, to diagnose hypercapneic respiratory failure. Hypoxemic respiratory failure is diagnosed based on
PaO2 levels of less than 60 mmHg in patients breathing
room air at sea level. Pulse oximetry may be substituted
if arterial blood samples cannot be obtained. Saturation
readings obtained by these means of less than 90–92%
are consistent with hypoxemic respiratory failure.
Venous samples cannot be used to define acute hypoxemic respiratory failure although they may be the more
relevant sample for defining alterations in systemic oxygen delivery. Diagnosis of respiratory failure is discussed
in more detail in Chapter 38.

­Therapy
Therapy will be dependent on the form of acute respiratory failure present. Hypercapneic and hypoxemic respiratory failure will be discussed separately below
although the two forms may occur simultaneously.

387

VetBooks.ir

388

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

Hypercapneic Respiratory Failure
In acute hypercapneic respiratory failure, the primary
goal is to reestablish adequate levels of alveolar ventilation. If the underlying cause is reduced respiratory drive,
then therapy should be aimed at increasing central drive
by one or more of the following means:
reversal of agents such as opioids which may be suppressing central drive
●● administration of agents that may enhance/increase
central drive such as doxapram
●● alleviation of elevated intracranial pressure if known
or suspected to be present with agents such as mannitol or hypertonic saline
●● enhancing elimination of agents suppressing central
drive such as toxins or anesthetic agents. This may
require fluid diuresis, short‐term ventilation, or extracorporeal techniques such as hemodialysis.
●●

If reduced ventilatory capacity is the underlying cause of
hypercapneic respiratory failure then supportive measures may often play a larger role than specific therapies.
Supplemental oxygen and/or mechanical ventilation (see
also Chapter 40) may be required until normal ventilatory
capacity can be reestablished. In some cases, supportive
care may be required for a few days only (e.g., supportive
care following removal of the tick in tick paralysis) and in
others it may need to be provided for many weeks.
Correction of metabolic myopathies and junctionopathies due to hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia should be
addressed by rapid correction via parenteral supplementation. Antivenins, when available, may be appropriate
for hypercapneic respiratory failure syndromes secondary to envenomations. Reduced ventilatory capacity due
to cervical myelopathies may be amenable to surgical
treatment in many cases. Stabilization and decompression may speed the restoration of effective transmission
of efferent signals to respiratory muscles. Toxic causes of
reduced ventilatory capacity may on occasion have specific therapies that may be employed to increase recovery
rates. Organophosphate toxicity treated with atropine
and pralidoxime (2‐PAM) would be just one example.
Reducing metabolic rate and carbon dioxide production
can help to bring ventilatory capacity and need closer to
adequacy. Addressing fever, preventing hyperthermia,
and controlling muscle tremors and seizures become
even more important goals than usual in this setting.
Lastly, the diaphragm is similar to cardiac muscle in
that maximal contractile strength is strongly dependent
on adequate perfusion. Typical skeletal muscle is able
to maintain contractile strength in the face of reduced
perfusion to a larger degree. Diaphragmatic blood
flow may be improved by reducing intraabdominal

pressures (e.g., removing ascites) or by pharmacologic
means (e.g., methylxanthine administration). Maintaining
global cardiac output and mean arterial pressures should
be a primary goal.
When excessive mechanical loads are the proximate
cause of hypercapneic respiratory failure, the primary
goal is to restore loads on the respiratory system to
more normal values. Intubation and temporary tracheostomy are essential means by which upper airway
obstructions can be bypassed and airway patency
restored. Having the necessary supplies and personnel
immediately on hand is advised in cases where such
measures seem likely to be required in the near future.
Permanent tracheostomy may be a suitable long‐term
solution in dogs, but has been associated with poor
overall outcomes in cats in one study. Laryngeal paralysis is another example of a cause that may be amenable
to surgical therapeutic approaches. While corticosteroids are advocated on occasion for the reduction of
upper airway edema, the empirical evidence for beneficial effects of this therapy remains quite limited.
Continuous positive airway ­pressure (CPAP) might be
of benefit in many cases of dynamic upper airway narrowing; however, more often than not, this therapy
requires general anesthesia in veterinary patients and
thus offers less potential benefit over traditional positive pressure ventilation. Heated, humidified, high‐flow
nasal cannula oxygen therapy (HHHFNC) has comparable effects to nasal mask/pillow CPAP in human pediatrics. The author uses one such device (PrecisionFlow®,
Vapotherm) in his practice to provide this form of therapy although direct comparisons have not yet been
made to other similar products and no specific recommendations are made here.
Excessive mechanical load due to low tissue compliance may be addressed by reducing parenchymal inflammation and reducing extravascular lung water (edema).
Diuretic administration and maintaining a neutral or
negative fluid balance are advised in cardiogenic edema
states and in some noncardiogenic edema states.
However, in patients on mechanical ventilation, the cardiovascular effects of high PEEP may preclude the clinician from keeping the patient as “dry” as one might
prefer. Reduced blood volume with high PEEP can often
lead to intolerably poor cardiac performance. In some
noncardiogenic pulmonary edema states such as the
acute respiratory distress syndrome, the use of diuretics
remains controversial. In this setting, pulmonary vascular permeability may be increased to the point that
­diuretic therapy does little to reduce the rate of transcapillary fluid flux and may lead to reductions in
­cardiac output with no discernible benefit. The pathophysiology of neurogenic pulmonary edema is complex

VetBooks.ir

39 Acute Respiratory Failure

and there is empirical evidence to support both hydrostatic and inflammatory components. Diuretic usage
is not considered absolutely contraindicated, but is
unlikely to yield the profoundly beneficial responses
observed with cardiogenic edema.
Excessive mechanical loads due to chest wall compliance issues (e.g., flail chest, congenital defects, etc.) may
be challenging to address unless they are iatrogenic in
nature. Iatrogenic alterations in chest wall/diaphragmatic
compliance can result from excessively tight thoracic and
abdominal wraps, splints, and casts. Incremental loosening of such wraps until chest wall compliance is not excessively low is advised.
Excessive chemical loads are the result of marked
increases in carbon dioxide production. Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is perhaps the most common cause and is
thankfully a rare occurrence. Active cooling, mechanical
ventilation, discontinuance of all volatile inhalational
anesthetics (or succinylcholine), and the administration
of dantrolene remain the mainstays of MH therapy. In
settings other than MH, excessive CO2 production is
addressed by minimizing muscle activity (seizures, tremors) and lowering body temperature when possible. In
many instances, active cooling is not required; rather, one
needs to only not provide active warming therapies.
Maintaining adequate hydration to promote effective
evaporative heat loss is advised.
Hypoxemic Respiratory Failure
As with hypercapneic respiratory failure, the optimal
therapeutic approach to hypoxemic respiratory failure
will vary with the underlying cause. In cases of hypoxemic respiratory failure in which a normal A‐a gradient
is found, therapy should be directed at restoring alveolar ventilation and appropriate inspired gas pressures.
This would entail removing the patient from elevations
above sea level, providing supplemental oxygen, or the
measures described above under hypercapneic respiratory failure.
When venous admixture is the underlying cause of
hypoxemic failure, the primary goals are as follows:
reduce anatomic or physiologic shunting if present
increase alveolar partial pressure of oxygen
●● correct V–Q inequalities
●● recruit alveolar surface area available to participate in
gas exchange
●●
●●

Achieving a reduction in anatomic shunting often
requires an invasive or minimally invasive surgical
approach to reducing or ablating flow through the shunt
conduit. Reductions in physiologic shunting may be
achieved by surgical removal of lung lobes too diseased to

be salvaged in some cases. Restoring ventilation to alveolar regions that are atelectatic, obstructed, collapsed, or
flooded should improve V:Q ratios. This goal may be
achieved by increasing mean airway pressure (mechanical ventilation, typically with PEEP), enhancing alveolar
fluid clearance, breath hold recruitment maneuvers, and
addressing inflammatory or infectious insults to the
lower airways with appropriate drug therapy. Diffuse
alveolar hemorrhage syndromes should be addressed
with appropriate drug therapies and blood products
when they are the result of a coagulopathy. Note that the
majority of therapies that aim to reduce physiologic
shunting also will generally recruit alveolar surface area
and improve overall V–Q matching. The removal of air or
fluid accumulations from the pleural space can result in
marked improvements in V–Q matching in many cases.
Early recognition of pleural filling disorders can lead to
improved outcomes.
Ultrasound is the preferred imaging modality if it is
available in the emergency room. Many of these patients
are not stable enough to tolerate radiographic imaging
until after air or fluid has been evacuated from the pleural space. Thoracocentesis should be performed until
negative pressure is achieved. If negative pressure cannot
be obtained or if pleural filling rapidly recurs then chest
tube placement is required.
Increases in the alveolar partial pressure of oxygen
may be achieved by several means. First, the restoration
of ventilation to alveolar regions with limited fresh gas
flows will raise PAO2 in those areas. More widespread
increases in PAO2 are achieved by providing supplemental oxygen. Mechanical ventilation with PEEP
can simultaneously increase alveolar ventilation, recruit
underventilated/nonventilated alveolar units, raise mean
airway pressures, and provide supplemental oxygen.
Intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) is frequently required in hypoxemic respiratory failure cases
and is discussed in Chapter 40. The indication for
mechanical ventilation in hypoxemic respiratory failure
would be acute, persistent severe hypoxemia (PaO2
<60 mmHg or SpO2 <90%) that is unresponsive to supplemental oxygen therapy alone. In chronic disease
states, hypoxemia of this degree of severity may be
­better tolerated and occasionally requires neither supplemental oxygen nor IPPV.
Supplemental oxygen is generally required in cases of
hypoxemic respiratory failure in which the underlying
cause cannot be immediately addressed. Supplemental
oxygen may be sufficient to address hypoxemia in cases
not requiring mechanical ventilation. Delivery may be
via nasal or tracheal cannulae, facemask, intubation/tracheostomy with spontaneous respiration, or via an oxygen cage. The lowest FiO2 required to prevent hypoxemia

389

VetBooks.ir

390

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

Table 39.1 Approximate flow rates of 100% oxygen via nasal
cannulae required to achieve an FiO2 between 30% and 90%.
Body weight must be considered and FiO2 values above 50% may
be difficult to achieve in large dogs using this method

­Prognosis

Required flow rate in L/min to
achieve an FiO2 of…
Body weight (kg)

0.3–0.5

0.5–0.75

drying hypothesis is one explanation proposed for exercise‐induced asthma.

0.75–0.9

0–10

0.5–1.0

1.0–3.0

3.0–5.0

10–20

1.0–3.0

3.0–5.0

>5.0

20–40

3.0–5.0

>5.0

ND

ND, not determined.

should be determined on an individual case basis. In
many cases, FiO2 will be known (e.g., 21% or 100%) but
at other times it must be estimated. In humans breathing with nasal cannulae in place, the rule of thumb is
that one can add 4% for each L/min of oxygen flow.
Thus, a person breathing with a 2 L/min flow of oxygen
would have an estimated FiO2 of 28–29% (i.e., 21 + (2 ×
4)). This rule works poorly in veterinary patients as their
size and tidal volumes vary so much more widely than in
humans. Estimates of FiO2 can be made based on a consideration of both flow rate and patient size (see
Table 39.1). Prolonged (>24 h) exposure to greater than
60% oxygen can result in pulmonary oxygen toxicity in
most mammals although the toxic range varies with
species and age.
However supplemental oxygen is provided, it is important that the gas be properly conditioned. Conditioning
in this sense means appropriately warmed and humidified. The inhalation of improperly conditioned gas
is associated with several adverse effects in humans,
including increased nasal airway resistance, damage to
the nasal mucosa (both structural and functional, including epithelial metaplasia and keratinization), increased
work of breathing, difficulty in subsequent intubation, patient discomfort, and poor patient compliance.
Breathing cold, dry gas from compressed sources can
lead to airway dessication (particularly if the nasal passages are bypassed), increases in the tonicity of airway
lining fluid, and mast cell degranulation. This airway

A specific prognosis for acute respiratory failure cannot
be provided in a meaningful way. Clearly, acute respiratory failure is not good news in any context. However,
some causes may be easily resolved and carry a good
prognosis (fluid overload) whereas others are challenging to address and carry a quite guarded prognosis
(ARDS). The prognosis will naturally vary with the
underlying cause. Further, prognosis is impacted by
whether a specific, effective therapy is available for that
disease process or whether one must rely solely on supportive measures. The issue of prognosis is further complicated by the inherent difficulty in reaching a definitive
diagnosis in many cases of acute respiratory failure.
Patients are often too unstable to undergo the diagnostics required to definitively identify the underlying cause
and thus owners are often required to make difficult
decisions based on incomplete information.
As mentioned above, retrospective studies of long‐term
mechanical ventilation in veterinary patients provide
some insights into acute respiratory failure, but represent
a highly biased sample of such cases. In one such study,
veterinary patients with pulmonary parenchymal disease
(i.e., hypoxemic respiratory failure) were able to be successfully weaned 36% of the time, with an overall rate of
22% of cases surviving to hospital discharge. Outcomes
were better for patients experiencing hypercapneic respiratory failure, with 50% being successfully weaned and
39% surviving to hospital discharge. Patients with mixed
respiratory failure (both hypoxemic and hypercapneic)
had the poorest outcomes in this study. Overall, cats fared
more poorly than canine patients. Whether this is due to
the types of diseases that lead to the need for IPPV in cats
or whether cats are at greater risk for complications such
as ventilator‐induced lung injury (VILI) remains undetermined. Cats are a smaller species on average than dogs
and smaller species develop VILI more readily than do
larger species even when identical inspiratory pressures
are applied. No direct comparison of VILI incidence in
cats versus 3–7 kg dogs has yet been performed.

­Reference
1. Fonfara S, de la Heras Alegret L, et al. Underlying

diseases in dogs referred to a veterinary teaching

hospital because of dyspnea: 229 cases (2003–2007).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011; 239(9): 1219–24.

VetBooks.ir

39 Acute Respiratory Failure

­Further Reading
Fitzpatrick RK, Crowe DT. Nasal oxygen administration in
dogs and cats: experimental and clinical investigations.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1986; 22: 293–300.
Hammer J. Acute respiratory failure in children. Paediatr
Respir Rev 2013; 14(2): 64–9.
Hopper K, Haskins SC, Kass PH, Rezende ML, Aldrich J.
Indications, management, and outcome of long‐term
positive‐pressure ventilation in dogs and cats: 148

cases (1990–2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007; 230(1):
64–75.
Schneider J, Sweberg T. Acute respiratory failure. Crit Care
Clin 2013; 29(2): 167–83.
Stefan MS, Shieh MS, Pekow PS, et al. Epidemiology and
outcomes of acute respiratory failure in the United
States, 2001 to 2009: a national survey. J Hosp Med 2013;
8(2): 76–82.

391

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

393

40
Mechanical Ventilation
Kate Hopper, BVSc, DACVESS, PhD1 and Mathew Mellema, DVM, PhD, DACVECC2
1
2

UC-Davis School of Veterinary Medicine, Davis CA, USA
Applaud Medical, San Francisco, CA, USA

A respirator or mechanical ventilator is a therapeutic
device that performs some or all of the work of breathing. Ventilators are used in clinical practice to provide
short‐ or long‐term support of respiratory function in
patients with respiratory disease or failure.
Two primary functions of the lung are oxygenation of
the arterial blood and the elimination of carbon dioxide
from the venous blood in order to provide metabolic
substrate, remove metabolic waste, and maintain homeostasis. The ability of the lung to properly oxygenate the
pulmonary capillary blood depends largely on several
key factors:
adequate replenishment of alveolar gases with inspired air
adequate surface area for gas exchange
●● proper matching of ventilation and perfusion
●● maintenance of the structural integrity of the gas
exchange barrier.
●●

●●

In contrast, elimination of carbon dioxide is primarily
dependent on the repeated movement of fresh gas into
the alveoli and removal of portions of alveolar gas, a process known as alveolar ventilation. Respiratory failure can
result from diverse disease processes that interfere with
one or more of the lung’s primary functions. Patients with
respiratory failure can generally be divided into three
groups: those with hypoxemic failure, those with hypercapneic failure, and those with mixed respiratory failure,
which shares aspects of both of the other two types.

­Indications for Mechanical Ventilation
There are three primary indications for mechanical ventilation. The first is persistent severe hypoxemia (PaO2
<60 mmHg) despite supplemental oxygen therapy. Severe
hypoxemia may also be recognized by the presence of
cyanosis or SpO2 <90% when arterial blood gas analysis

is impractical or unavailable. Patients with severe hypoxemia will frequently have significant lung disease such as
pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS),
pulmonary edema, diffuse alveolar hemorrhage, or pulmonary contusions. Pulmonary vascular disorders such
as pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE) may also cause
severe hypoxemia. Other causes such as anatomic right‐
to‐left shunting are far less commonly encountered in
veterinary practice.
The second primary indication for mechanical ventilation is persistent severe hypercapnia (hypoventilation)
that is refractory to other therapeutic measures. Severe
hypoventilation is marked by a PACO2 >60 mmHg. The
PACO2 is determined primarily by alveolar minute ventilation and carbon dioxide production (which is often
reasonably constant). Alveolar ventilation is dependent
on the total amount of fresh gas that reaches the alveoli
over time and is equal to the product of the respiratory
rate and effective tidal volume. Effective tidal volume is
total tidal volume minus dead space volume. Causes of
severe hypoventilation are typically diseases that impair
the ability of patients to maintain an adequate respiratory rate and/or tidal volume. Examples include intracranial disease, cranial cervical myelopathies, peripheral
neuropathies, junctionopathies, and myopathies.
Severe hypoxemia or severe hypoventilation will not
always require mechanical ventilation, but the criteria
provided above may help to identify potential candidates
for ventilator therapy. The necessity of mechanical ventilation should be made on a case‐by‐case basis and knowledge of the primary disease process and related patient
data should factor heavily into the decision. Ventilator
therapy is not entirely benign and a careful weighing of
the risks and benefits should be made before the provision of this approach.
The third primary indication for mechanical ventilation is persistent, excessive respiratory effort that may

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

394

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

potentially lead to respiratory muscle fatigue and exhaustion. Such patients may be able to maintain acceptable
blood gas values for a period of time, but uncertainty lies
in how long this effort can be sustained. Determination
of excessive respiratory effort is largely subjective and
based on clinical judgment. Intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) is indicated in these patients to
avoid abrupt exhaustion, asphyxiation, and subsequent
arrest. Asphyxiation in experimental canine studies is
accompanied by an abrupt drop in heart rate of about
50 beats per minute. Any comparable drop in pulse rate
in a dog laboring to breath should prompt immediate
patient evaluation and careful consideration of intubation and mechanical ventilation. In these aforementioned
canine studies, failure to prevent complete asphyxiation
often leads to cardiac arrest in the form of pulseless
electrical activity; this is a particularly challenging form
of cardiac arrest to reverse and is often refractory to
therapy.
Patients with excessive respiratory effort usually have
an excessive mechanical or chemical load imposed upon
their respiratory system (see also Chapter 39).

­Ventilator Settings
Positive pressure ventilators achieve gas flow into the
lungs by generating positive airway pressure in a manner similar to that achieved by squeezing the rebreathing bag on an anesthetic machine. Modern therapeutic
ventilators have an array of settings that can be altered
to change the characteristics of the delivered breath.
Despite the complexity of many therapeutic ventilators,
there are only a few key settings that are essential to
understand in order to provide effective ventilation in
most cases. When choosing ventilator settings, the clinician must first select a mode of ventilation and then
input initial ventilator settings based on general guidelines (described below) and their own understanding of
the nature of the patient’s respiratory compromise.
Following initiation of mechanical ventilation, the ventilator settings are then adjusted as required to achieve
the blood gas, cardiopulmonary performance, and/or
oxygen delivery goals desired.
Ventilator Breath Types
There are three main ventilator volume delivery (breath)
patterns commonly used in veterinary medicine: assist/
control (A/C) ventilation, synchronized intermittent
mandatory ventilation (SIMV), and continuous spontaneous ventilation (CSV). Some ventilators only have
one breath pattern option, such as a compact volume‐
control ventilator designed for use in the operating

room. Modern therapeutic ventilators typically offer all
three formats.
In A/C ventilation, all breaths are completely machine
generated. These are termed mandatory breaths. In this
mode of ventilation, the clinician sets a minimum respiratory rate. If the trigger sensitivity (i.e., pressure or
flow alteration required to trigger delivery of a breath
that was not prescheduled to be delivered) is set appropriately then the patient can increase the respiratory
rate above this minimum value, but all breaths delivered
will be full ventilator‐delivered (mandatory) breaths.
The tidal volume of these ventilator breaths will depend
on the machine settings (and any patient–ventilator
dyssynchrony if present). Ventilator breaths can either
be pressure (PC) or volume controlled (VC). When VC
is employed, the clinician presets the desired tidal volume; the resultant peak airway pressure will be dependent on the size of the tidal volume chosen and the
compliance of the respiratory system. More compliant
lungs will accept a given volume at a lower peak pressure than less compliant lungs. In PC ventilation, the
clinician presets the peak airway pressure; in this setting, the tidal volume generated will depend on the level
of peak airway pressure chosen and the compliance of
the respiratory system. Assist/control ventilation provides maximum support of the respiratory system and is
used in patients with severe respiratory disease or those
with healthy lungs but reduced respiratory drive or ventilatory capacity.
In SIMV, the operator also sets the number of full
ventilator (mandatory) breaths to be delivered.
However, between these breaths the patient can
breathe spontaneously, depending on their needs. The
machine will try to synchronize the ventilator breaths
with the patient’s own respiratory efforts. This is
accomplished by partitioning the periods between
mandatory breaths into two periods. The first period
immediately follows a mandatory breath. During this
period, the patient may breathe spontaneously without triggering a machine‐delivered breath. The second
period is immediately prior to the next scheduled
mandatory breath. Patient effort during this period
will trigger early delivery of the next mandatory
breath. This latter period is the “synchronized” portion and is what distinguishes SIMV from intermittent
mandatory ventilation. As this mode combines full
ventilator breaths with spontaneous patient breaths, it
is often used for animals that need less than 100%
assistance from the ventilator or during the weaning
period. Neurologically impaired animals with highly
labile respiratory drive or patients with resolving lung
dysfunction may not need as much support as A/C
provides and SIMV can prove a useful option in these
conditions.

VetBooks.ir

40 Mechanical Ventilation

There are two widely available options for provision of
continuous spontaneous ventilation: continuous positive
airway pressure (CPAP) and pressure support ventilation
(PSV). In CPAP, the ventilator does not deliver breaths;
rather, all breaths are spontaneous breaths and are completely patient generated. The respiratory rate, inspiratory time, and tidal volume are all determined by the
patient. CPAP provides a constant level of positive airway pressure (the amount is preset by the operator)
throughout the respiratory cycle. Airway pressure is thus
maintained at supraatmospheric pressures throughout
the respiratory cycle. CPAP has the potential benefits of
decreasing respiratory system resistance and increasing
pulmonary compliance. These effects as well as the
increase in mean airway pressure may serve to improve
gas exchange and oxygenation relative to what the patient
could achieve without this support. Increased pulmonary compliance effects of CPAP can best be explained
by considering the shape of a typical lung pressure–volume relationship (aka compliance curve). Pulmonary
compliance curves are typically nonlinear with a flat
slope at volumes just above functional residual capacity
(FRC). This relatively flat slope indicates that changes in
pressure generated by early inspiratory effort are accompanied by only slight changes in lung volume (low compliance). CPAP can reduce the work of breathing by
shifting the starting point of breath initiation to a portion of the curve with a steeper slope (higher compliance). Further, maintaining the lung at a higher volume
increases mean airway diameter of noncartilaginous airways and reduces airway resistance. With modern ventilator models, the machine will alarm if the animal does
not generate adequate breaths or develops apnea. This
makes it a useful “monitoring” mode for weaning patients
or monitoring intubated patients.
As with CPAP, all PSV breaths are spontaneous breaths;
the ventilator does not trigger, deliver, or initiate any
breaths. In PSV, the tidal volume is generated by the
patient, but also augmented by the machine. The amount
of pressure support provided during the inspiratory period
depends on what level of PSV support the clinician has
prescribed. This mode reduces the effort required to
maintain adequate alveolar ventilation and gas exchange
in patients with adequate respiratory drive but reduced
ventilatory capacity. Pressure support ventilation can be
used independently, in conjunction with CPAP, or to augment the spontaneous breaths during SIMV.
Tidal Volume Settings
The normal tidal volume reported for dogs and cats is
generally in the range of 10–15 mL/kg although many
reports cite a tidal volume for healthy sedated cats of
approximately 20 mL/kg. Lower tidal volumes (6–8 mL/

kg) may be targeted in animals with severe lung disease
to avoid overdistension of the less severely diseased lung
tissue. When using volume control ventilation, the clinician presets the desired tidal volume. As overdistension
of the lung can lead to significant alveolar injury, it is recommended to start with no more than 10 mL/kg initially.
The tidal volume can subsequently be increased if it is
determined to be inadequate once an initial steady state
is achieved (typically 15 minutes after initiating IPPV or
following a settings adjustment). If pressure control ventilation is used then the operator presets a desired peak
airway pressure and once the animal is connected to the
ventilator, the tidal volume achieved with the preset
pressure is evaluated and peak inspiratory pressure
adjusted as needed. A tidal volume of around 10 mL/kg
would be an acceptable result in most cases.
The clinician must bear in mind that whole‐body carbon dioxide stores are enormous relative to the relatively
minimal whole‐body oxygen stores (excluding pinniped
mammals). Step changes in ventilation will result in
abrupt, modest changes in PaCO2, but a new steady‐state
value can take quite a long time to be reached. Only the
CO2 in large, well‐perfused organs can truly be considered rapidly exchangeable and this represents a small
fraction of whole‐body stores. Allowing 15 minutes to
pass prior to reassessing steady‐state PaCO2 values is a
clinically reasonable approach.
Airway Pressure Settings
Patients with healthy lungs such as hypoventilating anesthetized patients, patients with reduced respiratory
drive, or those with reduced ventilatory capacity typically only require peak airway pressures in the range of
8–15 cmH2O. Avoiding peak inspiratory pressures above
20 cmH2O is preferable whenever feasible. Animals with
significant lung disease often have relatively stiff lungs
and typically require higher airway pressures to achieve
adequate tidal volumes. Peak airway pressures as high as
30–35 cm H2O may be required in such animals. When
using pressure control ventilation, the peak airway pressure target is set by the clinician. Once the animal is connected to the ventilator, the tidal volume achieved with
that airway pressure should be determined. Alternatively,
in volume control, the tidal volume is preset and the
associated airway pressure needs to be monitored.
Initially, airway pressures of 10–15 cmH2O should be
targeted; higher airway pressures can be utilized if indicated by unacceptable blood gas values.
Trigger Settings
Most modern ventilators will allow the patient to trigger machine breaths, which allows breath delivery to be

395

VetBooks.ir

396

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

better matched to the patient’s intrinsic efforts. The
“trigger” or “sensitivity” setting determines what the
ventilator will acknowledge as a genuine inspiratory
effort by the patient. Appropriate trigger sensitivity is
essential to ensure the ventilator recognizes actual
respiratory efforts made by the patient while not
­
­delivering breaths as a result of minor fluctuations in
circuit pressure or flow. Appropriate trigger sensitivity
increases patient comfort, reduces dyssynchrony
between patient effort and machine delivery, and allows
the patient to increase the respiratory rate as required
by their needs. The trigger variable can be too sensitive
such that nonrespiratory efforts such as patient handling and cardiac contractions may initiate breaths.
This situation should be avoided as it leads to patient
discomfort, excessive mean airway pressures, breath
stacking, auto‐PEEP, and greater dyssynchrony. An airway pressure drop of –2 cmH2O or a gas flow change of
2 L/min are reasonable trigger sensitivity settings to
start with. These settings can then be altered as
required. Some ventilators (e.g., AutoTrak on the
Phillips Esprit line) have proprietary forms of trigger
sensing that combine the flow and pressure signals into
an integrated variable. Evidence of superiority of this
means of sensing patient inspiratory effort is currently
lacking in the veterinary literature.
Positive End‐Expiratory Pressure Settings
Positive end‐expiratory pressure (PEEP) maintains
pressure in the breathing circuit above atmospheric
pressure during exhalation so that the patient cannot
exhale all the way down to functional residual capacity
(FRC). This increased expiratory pressure maintains
the lung at a higher volume, with less small airway collapse, and improves oxygenating efficiency. PEEP may
also help to recruit alveoli collapsed due to atelectasis
or increased surface tension forces. Evidence suggests
that it may reduce ventilator‐induced lung injury by
altering cyclic stresses and strains on the alveoli and
peripheral airways. Typically, a small amount of PEEP
(~2 cmH2O) is applied in all ventilator modes to reduce
atelectasis and to account for the increased work of
breathing required simply due to the physical nature of
the ventilator circuit (e.g., valves, circuit resistance). In
patients with significant lung disease, much higher levels of PEEP may be required to improve oxygenating
ability. In continuous spontaneous ventilation, CPAP is
functionally equivalent to PEEP although they are
often generated by different means (i.e., closure of the
expiratory valve at supraatmospheric pressures versus
continuous inflow to maintain a given circuit pressure
during the expiratory phase).

Inspiratory:Expiratory (I:E) Ratio and Respiratory
Rate Settings
An operator‐set respiratory rate is available on nearly all
ventilators. A respiratory rate of 15–20 breaths per minute with an inspiratory time of approximately one second reflects typical initial ventilator settings in the
authors’ practice. These settings can then be adjusted as
needed to meet the patient’s needs. The ratio of the duration of the inspiratory phase relative to the expiratory
phase (I:E ratio) may be preset by the clinician or may be
a setting that is determined automatically based on rate
and inspiratory time settings. Commonly, an I:E ratio of
at least 1:2 is utilized to increase the likelihood that
patients are able to fully exhale prior to the delivery of
the next breath. As respiratory rates are increased, the
expiratory time will be reduced in order to accommodate
the increased number of breaths. High respiratory rates
can lead to a situation known as auto‐PEEP or intrinsic
PEEP if the patient is not able to fully exhale before the
start of the next inspiration. Such an occurrence can easily be detected by inspecting the flow scalar graphic if
waveform displays are available. Failure of expiratory
flow to return to zero before the next breath is delivered
is indicative of the presence of auto‐PEEP. To avoid this
problem, it is recommended to keep an I:E ratio of 1:1 or
higher whenever possible. If a higher respiratory rate is
required, a shorter inspiratory time will allow maintenance of an acceptable I:E ratio and is often better tolerated by the patient.
General Guidelines for Initial Ventilator Settings
As discussed above, the optimal ventilator settings for a
given patient cannot be predicted reliably. It is likely that
animals with hypoxemic respiratory failure will require
more aggressive settings than those with hypercapneic
respiratory failure. One must choose some initial settings prior to connecting the patient to the ventilator.
First the mode of ventilation must be selected; A/C,
SIMV or continuous spontaneous ventilation. If A/C or
SIMV are selected then it may be necessary to next
decide between volume control (VC) or pressure control
(PC) ventilation. The more modern and advanced the
ventilator, the more options one is likely to have.
Ventilator manufacturers are creating new proprietary
ventilation modes faster than clinicans can evaluate
them. Even the most renowned respiratory therapists in
the world admit that they cannot keep up with every
mode becoming available. This situation is unlikely to
change as equipment manufacturers are often less than
forthright about how these novel modes are designed.
The settings that need to be selected will vary with the

VetBooks.ir

40 Mechanical Ventilation

mode of ventilation chosen. In VC the tidal volume is
preset by the operator, once the patient is connected to
the machine the operator should note the peak inspiratory pressure associated with this tidal volume and
determine whether it is acceptable for this patient. In PC
ventilation, the clinician presets the peak airway pressure. Once the patient is connected to the ventilator the
operator will need to note the tidal volume and mean airway pressure and determine whether they are acceptable
for this patient.
These settings can then be altered as needed once the
patient is connected to the ventilator. Whenever possible, it is best to have the ventilator already running and
confirmed to be working properly before the patient is
connected. When this is not possible, for example initiating mechanical ventilation for patients already on an
anesthetic machine, then it is best to start with quite
conservative settings and titrate them upwards as
required to avoid inadvertent over‐distension of the
lung. It is imperative to always have a method for performing manual ventilation (e.g. Ambu‐bag, Bain’s circuit) close at hand during IPPV in case of equipment
malfunction, power failure, or operator error.

­Mechanical Ventilation for Hypoxemic
Respiratory Failure
Patients suffering from hypoxemic respiratory failure
often require inspiratory pressure settings that are substantially greater than normal. Pulmonary parenchymal
disease often reduces lung compliance and increases airway resistance. The result is that higher pressures will be
needed to achieve the same tidal volume. It is now recognized that excessive distension of the lung (or volutrauma) is a major cause of ventilator‐induced lung
injury. For this reason, it is recommended to deliver
smaller tidal volumes when ventilating patients with significant pulmonary parenchymal disease. In very severe
lung disease such as ARDS, it may be necessary to deliver
tidal volumes as low as 6 mL/kg.
Anesthesia
Unless the patient has significant neuromuscular or
intracranial disease, anesthesia will be necessary to allow
positive pressure ventilation and maintenance of an airway. Balanced anesthesia incorporating 2–3 drugs is
advised to reduce the dose required (and adverse effects)
of any single agent. Propofol or alfaxalone infusions are
commonly used anesthetic agents in conjunction with a
benzodiazepine and/or an opioid and/or a dexmedetomidine infusion. The aim is to keep the patient anesthetized

sufficiently such that it will tolerate the endotracheal
tube and PPV but to avoid excessive depth of anesthesia
in an effort to minimize the adverse effects of the anesthetic drugs. This requires some experience in anesthetic
monitoring and constant tinkering with the anesthetic
drug infusion rates as drug requirements will change
with time.
Typical intravenous anesthetic doses used to maintain
patients on mechanical ventilators at the authors’ practice include the following.
Midazolam: loading dose 0.2–0.4 mg/kg IV; constant
rate infusion (CRI) 0.1–0.5 mg/kg/h IV.
●● Propofol: loading dose 0.5–2.0 mg/kg IV; CRI 0.05–
0.4 mg/kg/min IV.
●● Fentanyl: loading dose 2–5 μg/kg IV; CRI 1–7 μg/kg/h IV.
●●

The vast majority of patients receiving long‐term
mechanical ventilatory support in our practice are
anesthetized with some combination of these three
agents. The occasional patient will also receive a dexmedetomidine infusion (0.1–3.0 μg/kg/h) either as a
replacement for one of those three agents or in addition
to them. Etomidate is rarely if ever given and has
resulted in marked suppression of adrenal function
when it was employed. Diazepam may be substituted
for midazolam as required. Pentobarbital, once a mainstay in our practice, is rarely used now due to relative
expense, reduced availability due to shortages, and prolonged recovery times.
Anesthetic depth should be formally assessed every
hour and recorded on the patient’s flow sheet/medical
record, but caregivers should be continuously assessing
anesthetic depth as they work on the patient. It is important to have drug dose charts that correctly convert the
mg/kg/h drug doses to mL/h for the drug concentration
you are using. In addition, it is recommended to have precalculated some “rescue doses” of drugs in case animals
suddenly become light and try to extubate themselves.
Initial Stabilization on the Ventilator
When patients are first connected to the ventilator circuit, an inspired oxygen fraction (FiO2) of 100% is advised
as a safety measure. The FiO2 can be reduced later once
stabilization of the patient has been achieved. When
ventilating patients with hypoxemic respiratory failure, it
can be beneficial to keep them in sternal recumbency
during the initial stabilization period. These animals frequently oxygenate better in sternal recumbency than in
other body positions. After connection, the patient’s thoracic wall is observed for appropriate movement. When
insufficient or excessive thoracic wall motion is observed,
the ventilator settings should be adjusted appropriately.

397

VetBooks.ir

398

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

The thorax is next auscultated bilaterally to ensure breath
sounds are audible. Next, other monitoring parameters
are evaluated (e.g., blood pressure, ECG, pulse oximeter,
ETCO2, etc.). Once the patient appears stable, serial arterial blood gas analysis is ideal for accurate titration of ventilator settings. If an arterial blood sample is not available,
a venous blood gas can be used to assess PCO2 if cardiac
output is not excessively low. The evaluation of oxygenation by pulse oximetry is the standard of care in some settings (e.g., human neonatology) and may serve as both a
noninvasive alternative and a means of reducing iatrogenic blood loss.
Goals of Mechanical Ventilation
The goal of IPPV therapy is to maintain acceptable
blood gas values with the lowest level of ventilator support possible. The optimal ventilator settings for each
individual patient cannot be predicted and are determined through a careful process of trial and error. The
patient should be fully evaluated after every change in
ventilator settings, including blood gas analysis whenever possible. It is advisable to make only one change in
ventilator settings at a time in order to accurately evaluate what effect each change alone has on gas exchange.
Whenever feasible, it is advised to allow 15 minutes to
pass before reevaluating PaCO2. Whole‐body stores of
carbon dioxide are quite large and a quarter of an hour
or more may be required for a new steady state to be
reached. Common blood gas goals of mechanical ventilation include a PaO2 of 80–120 mmHg (or SpO2 >95%)
and a PaCO2 of 35–55 mmHg (35–40 mmHg in patients
with intracranial hypertension).
In some settings, permissive hypercapnia may be
employed. In this approach, PaCO2 is allowed to climb
higher to 60–70 mmHg as long as the resultant acidemia
does not become too severe (pH <7.1). This approach is
often taken when the clinician fears that maintaining
carbon dioxide tensions within the normal target range
will require injurious ventilator settings. Permissive
hypoxemia approaches may also be employed at times.
With this approach, the clinician focuses on maintaining
central venous hemoglobin saturations (SCVO2) above
65–68%. Hypoxemia (PaO2 <80 mmHg) is tolerated as
long as tissue oxygen delivery appears adequate based on
SCVO2 readings. This approach reflects a school of
thought in which it is felt that clinicians should focus
more on maintaining adequate global oxygen delivery
rather than arterial blood gas values.
Adjustments to Improve PaO2
If the PaO2 is higher than the desired range (>120–
150 mmHg), the first priority should be to decrease the

FiO2 until it is <60%. Once FiO2 is less than 60%,
emphasis shifts to reducing PEEP and peak airway
pressure. If the PaO2 is lower than desired (<80 mmHg),
the first option is to increase the FiO2. If there is an
acute and severe drop in PaO2, placing the animal on
100% oxygen is appropriate until the issue can be
resolved and more definitive therapy can be provided.
Ultimately, it is hoped that manipulation of ventilator
settings will increase the oxygenating efficiency of the
lung and allow lowering of the FiO2 once again. All
increases in oxygenation are obtained by raising FiO2,
mean airway pressure, or both. Mean airway pressure
may be increased by increasing peak pressure, respiratory rate, PEEP, inspiratory time, or the format of flow
delivery (e.g., block versus sine versus descending
ramp flow patterns). Acute hypoxemic episodes are
life‐threatening complications that require immediate
intervention.
Adjustments to Improve PaCO2
The PaCO2 is dependent on alveolar minute ventilation, which is the product of the effective tidal volume
(excluding dead space volume) and the respiratory rate.
If the PaCO2 is higher than the desired range then the
respiratory rate, tidal volume, or both should be
increased. If the PaCO2 is too low, the respiratory rate
and/or tidal volume should be decreased. Excessive
gas trapping may lead to carbon dioxide retention.
Increasing expiratory time or reducing I:E ratio may
increase alveolar ventilation in this circumstance. In
patients with lower airway or parenchymal disease,
inspiratory times that are too short may lead to minimal ventilation of alveoli with high time constants
(product of resistance and compliance). In this instance,
prolongation of the inspiratory time may enhance alveolar ventilation.
An abrupt increase in PaCO2 in the ventilator patient
may indicate a life‐threatening complication. Similarly,
an abrupt drop in end‐tidal carbon dioxide may reflect a
sudden increase in physiologic dead space (e.g., pulmonary thromboembolism) or an abrupt reduction in cardiac output.

­Nursing Care for Ventilator Patients
Nursing care of the ventilator patient is one of the most
labor‐intensive and important aspects of ventilator
patient management. Each ventilator patient usually
requires a dedicated caregiver and two or more people
are needed for many of the patient care procedures.
Nursing care includes airway management, oral and eye
care, catheter care, and recumbent patient care.

VetBooks.ir

40 Mechanical Ventilation

Humidification
Anesthetized patients are not able to cough or clear
airway secretions effectively and this can contribute
to development of ventilator‐associated pneumonia
(VAP) and tube occlusion. Airway management is essential in an effort to try to reduce these complications.
Gas flow bypasses the nasal passages during mechanical
ventilation and is therefore not humidified or filtered.
This can lead to a loss of heat and moisture, which can
damage the respiratory epithelium. Humidification is
also critical in making secretions less viscous and easier
to remove.
The breathing circuit should be humidified appropriately without excessive accumulation of liquid in the circuit. There are two basic options for airway humidification:
active heated water humidifiers or passive heat moisture
exchangers. The heated water humidifiers are very effective, are ideal in patients with substantial airway secretions, and help prevent hypothermia, which can be an
issue in small patients. They are expensive and unless
they are used in conjunction with heated wire circuits,
they are associated with substantial “rain out” in the
circuit. This refers to water accumulating in the limbs
of the breathing circuit, which in large volumes can
interfere with ventilator function. More concerning,
it greatly increases the risk of VAP. Heat moisture
exchangers (HME) are inexpensive devices that fit on
the end of the endotracheal tube and passively take heat
and moisture from the exhaled gas and return it to the
inhaled gas. They have been found to be equally effective at humidifying the airways as the active humidifiers
and may reduce the incidence of VAP by reducing
moisture in the circuit. They can occlude and this has
the potential to be a life‐threatening event. For this
reason, the authors advise that they be avoided in
patients with excessive airway secretions.
Suctioning
Airway suctioning is another critical aspect of airway
management. There are risks associated with this procedure, and proper technique must be followed. The
inhaled oxygen concentration should be increased to
100% prior to and during suctioning. The suction catheters should be sterile, soft, and flexible with more than
one distal opening and a proximal thumbhole to control
the level of suction. Sterile gloves should be worn and
sterile technique observed throughout the procedure.
Closed suction systems are also available which are helpful in maintaining sterility and preventing issues with
disconnection. Suction should be applied while withdrawing the catheter from the airway for no more than
five seconds at a time. This procedure can be repeated

two or three times as long as the patient’s oxygenation
remains adequate and the patient does not seem distressed. If suctioning is productive, it can be performed
as frequently as every 2–4 hours.
The risks of suction include hypoxemia, patient discomfort, damage to the tracheal mucosa, collapse of
small airways and alveoli, and contamination of the
lower airways.
If the secretions are too dry to suction well or adequate humidification is not being provided, small
­aliquots of sterile saline (0.2 mL/kg) may be instilled
into the airway prior to suctioning. This practice has
been challenged because of the lack of evidence of
beneficial effects coupled with the risk of introducing
infection.
Tracheal Tube Management
Ventilator patients require an artificial airway, which is
most commonly accomplished via endotracheal (ET)
intubation and general anesthesia. It is important that
ET tubes are sterile and ideally have high‐volume/low‐
pressure cuffs. Tracheal mucosal blood flow can be
occluded by pressures over 25–35 mmHg. Ideally, cuff
pressure should be maintained between 20 and 25 mmHg
and measured regularly with a pressure gauge system.
Higher pressures impede mucosal blood flow and may
lead to tracheal necrosis. Lower cuff pressures are associated with an increased risk of aspiration. Although frequently used, the pilot balloons do not correlate well
with cuff pressure and should not be used as an indicator
of appropriate inflation.
Tracheal injury can also be minimized by deflating
the cuff and repositioning the ET tube slightly to
change the pressure point and then reinflating the cuff
every four hours. The mouth and pharynx should be
flushed and suctioned prior to deflating the cuff.
Endotracheal tubes should be securely tied with IV
tubing or another nonporous material, which is less
likely than gauze to become saturated with oral secretions and bacteria. The ties should be moved and
secured in a different position every four hours to minimize lip trauma.
The endotracheal tube may need to be changed every
24–48 hours, depending on the amount and character of
the secretions. It is important to preoxygenate with 100%
oxygen prior to changing the tube and to be prepared for
a difficult intubation. Tracheostomy tubes should ideally
have an inner cannula, which should be cleaned every
four hours. If there is no cannula, the tube should be suctioned regularly and changed every 24 hours. The tracheostomy tube should also have a cuff to protect the
airway from the migration of oral secretions and to allow
PEEP to be used.

399

VetBooks.ir

400

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

Oral Care
Care of the oral cavity is of the utmost importance in
these patients. Oral ulceration is a common problem
and with poor oral care may occur in 90% or more of
patients. Oral ulceration is a primary source of bacterial
proliferation and has been reported as a major cause of
VAP in human PPV patients. Prevention of oral ulceration with careful positioning of mouth gags, keeping
the tongue and mucous membranes moist, and frequent repositioning of the tongue and ET tube are
essential. The mouth and oropharynx should be carefully rinsed and suctioned every four hours. A chlorhexidine rinse of the mouth should be performed
every eight hours.

hours. Other indwelling catheters such as chest tubes
should be cared for as appropriate.

­Complications of Mechanical Ventilation
Hemodynamic Compromise

Ventilator patients are under anesthesia and require eye
care to prevent the development of corneal drying and
ulceration. Artificial tear ointment should be applied at
least every two hours. If an ulcer is suspected, fluorescein
staining should be performed and the patient should be
started on an antibiotic ophthalmic ointment. Temporary
tarsorrhaphy may be necessary in some cases.

Positive pressure ventilation can lead to reductions in
cardiac output in some patients. The associated increase
in intrathoracic pressure can reduce systemic venous
return which in the steady state is equal to cardiac
output. Although animals with higher mean airway
­
­pressures are at greater risk for developing impaired cardiovascular performance, those with significant pulmonary disease tend to have such poorly compliant lungs
that very little of the increased airway pressure is transferred to the cardiovascular system. Hemodynamic compromise secondary to PPV is more of a problem for
animals with concurrent hypovolemia or other causes of
reduced cardiac filling pressures. Continuous heart rate
and blood pressure monitoring is advised for all ventilator patients. Fluid and drug therapy should be given as
appropriate if hypovolemia or volume‐unresponsive
hypotension develops.

Recumbent Patient Care

Ventilator‐Associated Pneumonia

Prolonged recumbency can lead to muscle atrophy,
pressure sores, peripheral edema, and nerve damage.
Patients should be repositioned at least every four
hours and should have passive range of motion exercises performed. Ventilator patients should be kept on
sufficient padding that is changed immediately if soiled.
Frequent changes in body position also help prevent
the pooling of secretions in one region of the airways
and atelectasis of the dependent lung lobes. Turning
may be associated with desaturation in animals with
substantial pulmonary pathology; some patients will
not tolerate lateral recumbency in which case they may
require sternal recumbency with only their hips turned
regularly. Oxygenation should be monitored carefully
after changes in position. Sternal positioning is generally
associated with the best lung function and may be beneficial in hypoxemic patients.

In human medicine, VAP occurs in 10–48% of patients
and leads to an increase in mortality. Endotracheal intubation compromises the normal upper airway defenses
and bacteria from the oral cavity have greater access to
the lower airways. This problem can be compounded by
intermittent aspiration of oral secretions or gastroesophageal contents.
Ventilator‐associated pneumonia is typically diagnosed when new radiographic evidence of pulmonary
infiltrates is detected 48 hours or longer after beginning
IPPV. Decreases in oxygenation, a change in the character of airway secretions, new rhonchi or crackles, changes
in white blood cell count, and new fevers are also common clinical signs associated with VAP. Prevention of
VAP includes maintaining careful oral hygiene standards, including chlorhexidine rinses and the use of sterile
technique when handling the circuit or endotracheal or
tracheostomy tube. Minimizing circuit disconnections is
advised. It is now recommended in some guidelines that
ventilator circuits only be replaced every five days (earlier if gross contamination is evident). Many VAP infections have been found to come from the hands of
caregivers, so wearing gloves and frequent hand washing
are strongly recommended for all those dealing with ventilator patients. Wearing gloves should be considered
mandatory when dealing with the oral cavity.

Eye Care

Catheter Care
All indwelling catheters should receive diligent catheter
care as ventilator patients are at high risk for secondary
infections and catheters provide possible entry sites for
microorganisms. Urinary catheters require appropriate
cleaning and care every eight hours. Intravascular catheters should be unwrapped and cleaned every 24–48

VetBooks.ir

40 Mechanical Ventilation

Ventilator‐Induced Lung Injury
Ventilator‐induced lung injury (VILI) describes pulmonary damage that occurs as a result of stresses and strains
placed on lung tissues during PPV. In addition to increasing pulmonary pathology, in human medicine VILI has
been found to increase the incidence of multiple organ
dysfunction and patient mortality. It is believed that pulmonary inflammation resulting from VILI leads to the
elaboration of inflammatory mediators, which amplify
the systemic inflammatory response and subsequent
organ damage. Indeed, some have suggested that the
improved outcomes observed with lung‐protective ventilator strategies are not due to improvements in pulmonary performance but rather to reductions in distant
organ damage.
There are several mechanisms by which VILI can
occur. The two major proposed mechanisms are overdistension of the lung by excessive tidal volumes and repetitive alveolar and peripheral airway collapse. Titration of
ventilator settings should always be focused on providing the lowest possible level of ventilator support that
still allows the targeted goals to be achieved. When the
blood gas value goals cannot be achieved despite the use
of high airway pressures and PEEP, a valid alternative
approach is to change the blood gas goals for this particular patient. Permissive hypercapnia or permissive
hypoxemia‐based strategies may be employed in these
instances as described previously.
Oxygen Toxicity
Pulmonary oxygen toxicity is discussed elsewhere in this
text and the interested reader is referred to the appropriate sections (see also Chapter 39).
Pneumothorax
A pneumothorax can occur in the ventilator patient
when alveolar or airway rupture leads to air escaping
from the respiratory tract and accumulating in the pleural space. Although pneumothorax is a major concern
when high airway pressures are present, studies in
human patients have not been able to demonstrate a significant association between airway pressure and the
occurrence of pneumothorax. Rather, the incidence of
pneumothorax seems to vary with the nature of the lung
pathology present. Overdistension of the lung is thought
to be the major cause of pneumothorax. Thus, maintaining low tidal volumes, especially in patients with significant lung disease, is currently recommended.
Pneumothorax can be rapidly progressive in patients
receiving IPPV and it is imperative that it be recognized
early to avoid adverse outcomes. The acute onset of an

elevated PaCO2 and a decreased PaO2 is a common
early warning sign. Airway pressure would be expected
to be increasing if a pneumothorax occurs in a patient
being ventilated with volume control, while tidal volume would decrease if pressure control ventilation is
employed. Auscultation may reveal decreased lung
sounds, but this finding may be difficult to appreciate in
the mechanically ventilated patient. Thoracic radiographs will provide a definitive diagnosis, but are often
impractical. Thoracic ultrasound can also be helpful in
identifying a pneumothorax if the operator is suitably
trained and experienced.
Ultimately, a pneumothorax can be rapidly fatal in the
ventilator patient. If there is any doubt that one is present, a diagnostic thoracocentesis should be performed
immediately. If a pneumothorax is detected, unilateral or
bilateral chest tubes are likely to be required.
Weaning from Mechanical Ventilation
Weaning (or liberation) from the ventilator is generally
an ongoing process of gradual reduction in the ventilator
settings. Often, as the patient improves, the mode of ventilation may be changed to one that requires the animal
to perform an ever‐increasing proportion of the work of
breathing. SIMV and pressure support modes are often
employed for this purpose. If animals have been anesthetized for prolonged periods of time, it may take some
time (hours to days) for them to recover adequate ventilatory capacity. Some anesthetic protocols (e.g., barbiturates) employed for IPPV may have very prolonged
withdrawal periods. It is important to consider reducing
or changing the anesthetic drugs administered when
patients begin to improve and weaning becomes a realistic possibility.
Prior to discontinuance of IPPV, the patient should first
obtain certain physiologic goals, including the following:
the original disease process is stable or improving
a stable and appropriate level of respiratory drive has
been demonstrated
●● the patient no longer requires significant ventilator
support to achieve adequate gas exchange
●● adequate gas exchange efficiency has been restored
(i.e., PaO2:FiO2 ratio consistently above 200; greater
than 300 is preferred).
●●
●●

Reasons to suspect that a patient is not ready to be
weaned include cardiovascular instability, requirement
of high FiO2 (greater than 60%), high peak inspired airway pressures (>25 cmH2O), and/or high PEEP levels
(>5 cmH2O).
When a patient has improved sufficiently to consider
removing them from the ventilator, it is advised to first
determine if they can maintain spontaneous breathing

401

VetBooks.ir

402

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

while still intubated. During such a “spontaneous breathing trial,” the patient requires frequent, intensive monitoring. CPAP is often an ideal mode to use during a
spontaneous breathing trial as the tidal volume, respiratory rate, and end‐tidal carbon dioxide can all still be
closely monitored. The development of hypoxemia,
hypercapnia, hyperthermia, tachycardia, hypotension,
and/or tachypnea are all indications that the trial has
failed. Hypertension and the development of a rapid,
shallow breathing pattern are common markers used in
the authors’ practice to identify weaning failure. Positive
pressure ventilation should be reinstituted once weaning
failure has been identified.
In human medicine, it is frequently recommended to
perform spontaneous breathing trials daily once the
patient qualifies according to the criteria listed above.
When the patient can maintain adequate blood gases

without anxiety or fatigue, anesthesia can be discontinued and extubation performed.

­Nursing Care
No chapter on mechanical ventilation would be complete
without acknowledging the absolute requirement for
skilled, highly trained technicians. Patients receiving IPPV
require continuous monitoring and care. In the authors’
practice, the patient:nurse ratio for ventilator patients is
always 1:1. Additional nursing staff needs to be available
as required for turning, airway and oral hygiene, circuit
changes, and many other nursing procedures. Large numbers of highly skilled veterinary technicians are required
to provide mechanical ventilator support and may be the
single largest determinant of outcomes in many cases.

­Further Reading
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network. Ventilation
with lower tidal volumes as compared with traditional
tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute
respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med 2000; 342:
1301–8.
Anzueto A, Frutos‐Vivar F, Esteban A, et al. Incidence, risk
factors and outcome of barotraumas in mechanically
ventilated patients. Intensive Care Med 2004; 30: 612–19.

Hess DR, Kacmarek RM. Essentials of Mechanical
Ventilation, 2nd edn. New York: McGraw‐Hill, 2002.
MacIntyre NR, Branson RD. Mechanical Ventilation,
2nd edn. St Louis, MO: Saunders, 2009.
Weg JG, Anzueto A, Balk RA, et al. The relation of
pneumothorax and other air leaks to mortality in the
acute respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med
1998; 338: 341–6.

VetBooks.ir

403

41
Approach to the Patient with Shock
James W. Barr, DVM, DACVECC
Blue Pearl Veterinary Partners, Tampa, FL, USA

Shock is a clinical entity that veterinarians come into con­
tact with regularly and is defined as inadequate delivery or
usage of oxygen at the cellular and subcellular level. The
result of cellular and tissue hypoxia is the central driver of
the pathology of shock. Subsequently, resolving this
hypoxia must be the clinician’s primary focus to effectively
treat a patient in shock. Cellular hypoxia results in the fail­
ure of energy‐dependent mechanisms. When cells lack
the necessary energy, dysfunction of the organelles occurs
which ultimately results in the death of the cell. When
cells die, organs become dysfunctional and compensatory
mechanisms meant to be protective instead exacerbate
injury and lead to the death of the organism.
Classically, shock has been defined as lack of organ
perfusion resulting from the impaired ability of the car­
diovascular system to deliver oxygen to the tissues of the
body. This can result from many diseases, but the global
effects are similar regardless of cause. There are clinical
situations in which the delivery of oxygen to the tissues is
normal or increased whilst the tissues are unable to use
the oxygen presented to them that can lead to shock.
This, fortunately, is not recognized often in veterinary
medicine so this chapter will focus on the failure of oxy­
gen delivery rather than failure of oxygen utilization.
It is often helpful to classify shock states according to
their underlying etiology. This enables formation of a
general treatment plan. In general, shock can be classified
as hypovolemic, cardiogenic, distributive, or obstructive.
Hypovolemic shock occurs when intravascular volume is
reduced, resulting in decreased cardiac output. This can
include whole‐blood loss (hemorrhagic shock) or loss of
plasma volume. Cardiogenic shock is a result of poor car­
diac function that reduces cardiac output. Distributive
shock develops from inappropriate vasodilation and
decreased resistance to blood flow lowering blood pres­
sure despite normal or even increased cardiac output.
Obstructive shock is a result of physical impedance of

diastolic filling of the heart and subsequent decrease in
cardiac output. It is possible for patients to fit more than
one category and limiting classification to a single cate­
gory can lead the clinician astray. For instance, patients
that are septic may have shock that has characteristics of
hypovolemic, cardiogenic, and distributive etiologies.
In addition to categorizing etiology, shock can be char­
acterized by severity as either compensated or decom­
pensated. The sympathetic nervous system attempts to
compensate for perceived decreases in intravascular vol­
ume and/or blood pressure, generating some of the clini­
cal signs associated with shock. While the etiologies
vary, there are commonalities in the clinical signs of
shock. The recognition of shock centers on identifying
the compensatory mechanisms the patient displays in
response to decreased oxygen delivery. If a patient is in
the compensated phase of shock, the sympathetic nerv­
ous system has been activated and the subsequent
increases in chronotropy, inotropy, and systemic vascu­
lar resistance (SVR) will all converge to increase oxygen
delivery. Patients in compensated shock will often have a
normal blood pressure and mentation on presentation,
but will likely have other clinical signs suggestive of
shock such as tachycardia and tachypnea. If the initiating
cause of shock has been removed then patients in com­
pensated shock may not progress further.
If the underlying etiology of shock is severe or persis­
tent, compensatory mechanisms will be unable to restore
oxygen delivery and the patient will progress to decom­
pensated shock. These animals will have profound clini­
cal signs including depressed mentation, cold extremities,
thready pulses, and hypotension. If left untreated,
patients in decompensated shock will generally progress
to an irreversible shock state in which compensatory
mechanisms cease to function. This is termed autoregulatory escape and results from global vasodilation as oxy­
gen‐starved tissues finally demand blood flow. Clinical

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

404

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

signs of autoregulatory escape include venous pooling,
bradycardia, and hypotension unresponsive to fluids or
vasopressors and eventual death.
There are some specific treatments for each type of
shock, but key similarities exist between all categories.
The ultimate goal in the treatment of shock is to restore
homeostasis by ensuring adequate oxygen delivery to the
tissues. For the most part, these treatments do not
address the underlying cause of shock; rather, they are
nonspecific augmentations of oxygen delivery. The ideal
treatment of shock would prevent death, allow the
patient time to heal from the initiating insult, and limit
ongoing injury as much as possible.

Chemoreceptors are sensory organs responsible for
monitoring the blood for appropriate concentrations of
key chemicals, primarily oxygen and carbon dioxide. The
carotid bodies, which are located near the carotid bifur­
cation, sense oxygen tension and the partial pressure of
carbon dioxide (CO2) in arterial blood. The aortic body,
located in the aortic root, senses pressure in addition to
oxygen and carbon dioxide tension and pH of arterial
blood. These chemoreceptors send signals to the medulla
oblongata to regulate breathing and blood pressure and
are a potent mechanism by which respiratory rate and
heart rate are controlled.
Compensatory Mechanisms

­Pathophysiology of Shock and Effect
on Organ Systems
Cellular Effects of Hypoxia
Shock occurs due to failure of oxygen delivery to the tis­
sues which results in cellular and mitochondrial hypoxia.
The resulting anaerobic metabolism leads to a significant
decrease in production of adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
with generation of lactate as a byproduct causing acido­
sis at both local and systemic levels.
The ATP deficiency that occurs during shock has numer­
ous detrimental effects on the cell. ATP‐dependent trans­
port proteins cease to function and membrane gradients of
electrolytes are lost. This results in cellular swelling, cellu­
lar death, and ultimately organ dysfunction if enough cel­
lular death occurs. Cell death resulting from hypoxia is
usually necrotic and not apoptotic, and can therefore
induce an inflammatory response. This organ failure, if not
corrected in time, results in the death of the organism.
Sensors of Cardiovascular Homeostasis
In order to maintain homeostasis, volume, pressure
(baroreceptors), and chemical status (chemoreceptors) of
the blood must be monitored at all times. This is the job
of afferent sensors in various parts of the body capable of
sensing a change in one or more of these variables. These
sensors send signals primarily to the autonomic nervous
system and if an abnormality is detected, cause physio­
logic responses intended to reestablish homeostasis.
Baroreceptors are mechanoreceptors located within
the walls of vessels that are excited with stretch of the
vessel wall (pressure) and are important for the beat‐
to‐beat regulation of blood pressure. The information
collected by baroreceptors is used to regulate the func­
tion of the heart, vascular smooth muscle tone, and
endocrine responses aimed at managing intravascular
volume.

During shock, hypoxia is sensed centrally which prompts
the firing of the respiratory center efferent nerves,
increasing the respiratory rate in an effort to raise the
amount of fresh gas presented to the alveoli to ensure
oxygen extraction from the atmosphere is maximized.
Control of cardiac output is regulated by the autonomic
nervous system. The sympathetic branch of the auto­
nomic nervous system acts on the areas of the heart that
have pacemaking capability (i.e., sinoatrial node, atria,
atrioventricular node ventricles). Sympathetic stimula­
tion results in an increase in sinoatrial node rate of firing,
decrease in atrioventricular node delay, and increase in
speed of the spread of an action potential through the
specialized myocardial conduction system. Sympathetic
stimulation directly increases the strength of contractility
through the action of epinephrine stimulating beta‐1‐
adrenergic receptors. Indirectly, sympathetic stimulation
increases inotropy by increasing vascular tone through
arteriolar vasoconstriction, increasing resistance to blood
flow (systemic vascular resistance) and blood pressure.
Preferential vasoconstriction shunts blood flow away
from peripheral sites and to the brain and heart, increas­
ing preload and causing a reflex increase in inotropy.
The parasympathetic branch of the autonomic nerv­
ous system regulates chronotropy (heart rate). Para­
sympathetic stimulation slows the heartbeat with little
effect on the strength of ventricular contractions. In
shock, parasympathetic tone is reduced to increase the
heart rate. The net result of the increase in sympathetic
tone and decrease in parasympathetic tone is increased
inotropy and chronotropy. As a consequence, most
patients in shock exhibit tachycardia. Patients with
hyperkalemia or in the decompensatory phase of shock
may demonstrate bradycardia, however.
Other less immediate compensatory mechanisms are
also activated during shock. The renin‐angiotensin‐
aldosterone system (RAAS) is activated and a nonos­
motic release of antidiuretic hormone in response to
hypotension occurs. Both of these responses attempt to

VetBooks.ir

41 Approach to the Patient with Shock

expand intravascular volume by inducing retention of
water. This process takes hours to days to occur and is
therefore of little use in the immediate compensatory
attempt to return homeostasis.
Macro‐ and Microcirculation
Clinicians often consider shock to be a macrocircula­
tory phenomenon (i.e., an absolute decrease in blood
flow and perfusion in large arteries). It must be remem­
bered, however, that the purpose of the entire circula­
tory system is to deliver blood through the capillaries
(microcirculation) to exchange oxygen and nutrients
and remove waste products from individual tissue beds.
While arteriolar constriction will increase global pres­
sures and improve macrocirculatory parameters, it can
reduce blood flow to the capillary or downstream side of
the arterioles.
Under normal conditions, arteriolar tone changes
from minute to minute depending on the metabolic
demand of the particular tissue bed in which it is located.
If a tissue demands more or less oxygen, concentrations
of metabolites including adenosine, oxygen, and carbon
dioxide will cause vasoconstriction or vasodilation. This
is termed chemical autoregulation and is key in coupling
blood flow to the metabolic needs of the tissue. In shock
states, however, sympathetic stimulation causes vaso­
constriction and overrides local tissue autoregulatory
mechanisms. This often reduces perfusion of the tissues
supplied by the constricted arterioles and, if oxygen con­
sumption is higher than oxygen delivery, will result in the
onset of anaerobic metabolism.
It is possible, if not common, for a patient in shock to
have normal or even increased cardiac output and blood
flow to the level of the arterioles yet have poor flow
through the capillaries. This alteration in microcircula­
tion is especially significant in septic shock and ischemia/
reperfusion injury.

­Diagnosis
A key feature of shock is that all organ systems are
affected due to a global decrease in oxygen delivery, dif­
ferentiating shock from local perfusion derangements.
Due to the systemic nature of shock, the compensatory
mechanisms in place are meant to preferentially perfuse
the organ systems most important for immediate sur­
vival. This means that the brain and heart are perfused at
the expense of the abdominal viscera such as the kidneys,
gastrointestinal (GI) tract, and liver. Therefore, the clini­
cal signs of shock represent the compensatory changes
that occur in response to, rather than directly from, the

cause of shock, meaning the underlying etiology of shock
may not be evident on initial physical exam since similar
clinical signs are present in all types of shock.
Tachycardia is one of the most consistent clinical signs
of shock and although it is a frequent finding, the etiol­
ogy is often multifactorial. The origin of tachycardia
typically belongs in one of three categories: related to
pain or anxiety, related to an appropriate physiologic
compensatory mechanism, or due to primary cardiac
disease. As usual, cats provide a notable exception to this
generalization and frequently present bradycardic, as do
dogs in the decompensatory or terminal stage of shock.
In general, bradycardia in the context of shock should be
considered a negative clinical sign and if recognized,
should elicit a rapid and diligent search for the underly­
ing reason for shock.
Pale mucous membranes can represent either anemia
or vasoconstriction and mucous membrane evaluation
provides a very crude assessment of hemoglobin
­concentration and microcirculation. While it is possi­
ble that a patient in shock is anemic, more commonly
mucous membrane pallor is due to vasoconstriction.
Capillary refill time (CRT) reflects the amount of time
it takes for blood to fill the capillaries after they have
been forcibly evacuated and provides an estimate of
the efficiency of microcirculation. Normal CRT ranges
from one to two seconds and prolongation of the CRT
would reflect microcirculatory disturbance. Patients
with pallor typically have a slow or difficult to evaluate
CRT due to anemia preventing appreciable blanching
of the mucous membranes. Occasionally, patients will
have bright red mucous membranes and faster than
normal CRT. This finding suggests the patient has vaso­
dilation in conjunction with normal or high cardiac
output and this occurs most frequently in septic shock
or in shock associated with heat stroke. It does not
imply that these patients have better than normal per­
fusion. Similarly, patients can have dark or dusky
mucous membranes and a prolonged CRT indicating
the presence of vasodilation and decreased cardiac
output, as is seen in cardiogenic shock. Patients with
these findings can have significant perfusion deficien­
cies and the clinician should seek to treat these patients
aggressively.
Weak pulses are inconsistently present in shock. If the
animal is in the compensated stage of shock, there is
likely sufficient blood pressure to generate a detectable
pulse. Some clinicians use the presence of a pulse in dif­
ferent areas of the vascular tree to give an estimate of
blood pressure and argue that detection of pulses in the
dorsal pedal artery and in the femoral artery represent
systolic pressures of 80 mmHg and 60 mmHg respec­
tively. There is limited evidence to support this finding
in veterinary medicine and quantitative measurement of

405

VetBooks.ir

406

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

blood pressure should always be used when available.
A systolic blood pressure of less than 90 mmHg or a
mean arterial pressure (MAP) of less than 60 mmHg
should be aggressively pursued.
Numerous factors can confound the interpretation of
pulses in clinical cases. Since the pulse that is palpated is
the difference between the systolic and diastolic pres­
sures, a small difference will cause the pulse to be weak or
thready and a large difference will cause the pulse to be
strong or bounding. None of these descriptions reflect
the actual pressure within the vessel, and all of these pulse
qualities can represent a patient in shock. An obstruction
to blood flow can also inhibit the detection of pulses, as is
the case in aortic thromboembolism by causing an abso­
lute reduction in blood flow through the artery.
Patients in shock also frequently demonstrate tachyp­
nea as the body attempts to maximize oxygen delivery to
the alveoli and subsequently to the arterial blood.
Respiratory rates in excess of 40 breaths per minute for a
dog and 60 breaths per minute for a cat are consistent
with shock. In this instance, tachypnea must be differen­
tiated from true dyspnea or respiratory distress, the
presence of which may indicate an underlying etiology
but does not lead to a diagnosis of shock. Tachypnea is
also a common response to pain, which may confound
the use of respiratory rates for evaluation of possible
shock. Often, evaluating the respiratory rate after admin­
istration of analgesia provides a better representation of
the patient’s ventilatory status.
Altered mentation is seen in patients in decompen­
sated shock as blood flow and oxygen delivery to the
brain are reduced. Since the brain has high demands for
energy and little reserve for energy production, cerebral
function and consciousness are affected early after
decompensation begins. The typical patient in compen­
sated shock will appear bright and alert while the patient
in early decompensated shock will be mildly to moder­
ately obtunded. As shock progresses so will mentation
change and patients that find themselves in late decom­
pensated shock will appear severely obtunded to stupor­
ous. Pain can also affect a patient’s response to its
environment and care should be taken to ensure that
changes in behavior are in fact due to altered mentation
rather than pain. Evaluation of mentation is especially
relevant in cases with head trauma when the level of con­
sciousness can be used as a prognostic sign or metric of
the severity of injury. In these cases, shock and pain
should be addressed before those assessments are made
or at the very least, they should be interpreted with these
facts in mind.
The GI tract is affected in almost all cases of shock as
evidenced by the ubiquity of the term “shock gut.” Recall
that the GI tract is one of the organ systems that is sacri­
ficed in order to divert the scarce blood flow toward the

heart and brain. This decrease in splanchnic blood flow
has a significant impact on the mucosal integrity of the
GI tract, leading to the vomiting and hemorrhagic diar­
rhea often seen in shock. As with most of the exam find­
ings associated with shock, GI signs are usually mild to
absent in animals in the compensatory stages of shock
and can be moderate to severe in animals that have pro­
gressed to the later stages of decompensated shock.
The use of biomarkers for detection of shock and co‐
morbidities has become widely accepted as standard of
care in human medicine. These measurements (i.e., elec­
trolytes, blood glucose, creatinine) can provide impor­
tant information regarding the underlying cause of shock
in addition to aiding in its recognition and diagnosis.
Biochemical abnormalities can be prognostic or diag­
nostic and can direct the clinician to appropriate thera­
peutic interventions. All patients in shock should have a
blood gas profile with lactate as a part of the initial and
ongoing evaluation of the patient whenever possible.
Lactate is an important marker of tissue perfusion and
has been the most widely used biomarker of shock in vet­
erinary patients. Lactate is easily measured in clinical
practice with a range of options from bench‐top blood
gas analyzers to handheld monitors that have been vali­
dated in veterinary patients. Blood lactate concentra­
tions greater than 2.5 mmol/L are indicative of significant
anaerobic metabolism and, in a patient with other signs
consistent with shock, should be considered to be diag­
nostic for failure of oxygen delivery.
The availability and use of ultrasound in veterinary
medicine has become very common. While not particu­
larly useful for the diagnosis of shock itself, ultrasound
has become especially useful because it allows identifica­
tion of the etiology faster. The use of focused assessment
with sonography for trauma (FAST) protocols for the
abdomen (AFAST) and thorax (TFAST) have been very
well described in veterinary medicine. These techniques
can be performed with minimal training and are quite
effective at the identification of fluid in cavities as well as
the presence of a poorly contracting heart or pneumo­
thorax. If available, and as long as positioning and
restraint will not be detrimental to the patient, ultra­
sound should be used to evaluate patients in shock to
attempt to determine the underlying cause. A descrip­
tion of the FAST procedures is provided in Chapter 46.

­Classification of Shock
The following provides a guide to the classification of
shock. The categorization of shock can be beneficial for
formulating a diagnostic and therapeutic approach to a
patient. While clinically useful, it should be reiterated
that a patient in shock might often have disease processes

VetBooks.ir

41 Approach to the Patient with Shock

occurring that overlap categories, and it is possible that
categorization may change as the underlying pathology
progresses. Therefore, a singular approach to each spe­
cific shock category is not possible.
Hypovolemic Shock
Hypovolemic shock occurs when there is an absolute or
perceived decrease in the intravascular volume. This is
the classic example of shock and is arguably the most
common cause of shock in veterinary patients.
Hypovolemic shock can result from a loss of whole blood,
loss of sodium‐rich fluid (plasma) or in severe cases lack
of adequate water intake. Chronic endocrine diseases can
occasionally present as a unique subset of hypovolemic
shock. As an example, a patient in a hypoadrenicortical
(Addisonian) crisis may be hypovolemic but may not
exhibit the typical clinical signs of shock.
Hemorrhagic shock is the classic example of hypov­
olemic shock. A distinguishing characteristic that sets
hemorrhagic shock apart from other causes of hypov­
olemic shock is the absolute loss of whole blood, which
can occur as overt blood loss from the laceration of a ves­
sel or covert blood loss resulting from cavitary bleeding.
A complicating component of hemorrhagic shock is the
necessary loss of red blood cell mass concurrent with the
loss of intravascular fluid. Patients suffering from hem­
orrhagic shock may only have shock completely amelio­
rated by the administration of both IV fluids and
hemoglobin‐containing products.
Cardiogenic Shock
Cardiogenic shock results from an inability of the heart
to move blood into the pulmonary or systemic circula­
tion. This is classically imagined to be a result of “for­
ward failure” of the heart due to the heart being unable to
maintain forward blood flow. As in the case of congestive
heart failure, this may occur in the face of normal or
increased preload. Due to the unique etiology and treat­
ment approach to cardiogenic shock, a closer examina­
tion will be made in Chapter 42.
Distributive Shock
Distributive shock describes shock that occurs primarily
due to loss of systemic vascular resistance (i.e., blood
pressure). This is most often a result of inappropriate
vasodilation resulting in decreased venous flow and thus
decreased preload. Recall that in the absence of signifi­
cant heart disease, preload is positively correlated with
cardiac output. Besides the decrease in cardiac output
that occurs in distributive shock, regional perfusion is
disrupted with loss of blood pressure.

The classic example of distributive or vasodilatory
shock is anaphylaxis whereby massive vasodilation low­
ers blood pressure to such a degree that capillary blood
flow decreases. This reduction in capillary blood flow
limits oxygen delivery to the tissues and results in tissue
oxygen debt. In addition to vasodilation, an increase in
the permeability of the capillaries results in a higher than
normal net movement of water from the intravascular
space to the interstitial space, further decreasing intra­
vascular volume and worsening hypotension.
Neurogenic shock is an uncommon manifestation of
CNS injury specifically in the brain, cervical or thoracic
spinal cord and results from a decrease in sympathetic
tone leading to significant loss of systemic vascular
resistance. The presumed mechanism behind this rapid
vasodilation is disruption of the autonomic paths in the
spinal cord and is different from “spinal shock,” which
refers to the temporary loss of function of the spinal cord
after spinal cord trauma.
Obstructive Shock
Obstructive shock results from impairment of blood
return to the heart. It is typically associated with intraab­
dominal disease that sequesters blood within the abdo­
men and decreases preload (e.g., gastric dilation and
volvulus [GDV]). Some argue that pericardial effusion
with cardiac tamponade is a form of obstructive shock.
Similar to GDV, during pericardial tamponade the intra­
pericardial pressure is higher than the venous pressure
and results in decreased preload of the right atrium.
Septic Shock
Septic shock can be considered a form of distributive
shock but has enough unique characteristics that it is
often classified as a separate entity. As a result of infec­
tion and systemic inflammation, fluid is lost to the
interstitium, water intake is decreased, systemic vascu­
lar resistance decreases, and myocardial performance is
impaired. The therapy for septic shock must address
each of these in turn as well as the underlying cause of
sepsis. Septic shock will be investigated in detail in
Chapter 43.

­Oxygen Delivery
At its most basic, there are two primary components of
oxygen delivery: cardiac output (CO) and arterial oxygen
content (CaO2). Therefore, a useful way to approach the
treatment of shock is to separate the components of the
cardiovascular system into the individual determinants

407

VetBooks.ir

408

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

of oxygen delivery (DO2). In fact, only seven parameters
can be manipulated to augment oxygen delivery: those
associated with cardiac output (heart rate, preload [end‐
diastolic volume], afterload [MAP], systemic vascular
resistance, and ejection fraction), and those associated
with arterial oxygen content (hemoglobin concentration
and partial pressure of inspired oxygen).
Cardiac Output
Cardiac output is determined by the amount of the blood
ejected from the heart with each beat (stroke volume)
and the rate at which the heart is beating (heart rate).
Stroke volume, in turn, is determined by the amount of
blood that returns to the heart (preload), the force that
must be overcome to eject blood out of the heart (after­
load/systemic vascular resistance), and the physical force
that the heart must generate to move blood (contractility
or inotropy). Cardiac output is arguably the easiest com­
ponent of DO2 to manipulate. Accordingly, increasing
preload is the most common initial treatment of shock
and is accomplished with the administration of IV fluids
and vasoactive medications to augment preload by
increasing venous pressure and consequently right ven­
tricular volume.
The heart has the ability to increase or decrease the
force of contraction (inotropy) exerted during systole.
Intrinsically, the heart pumps more powerfully when
there is a larger amount of blood present in the ventricle
at the end of diastole (Starling law of the heart).
Sympathetic stimulation can also increase the force of
contraction and is in fact the primary mechanism by
which inotropy can be altered by the clinician through
administration of beta‐1‐adrenergic agonists.
The impediment of flow that must be overcome to
eject blood out of the heart is the systemic vascular
resistance (afterload). This is the force that the cardiac
wall is placed under when it contracts in systole and is
usually considered as the mean arterial blood pressure
(MAP). Although convenient, this is not always accurate.
As an example, MAP and afterload are uncoupled when
an anatomic obstruction to flow exists, such as subaortic
stenosis. Manipulation of afterload (SVR and MAP) is
possible through the administration of agents acting on
specific vasoactive receptors (alpha, dopamine, and vas­
opressin). Most frequently, the goal is to increase both
SVR and MAP. Afterload reduction is infrequently a con­
cern in veterinary patients although it is common in
humans due to that species’ propensity for developing
primary hypertension.
Heart rate changes are important for the second‐to‐
second adjustment of cardiac output. During shock,
increases in heart rate typically parallel increases in inot­
ropy. Clinically, heart rate measurement is a useful tool

for diagnosing a patient in shock. Heart rate can be
manipulated pharmacologically with beta‐2‐adrenergic
agonists and anticholinergic drugs. However, the ability
of changes in heat rate to improve cardiac output is lim­
ited. Diastolic filling time is essential for preload and
tachycardia shortens the amount of time spent in dias­
tole during the cardiac cycle. At very high heart rates,
this shortened diastolic time can significantly decrease
preload and cardiac output. Patients in the decompensa­
tory stage of shock can become absolutely or relatively
bradycardic as the heart begins to fail due to poor oxygen
delivery to the heart itself.
Arterial Oxygen Content
Oxygen content of the blood is the sum of the oxygen
dissolved in the blood (PaO2) and the amount of oxygen
that is bound to hemoglobin. The amount of oxygen
bound to hemoglobin is a much more important con­
tributor to total blood oxygen content while PaO2 is a
more important indicator of the lungs’ ability to oxygen­
ate the blood.
Interventions directed at improving arterial oxygen
content include provision of supplemental oxygen
(increasing PaO2) and transfusion of hemoglobin in
the form of red blood cells or hemoglobin‐based oxy­
gen carriers (increasing oxygen‐carrying capacity).
The importance of hemoglobin concentration in oxy­
gen delivery cannot be overstated. Hemoglobin makes
the transport of oxygen in the blood and subsequent
offloading at the tissue bed much more efficient.
Consequently, raising hemoglobin is the best way to
improve arterial oxygen content if lung function and
ventilation are normal. Supplementation of oxygen to
those patients who are normoxic (have a normal PaO2)
will do little to increase the amount of oxygen pre­
sented to the tissues (assuming the supplementation is
at normal atmospheric pressure) when compared
to supplementation of hemoglobin. Consider a dog
breathing room air; assuming a hemoglobin concen­
tration of 6 g/dL (HCT 18%), PaO2 of 90 mmHg, and
arterial hemoglobin saturation (SaO2) of 95%, the cal­
culated CaO2 would be 8.0 mL O2/dL. By increasing
the fraction of inspired oxygen to 40%, the resultant
CaO2 would increase to 8.55 mL O2/dL for an 8%
increase. Now assume raising the hemoglobin with no
oxygen supplementation. By increasing the hemo­
globin concentration to 9 g/dL (HCT 28%), a CaO2 of
12 mL O2/dL can be achieved for a 54% increase. In
order to extract the most benefit from an increase in
hemoglobin concentration, it must be maximally satu­
rated with oxygen so oxygen supplementation is always
warranted during shock to ensure the highest possible
PaO2 is achieved.

VetBooks.ir

41 Approach to the Patient with Shock

­Treatment
If possible, the treatment of shock should be directed at
the underlying cause and should be aggressive and com­
prehensive. Most patients in shock can be initially resus­
citated in a similar or identical manner with a few notable
exceptions. If the patient has an obvious cause of shock
with tachycardia without significant heart disease pre­
sent or suspected, then fluid therapy is almost always
beneficial. In cases of hypovolemic, distributive, or
obstructive shock, increasing intravascular volume often
results in significant improvement. The exception to
fluid administration for shock is cardiogenic etiology.
The type and dose of fluid administered for shock are
among the most controversial topics in medicine. In
most circumstances, isotonic crystalloids are as effective
or better, as safe or safer, and less expensive than any of
the other choices for the initial resuscitation of shock.
There are subtle nuances, with different resuscitative
fluid strategies for specific disease states, but in general
replacement crystalloid fluids are suitable choices.
The traditional dose of fluids for patients in shock for
dogs and cats respectively is 90 mL/kg and 60 mL/kg of
crystalloid fluids. This represents approximately one
blood volume that is intended to be administered over a
short period of time. Many patients do not require an
entire shock dose of fluids to be effectively resuscitated
so the most utilized clinical approach is to divide the
dose into four equal parts and administer the aliquots
until endpoints of resuscitation are reached. Although
effective at restoring circulating volume, the duration of
effect of replacement crystalloids is short due to rapid
redistribution of bolus fluids into the interstitial space.
For this reason, it may be necessary to administer subse­
quent boluses to maintain the desired volume expansion.
Unfortunately, overaggressive resuscitation can lead to
interstitial edema formation and dilutional coagulopa­
thy. Because of this risk, it is necessary to keep track of
the total volume of replacement crystalloid administered
to a patient and to consider alternative methods of resus­
citation if initial crystalloid boluses do not result in last­
ing resolution of shock.
Alternatives to replacement crystalloid fluids include
hypertonic saline, blood products (i.e., fresh frozen
plasma, fresh whole blood or packed red blood cells),
synthetic colloid solutions (i.e., hydroxyethyl starches),
albumin‐based colloid solutions (human serum albumin
or lyophilized canine albumin), hemoglobin‐based oxy­
gen carriers (HBOC), or combination of any of the above.
Of these, hypertonic saline and synthetic colloids are
used the most frequently.
Hypertonic saline has the advantage of being rela­
tively inexpensive and having a long shelf‐life. Doses of
4–6 mL/kg of 7.5% NaCl can be used in nondehydrated

traumatized or hemorrhaging patients and may be par­
ticularly useful for resuscitation of animals with head
trauma. Hypertonic saline recruits fluid from the intra­
cellular space to rapidly increase the intravascular vol­
ume, ­providing much needed volume expansion while
minimizing the risk of overresuscitation and edema for­
mation. Boluses of hypertonic saline can be administered
over a shorter period of time than boluses of isotonic
crystalloid fluids due to the smaller volume required.
Unfortunately, hypertonic saline behaves in a similar
manner to replacement crystalloids, with rapid redistri­
bution of fluid into the interstitial space, and because of
the high osmolarity of hypertonic saline and the absolute
solute load, repeated dosing is not recommended due
to the risk of hypernatremia. Relative or absolute con­
traindications to hypertonic saline include preexisting
­dehydration, hypernatremia or hyperosmolar conditions
(ex. hyperosmolar‐hyperglycemic diabetes mellitus). To
maintain the volume expansion derived from adminis­
tration of hypertonic saline, it is often combined with a
synthetic colloid such as hetastarch (10–20 mL/kg) and
administered together.
Colloids have been used successfully in the resuscita­
tion of patients in shock for years. However, controlled
studies have not consistently shown that colloidal solu­
tions are more effective at achieving resuscitation than
isotonic crystalloids. Theoretically, the use of a colloid
for resuscitation in patients with low serum protein or
those with edematous diseases may be preferred.
Incremental doses of 5 mL/kg of hydroxyethyl starch is
a reasonable starting point, with a total shock dose
equaling 10 mL/kg and 20 mL/kg for cats and dogs
respectively. Clinically, the primary utility of synthetic
colloids for resuscitation is to maintain the duration of
volume expansion achieved with isotonic crystalloids.
Synthetic colloids are almost never used alone for
resuscitation of a patient. Rather, they are co‐adminis­
tered with either isotonic or hypertonic crystalloids. An
effective resuscitation plan would include alternating
administration of isotonic crystalloid and colloid solu­
tions (1/4 volume aliquots of each) until resuscitation
has been achieved. Significant debate exists regarding
the impact of synthetic colloids on coagulation and
platelet function. There is little debate that synthetic
colloids can impair platelet function in vitro, but the
clinical implications are less clear. Perhaps of more clin­
ical import is the potential for synthetic colloids to
induce dilutional coagulopathy. For these reasons, syn­
thetic colloids should be used thoughtfully in patients
with thrombocytopenia/thrombocytopathia or docu­
mented coagulopathy. Ultimately, the clinician should
attempt resuscitation with the method they are most
comfortable with rather than attempting to use a resus­
citation strategy that is unfamiliar.

409

VetBooks.ir

410

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

The use of blood products in shock resuscitation is not
routine since most patients have adequate oxygen‐carry­
ing capacity. If a patient has been administered an ade­
quate volume of fluid for resuscitation, has persistent
clinical signs of shock and requires oxygen‐carrying
capacity, then the administration of blood is indicated.
This can be in the form of packed red blood cells, whole
blood or hemoglobin‐based oxygen carriers. No agreed‐
upon transfusion trigger exists and the decision to
administer blood depends on the chronicity of the ane­
mia and the patient’s clinical signs. For patients with an
acute drop of 30–50% in packed cell volume (PCV), the
administration of blood should be strongly considered.
In these cases, a reasonable goal is to raise the PCV by
15–20% with a minimum PCV target of 20%. Typical
doses of 10 mL/kg of packed red blood cells or 20 mL/kg
of whole blood should be effective.
The actual rate of administration of blood products for
resuscitation will depend on the patient’s condition.
Under ideal circumstances, blood products are adminis­
tered slowly with careful monitoring for transfusion
reactions. Patients in shock, however, do not often have
the benefit of time and bolus administration may be
needed. In this case, care has to be taken as techniques
that apply pressure to the red blood cells or increase
shear stress, such as administration with an infusion bag
through a small‐bore catheter, can result in significant
lysis of transfused cells. When bolusing blood products,
it is best to allow blood to flow by gravity as quickly as
possible. Administration of blood should be through a
dedicated IV catheter, meaning that other resuscitative
fluids should be held during transfusion unless provided
through a different catheter or lumen (in the case of mul­
tilumen catheters). It is safe to administer normal saline
with blood products and co‐administration may improve
the fluid dynamics of the blood product and speed the
delivery rate.
The treatment of pain may be needed in many patients
with shock, and is mandatory if they have been trauma­
tized. In unstable painful patients, pain control should be
achieved with short‐acting pure mu opioid agonists (ex.
fentanyl, hydromorphone, oxymorphone or morphine)
administered via the intravenous or intramuscular route.
The dose should be adequate to effectively treat pain but
not depress respiration. This will help the clinician eval­
uate the patient, as it will mitigate the contribution of
pain to tachycardia. With pain controlled, the presence
of tachycardia likely indicates shock or hypoxia in the
traumatized patient. Typical doses of common analge­
sics are provided in Table 41.1.
Vasopressors and positive inotropes are rarely used
during the initial resuscitation of shock but can be
invaluable for the treatment or management of vasodi­
latory or septic shock that is refractory to resuscitation.

Table 41.1 Dosages of commonly used opioid analgesics
in the patient with shock
Drug

Dosage

Frequency

Fentanyl (bolus)

2–5 μg/kg

PRN, q15 min

Fentanyl (CRI)

5–20 μg/kg/h

CRI

Hydromorphone/
oxymorphone

0.05–0.2 mg/kg

q4‐6h

Morphine

0.5–2 mg/kg

q4h

Buprenorphine

0.01–0.02 mg/kg

q6‐12h

Methadone

0.2–0.5 mg/kg

q4‐6h

CRI, constant rate infusion; PRN, as needed (pro re nata).

Administration of vasopressors or positive inotropes
should not be performed prior to adequate volume
expansion, with the possible exception of treating car­
diogenic shock due to systolic failure with a positive
inotrope. Clinically, the most frequently used vasopres­
sor during shock is epinephrine administered for the
acute treatment of anaphylaxis. A more detailed discus­
sion of vasopressors can be found in Chapter 43.
Some patients in shock will not be stabilized until the
underlying disease process has been corrected, as is
often the case with obstructive shock. Patients with sig­
nificant amounts of pericardial effusion causing cardiac
tamponade improve dramatically when even a small
amount of fluid is removed, as do patients with GDV fol­
lowing decompression of the abdomen. Patients in
obstructive shock often do not have an absolute volume
deficiency, but increasing preload can transiently
improve the diastolic filling of the heart while prepara­
tions for definitive treatment are under way.

­Reevaluation and Endpoints
of Resuscitation
The importance of reevaluating the patient during and
after resuscitation cannot be overstated. When evaluat­
ing the efficacy of treatment, the clinician expects physi­
ologic signs of shock to resolve. If resolution is not
achieved, further resuscitation is needed or reconsider­
ation of the diagnosis is necessary. As with all medical
treatments, it is necessary to have predetermined end­
points in mind to decide when treatment is no longer
needed. The optimal endpoints of resuscitation have
been debated for a number of years and although rec­
ommendations and general agreement exist, no consen­
sus has been reached. The ultimate endpoints of
resuscitation should tell the clinician when the patient
is out of shock, meaning adequate oxygen delivery to
all tissues has been reestablished. Possible endpoints

VetBooks.ir

41 Approach to the Patient with Shock

Box 41.1 Endpoints of resuscitation. Each of these
values must be interpreted within the clinical context
as improvement in an isolated variable may not
indicate complete resolution of shock
Normalization of heart rate
Normalization of respiratory rate
●● Improvement of pulse quality
●● Normalization of capillary refill time
●● Blood pressure
●● Improvement of blood lactate concentration
●● ScvO2
●●
●●

include physical exam findings or biochemical variables
(Box 41.1). These should be evaluated before, during,
and after therapy has been instituted.
Normalization of heart rate, respiratory rate, and
CRT as well as improvement of pulse quality have been
traditionally used by clinicians to judge if resuscitation
is complete. These endpoints are intuitive because
they coincide with the findings that are initially used to
determine if a patient is in shock. It follows that when
those findings normalize, resolution of shock has been
achieved. The reality is more complex as physical exam
endpoints can normalize while inadequate oxygen
delivery is ongoing at the cellular and subcellular level.
Therefore, the use of endpoints that include evaluation
of cellular oxygen usage such as lactate, base excess,
and hemoglobin saturation should be incorporated
into all shock treatment plans. In practice, resuscita­
tion should continue until there is resolution of the
physical exam endpoints, at which time analysis of the
biochemical endpoints should be performed. If those
endpoints have been reached then resuscitation is
complete; if biochemical derangements persist then
resuscitation efforts should continue until resolution is
achieved.
Blood Pressure
Blood pressure can be measured in a variety of ways but
is most commonly performed using a Doppler with
sphygmomanometer or a digital monitor with oscilllo­
metric capability. Unfortunately, blood pressure is an
unreliable predictor of perfusion as it is influenced by the
compensatory mechanisms previously discussed. In fact,
a patient can have significant microcirculatory hypoper­
fusion while maintaining normal blood pressure.
However, hypotension does occur as shock progresses
and when present should be aggressively treated with a
target of returning the systolic blood pressure to at least
90 mmHg and MAP to 60 mmHg.

Lactate
Because lactate is a byproduct of anaerobic metabolism,
has a relatively short half‐life and can be measured read­
ily, it is a very useful biomarker for shock. Lactate meas­
urement is an inexpensive adjunct to traditional physical
exam endpoints and its use has become standard of care
in human medicine.
In most cases, elevations in lactate occur secondary to
anaerobic metabolism, so by measuring the concentra­
tion of lactate in a blood sample, the clinician can form
an idea of whether or not anaerobic metabolism is occur­
ring. Occasionally, neoplastic or endocrine diseases can
cause the production of lactate to be higher than the
body’s ability to metabolize it, leading to elevation of
blood lactate concentration. Similarly, significant liver
disease or liver failure can reduce lactate clearance and
lead to hyperlactatemia. When lactate is elevated due to
causes other than anaerobic metabolism, it is termed
type B hyperlactatemia. Occasionally, strenuous exercise
can cause hyperlactatemia. This appears clinically in
patients with prolonged seizures or patients that require
aggressive restraint during examination or blood collec­
tion. These possibilities should be considered when a
patient has a high blood lactate concentration but no
other clinical signs that would indicate the presence of
shock. This is an uncommon occurrence in veterinary
medicine and an animal presented in shock with blood
lactate elevation should be assumed to have inadequate
oxygen delivery until proven otherwise.
The finding of elevated lactate alone does not neces­
sarily mean that global oxygen delivery is inadequate as
local perfusion abnormalities can have significant impact
on lactate concentration. Although absolute lactate con­
centration can be correlated with patient outcomes, lac­
tate clearance following resuscitative efforts is probably a
better prognostic indicator and patients with persistently
elevated lactate concentrations despite aggressive treat­
ment should be considered to have a worse prognosis. As
with all resuscitation endpoints, the results of lactate
measurement must be interpreted in light of the patient’s
clinical condition.
Mixed Venous or Central Venous Oxygen Saturation
Measurement of venous hemoglobin saturation can pro­
vide meaningful insight into the consumption of oxygen
within the body. The hemoglobin saturation of venous
blood is expected to be lower than that of arterial blood.
If this difference is greater than expected, it may indicate
that oxygen‐starved tissues are removing more oxygen
than usual from each hemoglobin molecule. This is best
explained by the oxygen extraction ratio (OER), which is
simply the mathematical ratio of the amount of oxygen

411

VetBooks.ir

412

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

that is delivered to the capillaries via the arteries and the
amount found in the venous blood draining the capillar­
ies. This ratio indicates the proportion of oxygen that
the mitochondria are using versus the amount supplied.
If venous blood has high hemoglobin saturation, then the
mitochondria did not consume as much oxygen as
expected. This may indicate low metabolic rate or mito­
chondrial dysfunction, as seen in sepsis. However, if
venous oxygen saturation is low, it suggests that the
mitochondria are extracting more oxygen than expected
and that an oxygen debt may be present.
Importantly, venous hemoglobin saturation only reflects
the oxygen consumption that is occurring in the tissue bed
that the blood is draining. As an example, if you were to
draw blood from a cephalic vein, you will only be gaining
knowledge about oxygen usage in the distal limb. Blood
drawn from the jugular vein will provide information
about oxygen consumption in the head, including the
brain. Under most circumstances, samples drawn from
the jugular vein are approximately reflective of oxygen
consumption throughout the body, but a better represen­
tation of the global oxygen usage would be venous blood
that has been mixed from all parts of the body. This ideal
sample is retrieved from the pulmonary artery and is
termed the mixed venous oxygen saturation (SvO2). The
pulmonary artery is not routinely catheterized in people
and even less frequently in veterinary patients, but there is
a strong correlation between mixed venous samples and
central venous samples (ScvO2) obtained from the cranial
vena cava or right atrium. Obtaining an ScvO2 sample is
much more feasible in clinical practice and can prove very
useful for guiding resuscitation efforts.

The most significant advantage of venous hemo­
globin saturation monitoring is that increases in OER
(i.e., lower than expected venous hemoglobin satura­
tion) may be evident before the onset of anaerobic
metabolism, giving the clinician an essential head start
in the treatment of shock. An ScvO2 of <70% indicates
that a patient is experiencing tissue oxygen debt. When
performing resuscitation, therefore, the goal is to main­
tain an ScvO2 of >70%. If this is not possible with the
administration of vascular expansion and vasopressor
support alone then treatment with red blood cells may
be indicated. Venous hemoglobin saturation may be
low for several reasons, including slow capillary transit
time (poor microperfusion), increased tissue demand
for oxygen, low arterial hemoglobin saturation or ane­
mia. Once again, venous hemoglobin saturation should
be interpreted with the patient’s overall condition in
mind.

­Conclusion
A simplified and systematic approach to the patient
in shock is necessary for successful management. It is
easy to become overwhelmed with the totality of clini­
cal implications and lose sight of the ultimate goal.
Approaching shock from the standpoint of oxygen
delivery makes the interventions that need to be
­considered finite and easier to implement. Frequent
reevaluation of the patient through the endpoints of
resuscitation will allow determination of the efficacy
of therapy.

­Further Reading
Allen SE, Holm JL. Lactate: physiology and clinical utility.
J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2008; 18: 123–32.
Hall JE. Guyton and Hall Textbook of Medical
Physiology, 12th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders
Elsevier, 2011.
Lisciandro GR. Abdominal and thoracic focused
assessment with sonography for trauma, triage, and
monitoring in small animals. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
2011; 21: 104–22.

Silverstein DC. Pruett‐Saratan II A, Drobatz KJ.
Measurements of microvascular perfusion in healthy
anesthetized dogs using orthogonal polarization spectral
imaging. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2009; 19: 579–87.
Zacher LA, Berg J, Shaw SP, et al. Association between
outcome and changes in plasma lactate concentration
during presurgical treatment in dogs with gastric
dilatation‐volvulus: 64 cases (2002–2008). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2010; 236: 892–7.

VetBooks.ir

413

42
Cardiogenic Shock
Nathan Peterson, DVM, DACVECC1 and James W. Barr DVM, DACVECC 2
1
2

VCA West Los Angeles Animal Hospital, Los Angeles, CA, USA
BluePearl Veterinary Partners, Tampa, FL, USA

­Pathophysiology
Cardiogenic shock occurs when oxygen delivery is insufficient to maintain normal aerobic cellular metabolism
as a result of cardiac dysfunction in the presence of adequate intravascular volume. In other words, cardiogenic
shock occurs when cardiac output is decreased despite
adequate blood volume. Importantly, cardiogenic shock
does not imply congestive heart failure (CHF) although
CHF can be present in cardiogenic shock patients.
Cardiogenic shock occurs in two settings. Forward
failure results from the heart’s inability to adequately
pump blood forward from either the left or right ventricle into either the aorta or main pulmonary artery
respectively. Backward failure, on the other hand, results
from inadequate ventricular filling of the heart during
diastole with a subsequent reduction in stroke volume
and cardiac output. Common conditions resulting in
forward failure of the heart include rupture of one or
more chordae tendinae or acute‐onset severe pulmonary
hypertension. Causes of backward failure include paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia or pericardial tamponade.
Cardiogenic shock is somewhat different from other
forms of shock due to the greater potential impact on the
myocardium. When cardiac dysfunction underlies the
development of shock, coronary perfusion is often
impaired as a result of increased right‐sided pressures or
decreased aortic root pressure. Because of the potential
for decreased coronary perfusion and subsequent
ischemic myocardial injury, it is imperative that cardiogenic shock is recognized early and treated aggressively.
When ventricular function or efficiency is acutely
diminished, cardiac output declines rapidly. If ventricular dysfunction is a result of systolic myocardial failure
(as seen with dilated cardiomyopathy), the force of
­ventricular contractions (inotropy) is not sufficient to
eject a normal volume of blood from the ventricles.

Since stroke volume is one of two determinants of
­cardiac output (cardiac output = heart rate × stroke volume), a decrease in inotropy will reduce cardiac output
in a direct fashion unless compensation occurs by
increasing heart rate. Perceived ventricular dysfunction
also occurs when there is a sudden change in valvular
integrity resulting in an acute increase in regurgitant
fraction and decrease in cardiac output. If this occurs, a
large portion of the ventricular load is directed backwards through the atrioventricular valve rather than the
semilunar valves of the aorta or main pulmonary artery.
Although this occurrence is uncommon in the general
population, animals that have existing degenerative valvular disease are at an increased risk of suffering rupture
of one or more of the chordae tendinae.
Bradycardia is an uncommon cause of forward failure
and cardiogenic shock but can occur with third‐degree
atrioventricular block. This condition results in diminished cardiac output as a result of drastic reduction in
heart rate (the other main determinant of cardiac output). Regardless of the inciting cause of forward failure,
the end‐result is an increase in the end‐diastolic ventricular volume with subsequent increases in atrial volumes
and pressures. Cardiogenic shock from forward failure
states is often exacerbated by development of pulmonary
edema and hypoxemia.
Backward failure results from diseases that cause
decreased ventricular volume at end‐diastole. Since the
volume of blood pumped out of the heart is dependent
on the volume of blood present at the beginning of the
cardiac cycle, it follows that any decrease in this volume
will result in diminished cardiac output. The Frank
Starling law of the heart states that the greater the volume of the ventricle at end‐diastole, the more forceful
the corresponding contraction has to be to meet the
demand for greater output, effectively tying preload
(end‐diastolic volume) to cardiac output.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

414

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

While it is convenient to consider the heart as consisting of two separate pumps (the left and right), it must be
remembered that the two operate in a dependent manner. The right heart is obligated to pump the same volume of blood that is returned to it from the venous
circulation in the same fashion that the left heart is obligated to pump the volume of blood that is returned from
the pulmonary circulation. This interdependence means
that dysfunction of either the left or right heart results in
a decrease in total cardiac output. Therefore, sudden
failure of one side of the heart will result in dysfunction
of the entire heart and can lead to cardiogenic shock.
Once global oxygen delivery is insufficient to maintain aerobic metabolism, the pathophysiology of shock
at the cellular level is identical regardless of the underlying etiology.

­Epidemiology
Many of the conditions that cause cardiogenic shock in
dogs are chronic, progressive diseases that have an acute
worsening. Myxomatous mitral valve disease can predispose dogs to rupturing one or more chordae tendinae,
leading to cardiogenic shock. Unfortunately, the severity
of valvular lesions is not predictive of risk of chordae
tendinae rupture in dogs so little can be done to predict
which patients will suffer from this condition. When
rupture of a first‐order chorda occurs, patients will often
exhibit acute, severe clinical signs. Rupture of second or
third‐order chordae may result in minimal to no clinical
signs and may only be detected during routine echocardiography or necropsy.
Pericardial effusion is arguably the most common
cause of cardiogenic shock in dogs and can occur more
or less acutely. Chronic pericardial effusion is less likely
to result in cardiogenic shock while acute pericardial
effusion almost uniformly causes tamponade and subsequent cardiogenic shock. Acute pericardial effusion can
occur secondary to a rapid bleeding event from a neoplastic lesion associated with the heart (hemangiosarcoma of the right atrium), or from rupture of one of the
vascular structures within the pericardial sac (atrial rupture in dogs or cats with severe left atrial enlargement
secondary to chronic cardiac disease). Idiopathic pericarditis is an uncommon cause of acute pericardial effusion but is a frequent cause of cardiac tamponade in
dogs. Pericardial effusion in cats is rare and infrequently
results in tamponade.
Canine heartworm disease can occur anywhere in the
continental United States, but the incidence reaches 45%
along the Atlantic and Gulf Coast regions and the
Mississippi River region. Caval syndrome can manifest
as cardiogenic shock when dogs have large heartworm

burdens that mature rapidly. The severity of disease is
directly related to worm burden and patient size and
caval syndrome occurs most often when worm burdens
approach 60–100 although it has been reported with
worm burdens as small as 12.
Tachyarrhythmias can result from primary conductional abnormalities such as arrythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) or may be secondary
to structural changes within the heart, as is the case
with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). In fact, sudden
death due to ventricular tachycardia occurs in up
to 50% of Doberman pinschers affected with DCM.
A rare but severe form of ventricular tachycardia
called Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome can be seen
in dogs or cats with ventricular preexcitation. These
patients are at risk for development of paroxysmal
­ventricular tachycardia due to the establishment of a
reentry circuit that allows for the establishment of a
reciprocating tachycardia and are at increased risk of
developing cardiogenic shock.
Third‐degree atrioventricular (AV) block can result
from progression of a chronic infiltrative cardiac disease,
infectious disease (e.g., Chagas disease), myocarditis or
ingestion of cardiotoxins, including prescription medications (e.g., beta blockers, calcium channel blockers) or
plant alkaloids (e.g., digitalis glycosides). If acute in onset
(not preceded by second‐degree AV block), third‐degree
AV block can result in development of cardiogenic shock
although this is uncommon and usually coincident with
significant structural cardiac disease. Sick sinus syndrome is a disease that occurs primarily in miniature
schnauzers and infrequently in other breeds. It is characterized by periods of severe bradycardia or sinus arrest
with occasional paroxysmal tachycardia resulting in
potentially significant perfusion abnormalities.
Myocarditis is an extremely rare cause of cardiogenic
shock that can be caused by infectious organisms, trauma,
immune‐mediated diseases, and toxins. Infectious causes
of myocarditis include viral (parvo, distemper), bacterial
(various), rickettsial (Bartonella), and protozoal organisms
(Trypanosoma, Toxoplasma), among others. Myocarditis
can induce myocardial failure through a cycle of inflammation, myofiber dropout and fibrosis, the cumulative effect
of which is a clinical syndrome that mimics dilated cardiomyopathy. In general, myocarditis results in a subacute to
chronically progressive form of cardiac dysfunction, but
patients with undiagnosed myocarditis can present with
end‐stage disease in cardiogenic shock.
Rarely, intracardiac neoplasia can result in development of cardiogenic shock by directly affecting blood
flow within the heart itself. Neoplasia associated with
the atrioventricular valves, semilunar valves, right ventricular outflow tract, and right and left atria has been
described. Tumor types that have been reported include

VetBooks.ir

42 Cardiogenic Shock

ectopic thyroid carcinoma, hemangiosarcoma, and osteosarcoma, among others.
Cardiogenic shock in cats occurs infrequently. When it
does occur, it is usually due to cardiomyopathy (dilated
[DCM], restrictive [RCM) or hypertrophic [HCM] with
or without left ventricular outflow tract obstruction
[LVOT]). The clinical importance of LVOT obstruction
in cats with HCM is not fully understood but in cats with
severe LVOT secondary to HCM, the dynamic obstruction of the left ventricular outflow tract can result in significant decreases in cardiac output. A more common
cause of cardiogenic shock in cats is a form of “low‐output” heart failure, usually characterized by hypothermia,
bradycardia, and severe hypotension. This form of heart
failure appears to be more common in cats with RCM
and may be the result of ischemic heart injury.

­Signalment
Cardiogenic shock can occur in a patient of any age or
breed, making it difficult to describe a typical signalment, but because myocardial failure or neoplasia is
often the inciting cause of cardiac dysfunction, these
patients tend to be older middle‐aged to geriatric animals. Pericardial effusion occurs most commonly in
large‐ and giant‐breed dogs, although endocardial ruptures resulting in acute pericardial effusion appear to be
more common in older male small‐breed dogs, with
dachshunds and cocker spaniels being overrepresented.
Young dogs and cats with congenital cardiac abnormalities can develop cardiogenic shock. These patients
are often identified as having a cardiac abnormality during an early veterinary visit and have frequently exhausted
most if not all management options by the time cardiogenic shock develops. Therefore, when it occurs in these
patients, it is usually a terminal, irreversible event.
Canine heartworm disease occurs in middle‐aged dogs
of both sexes. Smaller dogs appear to be at greater risk of
developing caval syndrome and subsequently would be
at greater risk for development of cardiogenic shock,
likely due to the smaller worm burdens required to cause
significant clinical disease in these smaller patients.
Certain breed predispositions for cardiac disease exist
and by extension, these breeds may be at increased
risk for development of cardiogenic shock. Boxer dogs
are much more likely than other breeds to develop
arrythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy while
Doberman Pinschers are considered most at risk for
development of dilated cardiomyopathy. Both of these
conditions can lead to ventricular tachycardia with
­cardiogenic shock. Besides the potential for tachyarrhythmias, dogs with DCM are at risk for systolic failure. Large‐ to giant‐breed dogs are at increased risk for

development of atrial fibrillation. Cats are rarely able to
propagate atrial fibrillation due to their relatively small
atrial mass but cats with severe atrial enlargement due
to cardiomyopathy (Maine Coon, Himalayans) should
be considered to be at risk.

­History and Clinical Signs
A common historical complaint for animals presenting
with cardiogenic shock is collapse or syncope. Owners
commonly describe “seizures” rather than syncope so a
careful history must be taken to determine if intracranial
disease or seizures are in fact a contributing factor. A
thorough history includes the patient’s activity and
behavior immediately preceding and following the event,
state of consciousness during the event, and frequency of
events. Syncope can result from many different cardiac
conditions but brady‐ or tachyarrhythmias and pulmonary hypertension are the most common. Often syncope
in these animals is exercise induced and the occurrence
of syncope at rest should be considered evidence of
advanced disease. If a patient presenting in shock has a
history of syncope or collapse or if the owner describes
exercise‐induced “seizures,” the clinician should be alert
to the potential for a cardiogenic cause of shock. Most, if
not all, patients in cardiogenic shock will present with
acute exercise intolerance or weakness.
Regardless of the underlying cause of cardiogenic
shock, all of these patients will present with perceptible
derangements in perfusion parameters. The mucous
membranes may be pale (evidence of poor perfusion) or
cyanotic (evidence of hypoxemia). Delayed capillary
refill time is an indicator of poor peripheral perfusion. In
cases of severe shock, the mucous membranes may fail to
blanch altogether. Often, the distal extremities will be
cooler to the touch than the trunk. As shock progresses
from compensated to the early, then late decompensatory stages, the mental status will change and the patient
will become obtunded. Patients presenting obtunded to
stuporous are in the late stages of shock and without
timely intervention are likely to die.
As a general rule, patients in cardiogenic shock will
have one or more abnormal findings during cardiac auscultation. Animals with pericardial disease will often
have decreased heart sounds. Auscultation of animals
with myocardial dysfunction may reveal either brady‐ or
tachyarrhythmias. When present, arrhythmias can either
be regular (e.g., sustained ventricular tachycardia) or
irregular (e.g., atrial fibrillation). Cats often have gallop
rhythms although extra heart sounds can be present in
the dog also and usually indicate structural cardiac disease. Increases in adventitial lung sounds (crackles) may
be present in cases with forward failure that results in the

415

VetBooks.ir

416

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

development of pulmonary edema. Occasionally, acute
worsening of a previously detected murmur with or
without development of a precordial thrill is present
and may be indicative of rupture of a first‐order chorda
tendina.
In some instances, as in the case of cardiac tamponade,
the history may be one of subacute progression. Physical
exam findings suggestive of pericardial effusion include
muffled heart sounds, decreased precordial impulse,
detection of pulsus paradoxus (although weak pulses are
also common), and presence of jugular pulses. The finding of ascites and a positive hepatojugular reflex is more
likely to occur in cases of chronic pericardial effusion
and may be absent in the patient presenting with cardiogenic shock.
Respiratory distress may or may not occur as a result of
cardiogenic shock but respiratory failure is rare.
Tachypnea is likely to be present as a result of normal
compensatory mechanisms to improve oxygen delivery.
Significant hypoxia or hypoxemia can occur in situations
such as pulmonary hypertension or pulmonary edema
due to chordae tendinae rupture. For a more in‐depth
discussion on respiratory failure, the reader is referred to
Chapter 39.

­Diagnosis
Unique clinical characteristics of cardiogenic shock
include concurrent hypotension (systolic blood pressure
<90 mmHg or mean arterial pressure <60 mmHg),
decreased cardiac output, and elevated central venous or
left atrial pressures. There is no single diagnostic test
that will confirm the presence of cardiogenic shock.
Rather, the clinician will be forced to reconcile available
diagnostic results (limited by patient stability, availability
within the clinic, and finances) with the patient’s historical findings, presenting complaint, and physical exam
findings to achieve a diagnosis.
When presented with a patient in cardiogenic shock,
the clinician will be faced with the decision about
whether or not the restraint required to perform a diagnostic test is going to be tolerated by the patient.
Unfortunately, it may be necessary to delay or forego
some diagnostic tests that require restraint due to the
tenuous nature of the patient’s condition and every effort
should be made to limit stress to the patient. Staging of
testing can be helpful, focusing efforts on performing
tests in the order most likely to yield meaningful results.
As an example, it would be best to delay collection of
blood in order to obtain even a single thoracic radiograph or an electrocardiograph (ECG). Occasionally, it is
necessary to accept less than ideal results for testing
such as obtaining a single radiographic view rather than

orthogonal views or performing a limited echocardiogram or thoracic ultrasound rather than a complete
exam to preserve patient safety. In fact, thoracic ultrasound can often be performed in the ER with minimal
restrain and can produce repeatable results with a small
amount of training. It is extremely disappointing when
patients die during diagnostic procedures so the patient’s
condition, stability, and the value of the potential information obtained should be taken into consideration
prior to ordering or performing a test.
The use of ECG provides real‐time evaluation of the
electrical conductance of the heart and enables the clinician to determine the source of cardiac depolarization
and if a conduction abnormality exists. When evaluating
a patient with suspected cardiogenic shock, an ECG
should always be obtained. Patients are usually tolerant
of ECG leads placed with either alligator clips or pads.
The goal of ECG evaluation in this setting is to determine which cardiac cells are acting as pacemaker cells
and if electrical conduction is occurring in an organized
fashion. Therefore, patients can often be allowed to
remain in sternal recumbency with minimal restraint.
Evaluation of a lead II ECG should enable the clinician to
answer pertinent urgent questions. A more thorough
six‐lead ECG can be performed if the patient’s condition
is considered stable enough to allow for restraint in lateral recumbency. While the presence of sinus tachycardia will not enable diagnosis of cardiogenic shock (sinus
tachycardia is expected to occur in most shock states
regardless of etiology), the presence of paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia supports the diagnosis. Additionally,
the finding of multiform ventricular ectopy or electrical
alternans may increase the clinician’s suspicion of a cardiac origin of shock.
Radiography is a useful diagnostic tool and is readily
available in most veterinary facilities. When using radiography in the emergency setting, it is important to keep
patient safety in mind, realizing that the quality and
completeness of the study may have to be compromised
to ensure patient safety. Diagnostic radiographs can
often be obtained with minimal restraint. In fact, patients
can often be allowed to remain in sternal recumbency
while a dorsoventral (DV) projection is obtained. A single lateral or DV projection may provide clues regarding
the cause of shock (e.g., a globoid cardiac silhouette) but
orthogonal views are always preferred if possible.
Animals with rupture of a first‐order chorda may manifest fulminant pulmonary edema characterized by the
presence of an alveolar lung pattern while animals with
cardiogenic shock secondary to ventricular tachycardia
may have no radiographic abnormalities.
Echocardiography can be used to diagnose many of the
causes of cardiogenic shock. The minimally experienced
ultrasonographer will be able to recognize the presence of

VetBooks.ir

42 Cardiogenic Shock

pericardial effusion and will likely correctly identify tamponade if present. Additionally, with a small amount of
focused training, the emergency clinician can recognize
acute systolic failure (e.g., dilated cardiomyopathy).
Evaluation of ventricular function and filling pressures in
patients with chronic valvular disease requires more training and is complicated by the fact that ventricular systolic
and diastolic function changes with age and ­disease severity in dogs. The recognition of chordae tendinae rupture,
mild to moderate valvular insufficiency, caval syndrome
or pulmonary hypertension will likely require evaluation
by a veterinary cardiologist. Echocardiography can also
be used to identify rare causes of cardiogenic shock such
as intracardiac tumors.
The use of biomarkers in veterinary medicine is an
area of active investigation. While many biomarkers have
been studied and show promise for distinguishing cardiac disease from respiratory disease or for stratifying
severity of cardiac disease (NT‐proBNP, troponin‐I),
most are not available as point‐of‐care (POC) tests, limiting the clinical usefulness of these assays for evaluation
of the patient in cardiogenic shock. The exception to this
is troponin‐I, which is available as a POC test (iStat by
IDEXX) and has been shown in several veterinary studies to correlate with myocardial injury. A high troponin‐I
level in a patient presenting for shock should prompt the
clinician to further explore the possibility of an underlying cardiac cause. It should be noted, however, that troponin‐I levels have been shown to increase in dogs with
gastric dilation and volvulus and may be elevated in any
patient that has cardiovascular instability. The degree of
troponin‐I elevation is likely greater in dogs with myocardial injury than in those with shock of noncardiac origin. Therefore, the true utility of troponin‐I may be in its
ability to rule out myocardial injury in the acute setting.
Determination of cardiac output would provide strong
support for a diagnosis of cardiogenic shock, especially in
the absence of other possible causes of shock. While cardiac output monitoring technology exists in veterinary
medicine, its clinical use remains limited at this time.

­Therapy
Cardiogenic shock is a unique form of shock that is not
generally responsive to traditional treatments for other
types of shock, (i.e., volume expansion and vasopressor support). In fact, intravascular volume expansion
and vasopressor therapy can be detrimental or even
fatal when administered to a patient with cardiogenic
shock. Rather, cardiogenic shock must be treated primarily by improving cardiac performance and secondarily by altering vasomotor tone (usually reduction of
vasomotor tone).

As with all forms of shock, oxygen administration
should be started immediately upon recognition of the
shock state in an effort to maximize arterial oxygen content as far as possible. Oxygen can be provided by a variety of methods. The use of flow‐by oxygen with a mask
is easy to perform but requires constant restraint of the
patient. This method of oxygen supplementation is relatively inefficient unless a tight‐fitting mask is used.
Unfortunately, animals in shock are often intolerant of
having a mask held over their muzzles and they may
struggle or resist. Holding a tube attached to an oxygen
source in front of an animal’s face is an extremely inefficient method of providing oxygen but, recalling that
perfect is the enemy of good, is probably better than not
providing any supplemental oxygen. Occasionally, animals will tolerate placement of nasal prongs similar to
those used in human medicine. Due to the large size
of the prongs, this is most feasible in large‐breed,
no‐brachycephalic dogs.
A less labor‐intensive way of providing oxygen is
through the use of an oxygen chamber or cage. Purpose‐
built oxygen cages are available but require a significant
financial investment and utilize large amounts of oxygen.
A less expensive alternative is a plexiglass door with a
gasket attached to a standard cage that allows introduction of oxygen through a port. While this method is less
expensive than installing purpose‐made cages, the clinician has little control of the oxygen content and limited
ability to reduce carbon dioxide accumulation within the
cage. The amount of oxygen used in these cages is usually higher than in purpose‐made oxygen cages due to
leakage through imperfect seals.
When providing supplemental oxygen in the acute setting, the highest achievable FiO2 should be used. Once
the patient begins to stabilize, the FiO2 can be reduced to
below 60% to decrease the likelihood of oxygen toxicity
developing.
Animals with confirmed or suspected pulmonary
edema and cardiogenic shock should be given loop diuretics upon presentation. Loop diuretics are rapidly acting, effective diuretics that can quickly improve the
clinical condition of patients with pulmonary edema.
Furosemide (2 mg/kg) should be administered intramuscularly and repeated every 30–60 minutes as needed
until clinical signs improve. Attempts at IV catheter
placement or IV administration of diuretics can be considered but patient safety must always be kept in mind.
Sometimes it becomes apparent that without more
aggressive intervention (i.e., IV administration of medications), the patient’s condition will continue to deteriorate.
If, in the clinician’s mind, the patient is progressing irreversibly toward cardiopulmonary arrest unless such intervention is undertaken, all attempts should be made to
minimize the stress and duration of restraint by carefully

417

VetBooks.ir

418

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

choreographing the steps to be taken. The use of mild
sedatives can facilitate catheter placement in this situation. Administration of butorphanol (0.1–0.3 mg/kg) is
generally safe and is unlikely to have an untoward effect
on cardiac performance. The use of diuretics is not
expected to improve clinical signs in animals with pulmonary hypertension, tamponade, or tachycardia‐induced
cardiogenic shock but is also not likely to result in acute
decompensation.
Medications that increase cardiac contractility (positive inotropes) should be considered in animals that have
documented systolic dysfunction. It must be remembered that positive inotropes not only increase cardiac
contractility but also increase myocardial oxygen consumption. Dobutamine, an injectable beta‐adrenergic
agonist, can be administered as a constant rate infusion
to treat systolic failure. For dogs with strongly suspected
or confirmed systolic dysfunction, dobutamine can be
started at a rate of 2.5 μg/kg/min. The dose is uptitrated
every five minutes until systolic function improves or to
a maximum rate of 20 μg/kg/min. In certain clinical situations, systolic dysfunction cannot be confirmed due to
the patient’s condition or unavailability of echocardiography. In this situation, the clinician will rely on signalment and results of other diagnostic tests to determine if
systolic dysfunction is likely.
Systolic dysfunction in cats can be difficult to confirm
due to their rather tenuous condition when in cardiogenic shock, therefore inotropic support should be
considered in any cat presenting with heart failure and
bradycardia. The dose of dobutamine for cats ranges
from 1 to 5 μg/kg/min and should again be uptitrated
to effect. In some instances, it may be possible to
use pimobendan to improve cardiac contractility.
Pimobendan is a phosphodiesterase III inhibitor and a
calcium sensitizer that increases inotropy while reducing
vascular tone, making it an attractive treatment option
for many causes of cardiogenic shock. Unfortunately,
pimobendan is only available as an oral medication in the
United States, limiting its use in emergency situations.
Administering oral medications to patients in shock
should be avoided due to the stress associated with pilling
and concerns about absorption of the drug from the
underperfused gastrointestinal tract. An injectable form
of pimobendan has recently been approved for use in
Europe with a labeled dose of 0.15 mg/kg.
As mentioned earlier, the use of vasoactive medications
in cardiogenic shock is rare. Almost never,will a patient
with cardiogenic shock benefit from an increase in vascular tone alone. The same cannot be said for decreasing
vascular tone, however. Patients that are likely to benefit
from afterload reduction include those with rupture of a
first‐order chorda tendina or dilated cardiomyopathy – in
other words, patients with forward heart failure.

The most effective medication to achieve consistent,
rapid vasodilation is nitroprusside, which acts by increasing nitric oxide (a powerful arterial dilator) primarily at
the level of the arterioles. Due to the potential for profound hypotension, the use of nitroprusside should be
reserved for patients with confirmed congestive heart
failure and systolic or valvular dysfunction. When used,
nitroprusside is most effective as a constant rate infusion
(CRI) with doses starting at 1 μg/kg/min. As with dobutamine, nitroprusside dose should be uptitrated until the
desired effect is achieved or a maximum dose of 10 μg/
kg/min is reached. Patients being treated with nitroprusside should have their blood pressure monitored very
closely. Ideally, blood pressure is checked every 10–15
minutes until the target pressure (mean arterial pressure
[MAP] 70 mmHg, systemic arterial pressure [SAP]
90 mmHg) is achieved. Mean arterial pressures less than
60 mmHg or systolic pressures less than 90 mmHg should
be avoided due to the potential for additional organ
injury. An early sign of hypotension in patients on nitroprusside is vomiting and if this occurs the patient should
have blood pressure checked immediately and the CRI
rate adjusted accordingly. Fortunately, nitroprusside has
a very short half‐life so discontinuation of a CRI should
result in rapid recovery of blood pressure. Inadvertent,
abrupt cessation of nitroprusside should be avoided due
to the risk of rebound hypertension.
The use of nitroglycerine paste has been advocated in
the past. There is not good evidence to support its routine use and dosing of transdermal medications can be
notoriously difficult, especially in low cardiac output
states where absorption and perfusion are likely to be
impaired.
Sildenafil citrate is a phosphodiesterase V inhibitor that
has been shown to be useful for the treatment of pulmonary hypertension in dogs. While the use of sildenafil is
well documented for management of chronic pulmonary
hypertension, the benefits in the acute setting are less
clear. Sildenafil has a rapid onset of action so administration in a crisis would be expected to result in at least some
improvement in pulmonary pressure. Clinically, this
appears to be the case. As with pimobendan, however,
sildenafil is currently most widely available as an oral
medication and its administration needs to be carefully
considered prior to dosing. An injectable form of sildenafil is approved for use in human patients with pulmonary
hypertension but there are no descriptions of clinical use
in veterinary medicine. When given, the recommended
dose of sildenafil for management of pulmonary hypertension is 1–2 mg/kg PO TID.
Treatment of acute pericardial tamponade involves
immediate pericardiocentesis. Although the possibility
of continued, uncontrolled hemorrhage exists, the morbidity and possible mortality associated with tamponade

VetBooks.ir

42 Cardiogenic Shock

cannot be tolerated. If complete drainage is not achieved,
serial attempts can be made but may not be necessary.
Because the pericardial sac is essentially an enclosed
sphere, the removal of even a small amount of fluid will
exponentially decrease the pressure within the sac.
Observation of the pericardial space with ultrasound (if
available) following every attempt at pericardiocentesis
should be made. Often, the pericardium is lacerated during the attempt and although only a small amount of
fluid is retrieved, tamponade has been relieved and pericardial fluid has been drained into the thoracic cavity
where it is better tolerated. In cases where hemorrhage
cannot be controlled or multiple attempts at percutaneous pericardiocentesis are unsuccessful, emergency
thoracotomy may be required although this should only
be attempted as a last resort when death is believed to be
imminent or cardiac arrest has already occurred.
Treatment of tachyarrhythmias can be achieved
through one of two mechanisms: conversion of the
rhythm to a normal sinus rhythm or control of the rate of
ventricular contractions. Administration of antiarrhythmic medications can be used in an emergency setting to
treat patients with cardiogenic shock from tachyarrhythmias in an attempt to achieve either of these endpoints.
Due to the urgency inherent in this condition, injectable
antiarrhythmics are always preferred to oral formulations. Lidocaine or procainamide are considered first‐
line therapies for the treatment of ventricular tachycardia.
Control of ventricular tachycardia begins with a 2 mg/kg
slow bolus of lidocaine. If no response is seen, a second
dose of lidocaine can be administered. Occasionally,
rhythms that are refractory to lidocaine will respond to
procainamide so if the rhythm has not improved with
lidocaine, a dose of procainamide 5–15 mg/kg slow IV
can be attempted.
Amiodarone has recently been incorporated into the
human CPR guidelines developed by the American
Heart Association for use during cardiopulmonary arrest
as a treatment for pulseless ventricular tachycardia and
ventricular fibrillation refractory to electrical defibrillation. Amiodarone has been used as an oral medication in
veterinary medicine to treat many different arrhythmias,
including atrial fibrillation and ventricular tachycardia.
The use of injectable amiodarone is reported in veterinary patients but has been associated with development
of anaphylactic or anaphylactoid reactions. Due to these
potential adverse effects, it should be considered as a
second‐choice option for management of acute, life‐
threatening tachyarrhythmias. If amiodarone is going to
be used, the recommended starting dose is 5–10 mg/kg
as a slow IV bolus to effect and the amiodarone should
be diluted prior to administration.
Occasionally, dogs will present with supraventricular
tachycardia (SVT) or sinus tachycardia causing cardiogenic

shock as a result of toxin ingestion. For dogs with ECG‐
confirmed sinus tachycardia (with a rate >180 bpm), the
administration of beta‐blockers should be considered
once other causes of shock have been ruled out and the
absence of congestive heart failure has been confirmed.
Due to the need to urgently address cardiogenic shock,
injectable, ultra‐short‐acting beta‐blockers should be
used as first‐line treatment with oral formulations
reserved for patients that have stabilized. Esmolol administered as a bolus of 0.2–0.5 mg/kg followed by a CRI of
50–200 μg/kg/min is preferred. If bradycardia develops,
the CRI rate should be slowed or discontinued. Diltiazem
(5–20 μg/kg/min) can also be used and may be more
effective at managing nonsinus SVT. Because of their
negative inotropic effects, the use of beta‐blockers and
calcium channel blockers should be avoided in patients
with congestive heart failure.
Some cardiac rhythms are amenable to electrical cardioversion using a debrillator (atrial fibrillation, paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia). When used to perform
cardioversion, the energy delivered is generally much
lower (0.5–1 J/kg) than for defibrillation and the timing
of energy delivery must be synchronized with the R‐
wave of the ECG. The synchronization function on the
defibrillator should be activated and the energy dosage
should be selected. Once the synchronization function
has correctly identified the R‐waves, defibrillation can
be performed as usual. If the defibrillator is not equipped
with a synchronization feature then electrical cardioversion should not be attempted as inappropriately timed
delivery of the shock can result in ventricular fibrillation. Heavy opioid sedation or anesthesia should be
used if electrical cardioversion is going to be attempted
on a conscious patient to minimize discomfort associated with the procedure (see description for transcutaneous pacing).
Treatment of cardiogenic shock due to complete (third
degree) AV block consists of temporary or permanent
placement of a pacemaker. Temporary transcutaneous
pacing can be used in emergency situations and requires
little advanced training to be effective. Most modern
defibrillators are capable of performing temporary transcutaneous pacing while temporary transvenous pacing
may require the use of a pacemaker programmer or purpose‐made generator. Transcutaneous pacing is an
uncomfortable experience at best and requires general
anesthesia. To perform transcutaneous pacing, the
patient is prepared while awake. The fur is clipped over
the heart on both sides of the chest at the level of the
costochondral junction. The temporary pacing pads are
placed and plugged into the defibrillator base unit. Once
the patient is instrumented, a rapid‐sequence anesthetic
induction (IV bolus premed followed immediately by IV
bolus of induction agent) is performed and temporary

419

VetBooks.ir

420

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

pacing is begun. Once pacing has begun, the voltage of
the pacing leads is gradually increased until they are
“captured” by the heart. Evaluation of ECG, pulse oximetry or digital palpation of the pulses can be used to verify
capture. Transcutaneous pacing is always a stopgap
measure to allow time for the placement of either a temporary transvenous pacing mechanism or a permanent
pacemaker and should not be considered if these options
are not available.
Management of caval syndrome secondary to heartworm infection often requires direct removal of the
worms from the right heart. The use of a transvenous
approach has been well described and, provided the dog
survives the perioperative period, appears to be very
effective for management of acute caval syndrome.
Surgical management is also the best treatment for well‐
defined intracardiac tumors. Unfortunately, open‐heart
surgery requires total venous inflow occlusion or cardiac

bypass, significantly limiting its availability in veterinary
medicine at this time.

­Prognosis
Published mortality rates for cardiogenic shock in veterinary patients are lacking, but many human studies report
mortality rates of 50–80%. In most instances, the development of cardiogenic shock is a sequela to a severe
underlying structural or progressive conductive disease.
Therefore, both the short‐ and long‐term prognosis
should be considered guarded to poor. Patients that
recover from cardiogenic shock are usually left with residual cardiac dysfunction that is irreversible in nature. The
exception to this may be dogs that are treated for caval
syndrome secondary to canine heartworm disease and
animals receiving a pacemaker for bradyarrhythmias.

­Further Reading
Bonagura JD, Schober KE. Can ventricular function be
assessed by echocardiography in chronic canine mitral
valve disease? J Small Anim Pract 2009; 50(Suppl. 1):
12–24.
Bove CM, Gordon SG, Saunders AB, et al. Outcome of
minimally invasive surgical treatment of heartworm
caval syndrome in dogs: 42 cases (1999–2007). J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2010; 236(2): 187–92.
Brown AJ, Davison E, Sleeper MM. Clinical efficacy of
sildenafil in treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension
in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24: 850–4.
Hall DJ, Shofer J, Meier CK, et al. Pericardial effusion in
cats: a retrospective study of clinical findings and

outcome in 146 cats. J Vet Intern Med 2007; 21:
1002–7.
Humm KR, Keenaghan‐Clark EA, Boag AK. Adverse
events associated with pericardiocentesis in dogs: 85
cases (1999–2006). J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2009; 19(4):
352–6.
Pedro B, Lopez‐Alvarez J, Fonfara S, et al. Retrospective
evaluation of the use of amiodarone in dogs with
arrhythmias from 2003 to 2010. J Small Anim Pract
2012; 53: 19–26.
Yoon WK, Choi R, Lee SG, et al. Comparison of 2 retrieval
devices for heartworm removal in 52 dogs with heavy
worm burden. J Vet Intern Med 2013; 27: 469–73.

VetBooks.ir

421

43
Septic Shock
James W. Barr, DVM, DACVECC
BluePearl Veterinary Partners, Tampa, FL, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
The ability of an organism to mount an inflammatory
response is necessary for the survival of nearly all life
forms. Through the simple interaction of the body with
its internal and external environments, a constant bombardment with infectious agents and minor injuries
occurs that is prevented from progressing to systemic
disease by the innate immune system. This process is
performed successfully on a continuous basis without
any conscious effort on the part of the organism or need
for prior exposure to offending antigens.
Unfortunately, these same mechanisms, which are
protective when functioning normally, can become
unregulated or overactive, resulting in added pathology,
perhaps even worse than the original insult would have
caused. This idea is reinforced by the fact that patients
often die of sequelae to infections or systemic inflammation rather than directly from the primary insult.
The systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS)
is the systemic manifestation of a response to an insult
and may result from anything creating inflammation.
Importantly, this can be the result of a systemic condition (e.g., heat stroke) or a severe local insult (e.g., pancreatitis). While systemic inflammation may be necessary
to combat the initial insult, when left unregulated it can
lead to severe consequences. The presence of certain
clinical findings is used to define SIRS and sepsis in both
veterinary and human medicine. Definitions for SIRS
have been proposed and are currently being used clinically (Table 43.1).
Since there is little difference between the clinical
appearance of SIRS and uncomplicated sepsis, the two
terms are often used interchangeably. When SIRS
occurs due to an infectious cause, the term used to
describe it is sepsis. As a result of these definitions,
it means that sepsis always occurs in conjunction

with SIRS while SIRS can exist without the presence of
sepsis. As is the case with most aspects of veterinary
medicine, sepsis/SIRS is not an all‐or‐nothing condition but rather occurs along a spectrum, the least severe
form of which is a hemodynamically stable patient that
fulfills the clinical criteria. Severe sepsis is defined as
sepsis with acute dysfunction of one or more organs.
Common examples of secondary organ dysfunction
include the development of a coagulopathy or acute
kidney injury. The worst permutation of the septic
spectrum is septic shock in which a patient not only fulfills criteria for severe sepsis but also has hypotension
and signs of shock that are not reversed with fluid therapy and is consequently vasopressor dependent.
Response to Infection or Injury
Innate Immunity

The immune system has evolved into two complementary systems that work together to fight infection and
mitigate the damage that occurs in the host: the innate
immune system and the adaptive immune system. For
convenience, they are often discussed separately, but it
should be remembered that neither branch works in isolation from the other and that cross‐talk and feedback
are constantly occurring between the two branches.
The innate immune system is the portion of the
immune system that is nonspecific and responds to any
insult that may be present without need for preexposure
while the adaptive arm of immunity is a more specialized
system that requires preexposure to an organism or antigen. The adaptive response can have infinite, very specific targets but unfortunately, the delay necessary to
recognize an antigen and synthesize antibodies in order
to mount a response makes adaptive immunity unsuitable as a primary means of defending the host from an
acute injury or novel infection.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

422

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

Table 43.1 SIRS criteria for dogs and cats
Criterion

Cats

Dogs

Temperature

>103.5 °F
<100 °F

>102.6 °F
<100.6 °F

Heart rate bpm

>225
<140

>120

Respiratory rate

>40 breaths per
minute

>20 breaths per minute

White blood
cells/μL

>19 500 or <5000
>3% bands

>16 000 or <6000
>3% bands

Source: Adapted from Brady et al. (2000) and Hauptman et al. (1997).

As a consequence, most of the clinical manifestations
associated with sepsis and SIRS, with few exceptions, are
associated with the response of the innate immune system. It is important to note that the body makes no distinction between these two systems and they function
synergistically. For instance, proinflammatory cytokines
elicited as a result of an innate immune response help to
augment the subsequent or concurrent adaptive response.
Innate immunity relies on recognition by the host of
some very specific, evolutionarily conserved molecular
patterns that are found in association with infection,
inflammation, cell death or all of the above. Pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) are a relatively small set of receptors that are able to recognize a wide range of pathogens,
including viruses, bacteria, and fungi. Many cell types that
participate in immune function, including macrophages,
monocytes, dendritic cells, neutrophils, and epithelial
cells, express PRRs that allow the rapid recognition of
pathogens at the site of infection. Numerous PRRs have
been identified (Nod‐like receptors, C‐type lectin receptors, RIG receptors, and RAGE receptors) with remarkable homology across species in all parts of the phylogenetic
tree. The fact that these PRRs are found in such diverse
species highlights their importance for survival.
The most studied and best‐known PRRs are the toll‐
like receptors (TLRs), which are expressed by many cell
types including macrophages, dendritic, endothelial, and
epithelial cells. TLR activation is generally considered to
be proinflammatory and results in the production of
antimicrobial peptides, inflammatory cytokines and
chemokines, and adhesion molecules, all of which work
together to coordinate the innate response.
As a result of PRR activation, there is a coordinated
response by the immune system to recruit other cells
into the fight against infection. This recruitment, the
actions of the recruited cells, their associated killing
mechanisms, and soluble factors have led some authors
to compare the TLRs and other PRRs to keys on a piano.
When one key is struck alone, the resultant note does
not make a song, but when several keys are played at the

same time and in different combinations, a piece of
music emerges. The appropriateness or lack thereof of
this process is the central driver in the pathology associated with sepsis and septic shock.
Dysregulated Immunity

Once a pathogen has been recognized and the immune
response initiated, there are numerous opportunities for
dysregulation to occur, adding to morbidity and possibly
mortality of the patient. This dysregulated immunity was
considered to be exclusively an overexuberant inflammatory response and in fact, the “inflammation only” theory explains most of the clinical signs observed in septic
patients. It does not, however, explain all the clinical
signs and it has subsequently become clear that hyperinflammation alone does not fully account for the morbidity and mortality experienced by septic patients.
A compensatory anti-inflammatory response syndrome
(CARS) was proposed as an alternative that may occur in
some patients as a result of systemic inflammation. The
CARS theory states that in some patients, overcompensation by the anti‐inflammatory arm of the immune system
results from a combination of excessive anti-inflammatory
cytokine production and, possibly more importantly, from
the death and dysfunction of immune cells. This theory
helps to explain some of the clinical manifestations of
­sepsis/SIRS. It is convenient to consider these conditions
in the extreme as distinct identities but clinically most
patients will lie somewhere in the middle.
Physiologic Consequences

Patients with sepsis can develop shock that often shares
characteristics of hypovolemic, vasodilatory, and cardiogenic etiology due to the actions of inflammatory mediators and their cumulative effect on the circulatory
system. In addition to tissue perfusion derangements,
patients with sepsis or septic shock can suffer from cytopathic hypoxia or an inability to utilize oxygen at the
mitochondrial level. This further complicates understanding the pathophysiology of sepsis and septic shock.
Hypovolemia often develops from vomiting, diarrhea or
bleeding but can also occur due to accumulation of cavitary
effusion or peripheral edema reducing effective circulating
volume. Changes in vascular permeability, vascular hydrostatic pressure, decreased colloid osmotic pressure or lymphatic occlusion all occur in septic patients and result in a
tendency for fluid to move out of the vascular space. As a
result, significant “third spacing” of fluid can occur in the
thoracic or abdominal cavities or interstitium of patients
with sepsis or SIRS. The net effect of this fluid movement is
decreased intravascular volume that contributes to lower
cardiac output and impaired oxygen delivery.
Besides loss of effective circulating volume, sepsis can
induce significant alterations in vascular tone. Because

VetBooks.ir

43 Septic Shock

these patients may have low intravascular volume, compensatory mechanisms are activated in an effort to
maintain blood pressure. To minimize the effect of
hypovolemia on organ systems in nonseptic patients,
systemic vascular resistance generally increases to compensate for the lower cardiac output and maintain
organ perfusion. In sepsis, however, numerous factors
counteract these compensatory mechanisms to the detriment of the patient. This can result in decreased effectiveness of vasoconstriction or, worse, to pathologic
dilation of the vessels.
The most well‐understood vasodilatory agent in sepsis
is nitric oxide (NO). In sepsis and septic shock, inducible
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) produces supraphysiologic
levels of nitric oxide that interfere with myocyte calcium
metabolism and impair the ability of vascular smooth
muscle cells to contract. The end‐result is vasodilation
with a characteristically poor response to vasoconstrictive stimuli, including reduced vascular response to catecholamines. Additionally, the surplus of nitric oxide
leads to production of reactive oxygen species, including
peroxynitrite, which are directly toxic in the local environment and act to cause further damage to endothelium and smooth muscle myocytes. Nitric oxide is also
responsible to some degree for the cardiac depression
found in patients with sepsis or septic shock.
Endocrine abnormalities occur in sepsis and can also
adversely affect the ability of the vascular tree to respond
to stimuli. With the additional demand for vasoconstriction, the neurohypophysis (posterior pituitary) depletes
its stores of vasopressin and is unable to meet the
demand, leading to a well‐documented deficiency in
some septic patients.
A distinct cardiac failure component is present in
some human patients with septic shock but is of unknown
clinical relevance in veterinary medicine. It was believed
that a circulating myocardial depressant factor was
present in the blood of septic patients that decreased
cardiac function. This myocardial depressant factor was
subsequently identified as tumor necrosis factor (TNF)‐
alpha which, together with interleukin (IL)‐1, has been
associated with cardiac myocyte dysfunction. TNF‐alpha
and IL‐1, both potent inducers of iNOS, are now known
to be the offending molecules that lead to sepsis‐induced
cardiac dysfunction. If decreased systolic function is
coupled with decreased systemic vascular resistance, as
seen in septic shock, the cardiac output often stays the
same or even increases although tissue perfusion is
severely compromised. However, if vasoconstriction
persists, as seen in uncomplicated or severe sepsis,
decreased systolic function can lead to a significant
reduction in cardiac output.
Sepsis‐induced endothelial injury affects the lungs by
allowing neutrophil migration into the lung parenchyma

and increased vascular permeability that impairs gas
exchange. This disease has been termed acute lung injury
(ALI) or acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS),
depending on severity, with ALI describing a less severe
manifestation than ARDS. Both are characterized by
acute‐onset bilateral pulmonary infiltrates with no evidence of left‐sided heart failure. Classification is further
determined by the degree of hypoxemia. For more information on ALI/ARDS the reader is referred to Chapter 38.
Significant alterations in normal gastrointestinal function, motility, and vascular permeability result from
inflammatory mediators, altered blood flow, and oxidative stress. This may allow exposure of the bloodstream
to the luminal contents of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract
and allow bacteria access to the bloodstream or lymph,
although the clinical significance and actual incidence of
bacterial translocation are unknown.
Hepatic dysfunction in sepsis is manifested as hypoalbuminemia, icterus, hypoglycemia, and coagulation
abnormalities and decreased detoxifying ability. The
underlying cause of hepatic dysfunction is unknown but
may result from hypoperfusion of the liver, or may be
directly due to the systemic inflammatory process (i.e.,
inflammatory mediators) as many of the constitutive
functions of the liver are downregulated as part of the
acute phase response.
Coagulation abnormalities can be significant and can
lead directly to the death of the patient. Sepsis‐induced
coagulopathy is a manifestation of the procoagulant
nature of almost all proinflammatory mediators. In general terms, the procoagulant state in sepsis causes generation of microthrombi that result in inflammation
within the vascular beds in which they lodge. This systemic activation of the coagulation system finally results
in the consumption of coagulation factors and in the
later stages ultimately induces a hypocoagulable state.
This scenario has been termed disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) and continues to be a significant
clinical complication in the management of sepsis.
Unfortunately, due to clinical limitations in identifying
patients in the procoagulant phase of DIC, this complication is often found in the last stages when profound
bleeding tendencies predominate and it is extremely difficult to manage or reverse.
The discovery of renal dysfunction or acute kidney
injury is an easily identified marker of multiple organ
dysfunction syndrome. Acute kidney injury results from
decreased renal blood flow secondary to systemic hypotension; alterations in renal blood flow from vasoactive
substances, microthromboembolism, and poorly understood renal cellular apoptosis are also believed to contribute. Patients may exhibit a progressive increase in
creatinine and decreased urine production despite normal intravascular fluid volume. Even small changes in

423

VetBooks.ir

424

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

serum creatinine (within the reference range) can indicate renal impairment and emerging multiorgan failure.
The central nervous system manifestations of sepsis
and septic shock may be due to the effects of systemic
hypotension and decreased cerebral perfusion or may be
related to the direct effects of sepsis‐induced cytokines.
Alterations in cerebral blood flow, increased capillary
leakage, and disruption of the blood–brain barrier are
thought to be mechanisms contributing to brain dysfunction in sepsis. In addition to primary intracranial
causes, sepsis‐induced hypoglycemia can cause neurologic dysfunction. The clinical signs seen with sepsis and
septic shock are predominantly alterations in mentation
(i.e., obtundation, stupor, coma) and seizures.

­Epidemiology
The exact incidence of sepsis in veterinary medicine is
unknown. However, sepsis is likely a common occurrence in clinical practice and remains among the most
difficult to treat conditions. According to the NIH, about
750 000 people become septic in the United States each
year with a mortality rate of 28–50%. In fact, the rates of
hospitalization for human sepsis have become higher
than those of myocardial infarctions. The death rate
from sepsis eclipses that of prostate cancer, breast cancer, and AIDS combined.
Despite the difficulty in diagnosing sepsis, there are
common veterinary diseases that can cause a patient to
develop sepsis. Parvoviral enteritis, pyometra, pneumonia, and septic peritonitis are just a few of the diseases
responsible for sepsis and septic shock in dogs and cats.
Septic peritonitis occurs in both cats and dogs and
most commonly results from perforation of the GI tract.
Because of the propensity of dogs to ingest foreign
objects, septic peritonitis occurs more commonly in that
species. Most frequently, perforation of the GI tract
occurs from ingestion of foreign material that physically
obstructs aboral flow or damages the walls of the GI tract
to the point of rupture. Perforation of the stomach and
duodenum can occur secondary to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug (NSAID) administration. Neoplasia
can cause perforation in any part of the bowel.
Disease of organ systems other than the GI tract can
cause septic peritonitis. This occurs most frequently
when a normally sterile organ becomes infected and the
infection extends into the abdomen via perforation or
through translocation of bacteria to the blood or lymph.
Extension of infection from the urogenital tract can
occur because of prostatitis, prostatic abscess, pyometra,
pyelonephritis or rupture of the urinary bladder containing infected urine or calculi. Septic bile peritonitis results

from perforation of an infected biliary tree, most frequently the gallbladder. Less frequently, infection or
abscessation of organs such as the liver or spleen, or
necrotic tissue secondary to strangulation or torsion is
the source. Spontaneous septic peritonitis can occur in
cats with no evidence of gastrointestinal compromise or
other identifiable source.
Numerous other diseases are capable of causing sepsis
in dogs and cats. Penetrating trauma from animal bites is
a common occurrence and contamination from bite
wounds can result in sepsis. Blunt trauma without penetrating injury (e.g., being struck by a vehicle or falling
from a height) frequently results in significant soft tissue
injury that can result in sepsis if infection of the damaged
tissue occurs.

­Signalment
All species, breeds, sexes, and ages can develop sepsis.
Consequently, there is no signalment specific to sepsis
but there are populations that are susceptible to diseases that can be the underlying cause of sepsis. For
example, young, unvaccinated puppies are at risk of
contracting Parvoenteritis while intact female dogs
and cats may develop pyometra. Dogs that develop
septic peritonitis tend to be younger with indiscriminate eating habits that ingest foreign material, resulting in perforation of the GI tract. A report including
nearly 75 000 dogs identified some distinct breed‐ and
age‐related differences in all‐cause mortality, with
younger patients having a significantly higher likelihood of dying of infectious disease or trauma. Geriatric
dogs with chronic, progressive diseases necessitating
treatment with NSAIDs, corticosteroids, or other immunosuppressive medications are also at higher risk than
the general population for developing GI tract perforation. Ruptured neoplasia of the GI tract occurs in both
geriatric dogs and cats.
Lifestyle of the pet can significantly affect the likelihood of developing sepsis. Pets that are primarily outdoors or that spend a significant amount of time outdoors
and unsupervised are more likely to be exposed to injuries that can result in sepsis.

­History and Clinical Signs
Patient historical information often relates to the
underlying cause of sepsis. For example, animals with
septic peritonitis may have historical complaints such
as vomiting, abdominal pain or hemorrhagic diarrhea
while patients with sepsis secondary to pyometra often

VetBooks.ir

43 Septic Shock

have polyuria, polydipsia, and vulvar discharge as
part of their history. Many dogs with septic peritonitis
secondary to gastrointestinal perforation will have a
history of NSAID or corticosteroid administration.
Some of the etiologies of sepsis are subacute to chronic
in nature and subsequently the historical complaints
may be somewhat vague. Regardless of the underlying
cause of sepsis, it is common for owners to report
decreased activity levels and loss of appetite for varying
amounts of time prior to presentation. Travel history,
exposure to any and all medications (including common over‐the‐counter drugs), housing (indoor vs outdoor), and exposure to other animals are all important
historical facts to elucidate.
Just as sepsis/SIRS occurs on a spectrum, the clinical
signs associated with sepsis/SIRS vary depending on the
severity of the condition. By definition, all animals with
sepsis have clinical signs consistent with SIRS. Additional
clinical signs that may be present include lethargy, recumbency, vocalization, or seizures, with some patients even
presenting moribund.
Once septic shock develops, clinical signs vary but are
generally related to deficits in oxygen delivery. Patients
with septic shock can have two different presentations:
they can be in hyperdynamic (compensated) or hypodynamic (decompensated) shock. Hyperdynamic shock
implies that there is greater than normal cardiac output
with vasodilation and these patients will be tachycardic,
have red mucous membranes, bounding femoral pulses,
and warm extremities. Patients in the hypodynamic
phase of shock can be tachycardic or bradycardic, have
weak pulses, pale to gray mucous membranes, and cold
extremities.

­Diagnosis
The diagnosis of septic shock is made by fulfilling the
SIRS criteria and key hemodynamic parameters in conjunction with identification of an underlying infection.
Patients in septic shock will show similar physical exam
findings to patients in shock for other reasons, but there
will generally be additional abnormalities related to the
underlying cause of sepsis. For instance, a patient with
septic peritonitis will have traditional signs of shock
(tachycardia, weak pulses, and pale mucous membranes)
but will also often have abdominal pain and peritoneal
effusion as evidenced by abdominal distension with the
possibility of a palpable fluid wave.
When presented a patient with suspected sepsis or
septic shock, it is important to first gather as much data
as you can. The minimum database consists of a complete blood count, biochemistry profile, and urinalysis.

Abnormalities in the minimum database generally reflect
the underlying disease although specific sepsis‐related
changes could be present.
An inflammatory response is expected on the hemogram, although individual patients may demonstrate
high, normal, or low leukocyte counts with or without
toxic change or presence of band neutrophils. Patients
may have a regenerative or nonregenerative anemia and
may be thrombocytopenic.
The biochemistry profile can often be quite abnormal.
Septic patients have a significant inflammatory component to their disease that can affect blood protein levels
dramatically. Hypoalbuminemia is found frequently in
septic patients as albumin loss into exudates occurs concurrently with downregulation of albumin production
during the acute phase response. Other abnormalities
identified on the biochemistry profile may include hypoglycemia, hyperbilirubinemia, hypocalcemia, and elevated creatinine and blood urea nitrogen. Of these,
hypoglycemia is of particular concern since it contributes to morbidity or mortality if not identified and corrected rapidly.
Imaging studies are often key to the identification of
the source of sepsis. Plain radiographs of the chest and
abdomen are useful for identifying possible sources of
sepsis and the finding of unstructured interstitial to alveolar pulmonary infiltrates, pleural effusion, obstructive
intestinal pattern, free abdominal air, or loss of abdominal detail indicating free fluid should be considered significant and additional confirmatory diagnostic tests
should be pursued.
Collection of free abdominal fluid, if present, is often
the first step in diagnosing septic peritonitis and can be
accomplished via blind four‐quadrant paracentesis or
ultrasound‐guided needle aspiration. Ultrasound allows
the clinician to bring imaging to the bedside and perform
a rapid evaluation of the thoracic and abdominal cavities.
This can help with the initial identification of disease,
and can provide a method to monitor progression.
Ultrasound is particularly useful for identifying pockets
of fluid within the chest and abdominal cavities that can
then be sampled. In clinical practice, ultrasound is more
effective at identifying free fluid than is blind four‐quadrant paracentesis, making it an objective and effective
tool in the ER and ICU.
Once fluid is obtained, cytologic evaluation can
­confirm the diagnosis of septic peritonitis or prompt
the clinician to investigate further. Identification of
intracellular bacteria signifies that bacteria present in
the peritoneal cavity are being phagocytized by inflammatory cells and indicates infection rather than sample
contamination. The finding of even one intracellular
bacterium is significant and is an indication for immediate

425

VetBooks.ir

426

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

surgical exploration. While identification of even one
intracellular bacterium confirms the diagnosis of septic peritonitis, the absence of this finding does not rule
out sepsis. If the fluid obtained is highly cellular (composed of mixed inflammatory cells) or is turbid, flocculent or malodorous then further investigation may
be needed.
Comparison of the biochemical values, specifically lactate and glucose, of abdominal fluid with blood can be
invaluable for aiding in the diagnosis of septic peritonitis. The comparison of glucose and lactate concentrations of abdominal fluid and blood is both sensitive and
specific for differentiating septic peritonitis from other
causes of peritoneal effusion. Under normal conditions,
the concentration of glucose and lactate in peritoneal
fluid is essentially the same as that of blood. As infection
progresses within the peritoneal cavity, bacteria and
white blood cells utilize glucose for energy and produce
lactate as a by‐product. If the lactate concentration of
abdominal fluid is 2.0 mmol/L higher than that of the
blood or if glucose is 20 mg/dL lower in the effusion than
in the blood, a presumptive diagnosis of septic peritonitis can be made and surgical exploration should be
recommended.
Monitoring coagulation assists with identification of
needed therapies rather than identification of sepsis or
septic shock and coagulation assays may be normal or
abnormal in these patients. A prothrombin time (PT) or
partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) that is >50% prolonged indicates coagulopathy. Fibrinogen levels may be
normal, low or high, depending on the chronicity of the
disease. Patients that have a prolonged disease course
tend to have higher fibrinogen levels, but it is not uncommon to find low fibrinogen due to active consumption.
D‐dimers are often elevated as a result of the underlying
condition or inappropriate coagulation (i.e., DIC).
Identification of three of the following in a patient identifies DIC: prolongation of PT or aPTT, hypofibrinogenemia, thrombocytopenia, elevation of fibrin degradation
products (FDPs) or D‐dimers, or documented antithrombin deficiency.

­Treatment
Treatment of sepsis and septic shock must be aggressive
and aimed at eliminating the underlying cause. In broad
terms, treatment of sepsis and septic shock can be divided
into several distinct components: resuscitation, source
control (eliminating the cause of sepsis), antimicrobial
therapy, and supportive care. The resuscitation of a
patient with severe sepsis or septic shock is different from
that of patients with other forms of shock. This is due to

the multifactorial nature of the development of shock in
the septic patient, meaning that in any one patient, low
systemic vascular resistance, cardiac dysfunction, and
hypovolemia may all be coexistent and may all contribute
to failure of oxygen delivery (i.e., shock).
Resuscitation
Complicating septic shock resuscitation is the fact that
vascular permeability may be increased, which can
decrease the efficacy of crystalloid resuscitation or lead to
overresuscitation and subsequent edema formation. The
use of goal‐directed therapy, consideration of other fluids
options, and use of vasoactive agents as well as fastidious
reevaluation can improve the efficacy of resuscitation.
The most important initial therapy in the resuscitation
of a patient with septic shock is the administration of
appropriate doses of IV fluids to restore effective circulatory volume and improve global perfusion. The appropriate amount and character of the fluids that should be
administered are a matter of debate. The author prefers
to give an initial bolus of 20–30 mL/kg of crystalloid fluids such as lactated Ringer’s solution or 0.9% sodium
chloride. This initial dose serves to act as a fluid challenge and will help the clinician determine if continued
fluid resuscitation may be beneficial. If a positive
response is seen, this dose can be repeated 2–3 more
times until one of three endpoints occurs: signs of shock
resolve, there is no further improvement in perfusion
parameters or volume overload becomes evident. Signs
of volume overload include development of peripheral or
pulmonary edema or measurement of central venous
pressures greater than 10 cmH2O.
Colloidal solutions are commonly used as a primary or
secondary resuscitative fluid in veterinary patients in
shock. Colloids have several theoretical benefits, but one
of the most important is that they discourage formation of
tissue edema since they do not move out of the vascular
compartment as quickly as crystalloid fluids. If colloids
are used, total doses of 20 mL/kg are typically broken into
aliquots similar to the technique used with crystalloids
and are administered in incremental 5–10 mL/kg boluses
until endpoints are achieved. Hetastarch (Hespan®,
Hextend™) is the most commonly used colloid in veterinary patients and has replaced the dextran solutions that
were in use previously. A newer generation of hydroxyethylstarchs, generally classified as tetrastarchs, is also
available with a similar dosing schedule.
Patients in septic shock, by definition, have hypotension that is not responsive to fluid loading alone, meaning that vascular expansion has been completed without
resulting in resolution of shock. Determining when
patients are adequately volume expanded is difficult.

VetBooks.ir

43 Septic Shock

One method for determining if volume loading has been
adequate is measurement of central venous pressure,
with a target of 8–12 cmH2O. Many of these patients
will not have a central line in place, in which case lack of
improvement in blood pressure following IV fluid
boluses can be interpreted as evidence that volume
expansion is complete. When this happens, vasopressors
are needed to increase systemic vascular resistance in an
effort to increase blood pressure and maintain vital
organ perfusion. There is no consensus on which vasopressor is most effective and selection is largely based on
clinician preference. The most commonly used first‐line
vasopressors are dopamine (5–20 μg/kg/ min) and norepinephrine (0.05–0.3 μg/kg/min). If normotension is
not achieved at the upper end of the dose range for a
single vasopressor then the addition of a second agent is
needed. Typical secondary vasopressors include vasopressin (0.01–0.04 U/kg/h) or norepinephrine if not
already used as a first‐line agent.
While vasopressors function to increase systemic
vascular resistance and improve perfusion of tissue
beds, patients with sepsis or septic shock often have
concurrent systolic dysfunction. Positive inotropes are
drugs that increase inotropy (contraction strength)
and chronotropy (contraction rate), resulting in an
increased stroke volume and heart rate, and consequently cardiac output. The most commonly used inotropic medication is dobutamine. If evidence of systolic
failure is present then dobutamine should be started
(5–15 μg/kg/min) and the dose titrated up every 15
minutes until endpoints are reached or the top of the
dose range is reached. If dobutamine fails to result in
resolution or improvement in shock then the addition
of a vasopressor should be considered. It should be
remembered that many adrenergic drugs are positive
inotropes in addition to being vasopressors (ex. dopamine and norepinephrine) and the primary effect is
often dependent on the dose administered. For more
information about resuscitation endpoints, the reader
is directed to Chapter 41.
Source Control
Source control is important for the resolution of sepsis
and septic shock and should be performed as soon as
possible after the source is identified to improve the likelihood of recovery. Source control almost always requires
some degree of surgical intervention, ranging from lancing of an abscess to resection of perforated bowel. Good
source control for wounds includes early and aggressive
debridement of devitalized or infected tissue. Dogs with
necrotizing fasciitis may require radical resection of
affected tissue and the use of vacuum bandaging or

application of wet to dry bandages for continued debridement following the initial surgical intervention.
If the septic source is an abdominal viscus such as the
uterus or bowel then laparotomy should be performed as
soon as the patient is stable enough for anesthesia with
the goal of eliminating ongoing bacterial contamination with dilution or removal of already affected tissue.
Similarly, if the septic source is in the thorax (ex. pyothorax or lung abscess) then thoracotomy should be recommended. Pyothorax can be managed conservatively with
placement of thoracostomy tubes acting as source control mechanisms and is reported to be effective 71% of
the time. The decision to manage cases with thoracostomy tubes versus surgical intervention depends on
geography, as well as clinician preference or training. In
areas of the country where inhaled grass awns from foxtails are common, the frequency of surgery is expected to
be higher than that of an area in which those plants are
not found. Lung abscesses must be managed with lung
lobectomy. For cases with severe sepsis or septic shock
secondary to pyelonephritis, source control interventions to consider include percutaneous renal pelvis centesis or nephrectomy.
Antimicrobial Therapy
The early administration of appropriate antibiotics is key
for successful treatment of patients with sepsis and septic shock. Every effort should be made to collect culture
samples before antibiotics are administered; however,
one cannot wait indefinitely to initiate treatment and the
goal should be to begin antibiotics within one hour of
recognition of septic shock. In patients with sepsis without shock, it is often much more feasible to withhold
antibiotic therapy until appropriate cultures have been
obtained.
Ideally, the antibiotic administered would be effective
against the offending organism in question. Unfortunately,
in most cases the antibiotic sensitivities or the identity of
the organism are unknown prior to initiation of antimicrobial therapy. Even when appropriate culture samples
are collected, the results are delayed by 48–72 hours
or longer. Therefore, the initial antimicrobial selection
should be effective against bacteria in all four quadrants
(gram positive, gram negative, aerobic, and anaerobic).
This usually requires the co‐administration of two or
more antibiotics. Unless a clear contraindication exists,
the dose of all antibiotics should be at the high end of the
dose range, they should be given IV, and penetrate the
desired tissue bed. Examples of effective antibiotic combinations include combining potentiated penicillins
(ex. ampicillin/sulbactam 30–50 mg/kg q8h or ticarcillin/
clavulanate 40–50 mg/kg q8h) with fluorquinolones

427

VetBooks.ir

428

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

(ex. enrofloxacin 10–mg/kg q24h) or aminoglycosides
(ex. gentamicin 6–8 mg/kg q24h).
Once culture results are returned, the antibiotic spectrum can be narrowed based on the microbial sensitivity
pattern. The duration of therapy required by septic
patients is unknown and difficult to determine. A useful
guide is to continue antibiotics therapy until one week
after clinical resolution of infection.
Supportive Care
There are numerous additional components that are
integral to the recovery of any critically ill animal. In
­septic patients, nutrition, monitoring, and high‐quality
nursing care cannot be emphasized enough. Diligent
monitoring is necessary for these animals as their status
can change quickly and with little notice. Heart rate, respiratory rate, respiratory effort, blood pressure, hemoglobin saturation, urine production, and blood glucose
should be checked at regular intervals.
Due to the catabolic state that occurs during sepsis,
nutritional support is a very important component of
treatment for these patients. In addition to helping prevent hypoglycemia, nutrition allows for some anabolic
activity to occur and enables synthesis of components of
the immune system. In patients with severe sepsis or
septic shock, dextrose supplementation is often necessary to treat hypoglycemia. When possible, it is always
preferable to provide these patients with enteral rather
than parenteral nutrition. Early enteral nutrition
(defined as consistent caloric intake within the first 24
hours) has been shown to decrease length of hospitalization in dogs with septic peritonitis. This can be
accomplished through voluntary alimentation by the
patient or through the use of feeding tubes. The use of
feeding tubes is becoming more common in the management of critically ill patients as more diets specifically formulated to be used in small‐caliber tubes are
developed. While most feeding tube options require
heavy sedation or general anesthesia for placement,
nasoesophagal tubes are small‐caliber tubes that can be
placed with little to no sedation and are therefore very
useful for providing enteral nutrition to those patients
that are unwilling to eat voluntarily. Although patients
with sepsis as a rule have a negative energy balance, the
goal with nutritional support should be to meet the resting energy requirement. There is little to no evidence
that hyperalimentation improves clinical outcomes and
it has been associated with development of complications including feeding intolerance and hyperglycemia.

Critical illness‐related corticosteroid deficiency
(CIRCI) is a multifactorial deficiency in circulating
­cortisol in critically ill patients. This condition was
first described when it was found that a subset of
patients with refractory hypotension improved following
administration of physiologic doses of corticosteroids.
Initially CIRCI was diagnosed by determining if patients
responded appropriately to an adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH) stimulation test. It was found, however, that even some patients with normal response to
ACTH stimulation benefited from corticosteroid supplementation. This led to the recommendation for supplementation of hydrocortisone in critically ill human
patients with unresponsive hypotension regardless of
ACTH stimulation results and in fact, ACTH stimulation tests are no longer considered necessary for the
diagnosis of CIRCI.
Corticosteroid administration should be considered
only if fluids and vasopressors do not correct hypotension.
If used, the author prefers hydrocortisone 1–4 mg/kg/
day divided q12h or once every 24 hours. Corticosteroids
should be discontinued when the patient is no longer
vasopressor dependent.

­Prognosis
The prognosis for septic shock is tremendously variable
in both veterinary and human patients. Severity and
reversibility of the underlying disease process as well as
the presence of comorbid conditions affect prognosis of
sepsis and septic shock. However, it must be recognized
that the farther along the septic spectrum (toward development of septic shock) that a patient goes, the worse
the prognosis will be. Veterinary survival data are difficult to interpret as the practice of euthanasia complicates
the evaluation of outcome, but survival rates of 50–60%
are commonly reported. This correlates with studies
showing mortality rates of nearly 50% in humans with
septic shock.
Patients with sepsis or septic shock have significant
disease and regardless of the cause, this condition is considered serious. Every effort should be made to set realistic owner expectations with the understanding that the
prognosis is guarded to poor (especially in the case of
septic shock). The financial and emotional cost of treating a dog with sepsis can be very high. The long‐term
prognosis for patients that survive sepsis and septic
shock is unknown although good long‐term outcomes
appear to be common.

VetBooks.ir

43 Septic Shock

­Further Reading
Banta JE, Joshi KP, Beeson L, Nguyen HB. Patient and
hospital characteristics associated with inpatient severe
sepsis mortality in California, 2005–2010. Crit Care Med
2012; 40(11): 2960–6.
Bentley AM, Otto CM, Shofer FS. Comparison of dogs
with septic peritonitis: 1988–1993 versus 1999–2003. J
Vet Emerg Crit Care 2007; 17(4): 391–8.
Bonczynski JJ, Ludwig LL, Barton LJ, Loar A, Peterson ME.
Comparison of peritoneal fluid and peripheral blood pH,
bicarbonate, glucose, and lactate concentration as a
diagnostic tool for septic peritonitis in dogs and cats.
Vet Surg 2003; 32: 161–6.
Bone RC, Balk R, Cerra F, et al. Definitions for sepsis
and organ failure and guidelines for the use of
innovative therapies in sepsis. Chest 1992; 101(6):
1644–55.
Boothe HM, Howe LM, Boothe DM, et al. Evaluation of
outcomes in dogs treated for pyothorax: 46 cases
(1983–2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010; 236: 657–63.
Brady CA, Otto CM, van Winkle TJ, King LG. Severe
sepsis in cats: 29 cases (1986–1998). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2000; 217(4): 531–5.
Conti‐Patara A, de Araújo Caldeira J, de Mattos‐Junior E,
et al. Changes in tissue perfusion parameters in dogs with
severe sepsis/septic shock in response to goal‐directed

hemodynamic optimization at admission to ICU and
the relation to outcome. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2012; 22:
409–18.
Dellinger RP, Levy M, Rhodes A, et al. Surviving Sepsis
Campaign: international guidelines for management
of severe sepsis and septic shock: 2012. Crit Care Med
2013; 41(2): 580–637.
Fleming JM, Creevy KE, Promislow DEL. Mortality in
North American dogs from 1984 to 2004: an
investigation into age‐, size‐, and breed‐related causes
of death. J Vet Intern Med 2011; 25: 187–98.
Hauptman JG, Walshaw R, Olivier NB. Evaluation of the
sensitivity and specificity of diagnostic criteria for sepsis
in dogs. Vet Surg 1997; 26(5): 393–7.
Lisciandro GR. Abdominal and thoracic focused
assessment with sonography for trauma, triage, and
monitoring in small animals. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
2011; 21: 104–22.
Liu DT, Brown DC, Silverstein DC. Early nutritional
support is associated with decreased length of
hospitalization in dogs with septic peritonitis: a
retrospective study of 45 cases (2000–2009). J Vet Emerg
Crit Care 2012; 22(4): 453–9.
Takeuchi O, Akira S. Pattern recognition receptors and
inflammation. Cell 2010; 140(6): 805–20.

429

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

431

44
Disorders of Heat and Cold
Sarah Allen, DVM, DACVECC
Massachusetts Veterinary Referral Hospital, Woburn, MA, USA

­Normal Thermoregulation
Body temperature is closely maintained in mammals
around an optimal set point at which ideal cellular function can occur. This is a complex process that ultimately
results in a balance between heat production and heat
loss. The hypothalamus acts as the main regulator of this
process with multiple sensors throughout the body in
the skin, thoracic and abdominal viscera, and spinal
cord. The body can be viewed as two thermal divisions:
the core and peripheral compartments. The core compartment is well perfused with a mostly constant temperature. The peripheral compartment is composed of
the extremities and peripheral temperature is dependent
on heat transmission from the core via blood flow, heat
conduction from adjacent tissues, and heat loss to the
environment.
Heat is generated by muscle activity and metabolism,
with the brain, heart, and abdominal organs being the
main generators of metabolic heat. Changing blood
levels of thyroxine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine can
change the basal metabolic rate, and subsequently body
heat. Increased muscular activity (i.e., shivering) is also
used as a means of generating heat. Heat retention occurs
by physiologic responses including piloerection and
peripheral vasoconstriction, as well as behaviors such as
seeking shelter and warmth and curling up.
In order to prevent hyperthermia, methods of heat
dissipation are necessary to maintain an ideal body
temperature. The four main mechanisms of heat loss
from the body are evaporation, conduction, convection,
and radiation. Evaporation is loss of heat from moisture
on the body surface. In canine and feline patients, the
main source of heat loss by the evaporative route is from
the respiratory tract, with panting providing a means of
increasing heat loss from the body. Conduction is the
transfer of heat from body surfaces to objects contacting

the body, such as exam tables or cage floors. Convection
occurs when body heat is transferred to the air surrounding
the body and radiation is the transfer of heat from the
body to distant surfaces without direct bodily contact.
In small animals, conduction and convection are the
primary means of heat dissipation. Individual patient
factors that contribute to increased heat loss may include
increased relative surface area in a neonate, decreased
fat insulation in a thin patient, inability to prevent
excessive heat loss to a conductive surface or decreased
heat seeking due to weakness or altered mentation.

­Hypothermia
Hypothermia is defined as body temperature of less
than 38 °C (100.4 °F) and is classified by severity as mild
(32–37 °C/89.6–98.6 °F), moderate (28–32 °C/82.4–89.6 °F),
or severe (<28 °C/82.4 °F). With the onset of hypothermia,
compensatory responses including peripheral vasoconstriction and shivering are stimulated. Once body temperature reaches <34 °C (93.2 °F), vasodilation occurs and
metabolic rate is decreased. Below 31 °C (87.8 °F), thermoregulation ceases completely and if hypothermia is
allowed to continue unabated, death shortly follows.
Primary hypothermia is the result of prolonged
exposure to low environmental temperatures, where the
processes of heat production and retention are insufficient to maintain normal body temperature. Some
patients may be more vulnerable to developing primary
hypothermia due to decreased body condition, increased
relative body surface area or a decreased ability to generate
heat. Neonates, geriatrics, and patients suffering from
chronic illnesses that result in decreased body fat and lean
mass may be more susceptible to primary hypothermia.
Secondary hypothermia is a result of disease, anesthesia,
and/or surgery, or other processes that cause alterations

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

432

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

in heat production, heat retention or thermoregulation.
A common cause of secondary hypothermia in small
animal patients is general anesthesia. Perioperative
hypothermia consists of three phases, starting with an
initial rapid decrease in the core temperature of 1–1.5 ° C
during the first hour. Most anesthetics cause vasodilation, which results in venous pooling and redistribution
of heat from the core to the periphery. This is accompanied by a decrease in the temperature threshold needed
to cause reflex vasoconstriction. This phase is followed by
a slower decrease in temperature over the next 2–3 hours
as heat loss exceeds the rate of metabolic heat production that is decreased 20–30% by anesthetics. Heat loss
during this period is more profound in patients undergoing open cavitary surgical procedures due to increased
heat loss by all means of heat transfer as a result of the
increased surface area available for heat exchange. The
plateau phase is the final phase where metabolic heat production is equivalent to continued heat loss. At this point,
the core temperature has decreased to a point where
vasoconstriction occurs and heat loss is decreased.
The consequences of primary and secondary hypothermia are similar, although patients with secondary
hypothermia are generally more symptomatic at higher
temperatures. In the anesthetic setting, postoperative
hypothermia has been associated with increased mortality in humans.
Hypothermia has many physiologic effects and consequences. One major effect of hypothermia is a decrease
in the overall metabolic rate. This includes decreased
hepatic metabolism, which may prolong the effects of
anesthetic medications and consequently anesthesia‐
associated hypothermia. In the kidneys, hypothermia
initiates cold diuresis due to increased glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and decreased sensitivity to antidiuretic
hormone (ADH). During severe hypothermia, renal
effects can progress to decreased renal blood flow,
decreased GFR and ischemic renal tubular damage,
which can lead to acute renal tubular necrosis.
Besides the effects on abdominal viscera, hypothermia
can lead to a hypocoagulable state due to thrombocytopenia, thrombocytopathia, alteration in coagulation factor function and disruption of fibrinolysis. Hypothermia has
also been documented to cause suppression of the immune
system, resulting in increased surgical site infections and
altered wound healing in human and veterinary patients.
Cardiovascular consequences of hypothermia include
an initial catecholamine‐stimulated increase in heart
rate and blood pressure that increases myocardial oxygen demand and consumption. Hypothermia induces a
left shift in the oxygen–hemoglobin dissociation curve
resulting in decreased oxygen release to the tissues.
Combined with reflex vasoconstriction, this results in
significant tissue hypoxia, especially to the skin and

extremities. During more severe hypothermia, there is
decreased catecholamine responsiveness resulting in
bradycardia and hypotension. Arrhythmias can occur due
to myocardial ischemia as well as myocardial irritation,
with ventricular fibrillation as a commonly documented
rhythm.
Hypoxia is propagated by a decrease in respiratory rate
and tidal volume. While mild hypothermia may protect
the brain from ischemia in cases of cardiopulmonary
resuscitation and traumatic brain injury, in normal
patients the negative consequences of hypothermia are
likely greater than the benefits. Even mild hypothermia
can result in altered mentation due to decreased cerebral
blood flow. Prolonged recovery from anesthesia due
to hypothermia and decreased drug metabolism can
potentiate altered mentation.
Therapy
The primary treatment goal of hypothermia, regardless
of cause, is the restoration of normal body temperature.
The main difference between the treatment of primary
and secondary hypothermia is that since it can be anticipated, the best treatment for secondary hypothermia is
prevention. Prevention of perianesthetic hypothermia
requires close patient monitoring with rectal or esophageal thermometers. Indwelling probes allow for continuous
temperature monitoring.
Prevention of hypothermia utilizes the same therapies and techniques as treatment of hypothermia. Heat
loss can be prevented with passive surface rewarming
in the form of a blanket covering the patient and placed
between the patient and conducting surface. Extremities
can be wrapped in insulating material. Active surface
rewarming increases the temperature of the air and
surfaces surrounding the patient to minimize heat loss.
Forced warm air blankets and circulating water blankets significantly decrease heat loss from anesthetized
patients and should be used on all patients undergoing
general anesthesia of any significant duration (i.e.,
greater than 30 minutes).
Active core rewarming increases the temperature of
the core by introducing heat centrally and can be performed by administration of warmed IV fluids, warm
pleural or peritoneal lavage, warm water enemas, warm
saline urinary bladder lavage, and inhalation of warm,
humidified air. Warmed IV fluids are helpful in preventing
hypothermia but are of minimal assistance in rewarming
hypothermic patients. IV fluids can be warmed to 40 oC
(104 °F) in a microwave for 2.5 minutes (microwave
variation exists and each clinic should verify individual
microwave time) or stored in an incubator for immediate
use. In‐line fluid warmers help to maintain the temperature as the fluid is being administered. Peritoneal and

VetBooks.ir

44 Disorders of Heat and Cold

pleural lavage fluids should be warmed to 40–43 ° C and
are invaluable in rewarming and preventing further heat
loss in surgical patients.
When rewarming hypothermic patients, all these
measures can be employed based on the severity of the
hypothermia. When hypothermia is mild (>32 °C/89.6 °F),
passive surface rewarming may be sufficient. With
moderate hypothermia (>28 °C/82.4 °F), active external
rewarming is required with the main efforts aimed
toward the core region rather than the extremities. Once
hypothermia becomes severe (<28 °C/82.4 °F), active
core rewarming is mandatory. Warm lavage allows heat
transfer from the fluids to the bowel and heart and can
help prevent further decrease in temperature. Heat
transfer is able to occur as long as the lavage fluid temperature exceeds the core temperature, ideally 40–43 °C
(104–109 °F). Warm peritoneal or pleural lavage can be
performed in nonsurgical patients but is technically
more difficult than in animals with an open body cavity
in the operating room. If necessary, a peritoneal catheter
or thoracostomy tube is placed using sterile technique
and 10–20 mL/kg of warmed lavage fluid (0.9% NaCl) is
infused. The amount of time that fluid is allowed to
remain within the body cavity (dwell time) will determine how much heat is transferred. Dwell times should
be of sufficient duration to allow for maximum heat
transfer, with typical dwell times lasting 2–5 minutes.
Transfers can be repeated as needed until the target body
temperature is reached.
Similar to peritoneal or pleural lavage, warm lavage of
the urinary bladder and colon is an option but is of
unknown benefit due to limited surface area available for
heat exchange. However, urinary bladder lavage and
warm water enema administration is less invasive and
does not require placement of catheters within the peritoneal or thoracic cavities. If used, the dwell times,
exchange volumes, and temperature of the infusate are
the same as for the cavitary lavage techniques.
Hypothermic patients require cautious IV fluid resuscitation to assist in restoring blood pressure and effective
circulating volume. As hypothermia progresses, the
decreased affinity of catecholamines for receptors leads
to reduction of cardiac contractility and vasodilation.
This may manifest as a minimal response to IV fluid
therapy and does not automatically indicate the need to
continue volume expansion with fluids in the absence of
ongoing hypovolemia. As the body temperature returns
to normal, rebound vasoconstriction and increased contractility may result in fluid overload as the intravascular
fluid volume is centralized. When IV fluid therapy is
needed, warm IV fluids are recommended so fluid resuscitation does not potentiate hypothermia. The ideal rate
at which to rewarm a hypothermic patient is unknown
but a general recommendation is 1–2 °C per hour. Active

rewarming efforts are stopped once the patient has
reached 37 °C (98.6 °F) to prevent hyperthermia.
Primary hypothermia is less common than secondary
hypothermia. When it does occur, the decrease in body
temperature is generally more severe; however, the
recovery may be less complicated due to the absence of
concurrent diseases, surgery or anesthetic drugs.
With rewarming, there is an increase in the metabolic
rate and oxygen consumption that may not be appropriately compensated for in patients that are hypotensive
or hypoventilating. Supplemental oxygen may be beneficial in preventing hypoxia from this increase in oxygen
demand. When utilizing external warming techniques, a
condition known as afterdrop can occur in which the
core temperature actually continues to decrease as
peripheral vasodilation allows movement of warm core
blood to the periphery and return of cold peripheral
blood to the core. Afterdrop may be prevented by instituting core rewarming techniques concurrent with
external rewarming, and by directing rewarming techniques at the trunk rather than the limbs. At the far end
of the afterdrop spectrum lies rewarming shock, which
occurs when rapid vasodilation from external warming
results in significant venous blood pooling and circulatory collapse. Thermal burns due to active rewarming
efforts can occur if excessive heat is used (>42 °C/
107.6 °F), prolonged contact time between patient and
heat source is allowed, or there is a lack of insulation
between the heat source and patient.
Prognosis
Rewarming complications can affect the prognosis of
hypothermic patients.

­Hyperthermia
Hyperthermia is defined as an increase in body temperature greater than 38 °C (100.4 °F) and can be due to an
alteration of the set point of the hypothalamus to a higher
temperature with deliberate efforts of the body to raise
itself to that temperature (true fever) or can result from
loss of the thermoregulatory balance of the body in which
heat production is increased or heat loss is inhibited but
the set point remains the same. Hyperthermia can be
induced by extreme muscular activity. Sustained exercise,
especially in an underconditioned or overweight patient,
sustained seizure activity or frequent cluster seizures can
induce severe hyperthermia if not controlled.
An uncommon cause of hyperthermia in dogs and
cats is malignant hyperthermia. This is a condition of
disturbed calcium metabolism that is initiated by drugs,
most commonly volatile anesthetic gases, that results in

433

VetBooks.ir

434

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

a myopathy with increased metabolic heat production.
Clinical signs include elevated body temperature and
often muscle rigidity. In patients under anesthesia, an
increase in end‐tidal CO2 may be noted due to the
increased metabolic rate associated with this condition.
Various pathologic conditions, including endocrine disorders (hyperthyroidism, pheochromocytoma), can induce
an increase in metabolic rate and heat production, as well
as decrease heat loss due to peripheral vasoconstriction.
Hypothalamic lesions that result in an increase in the
temperature set point will create hyperthermia.
Prolonged extreme elevations in body temperature can
increase the metabolic rate and demand for oxygen,
water, and calories that may exceed the body’s ability to
supply them. When this occurs, protein denaturation
occurs and resulting cellular dysfunction is manifested
as cardiac arrhythmias, liver dysfunction, kidney failure,
and damage to the gastrointestinal barrier with secondary bacterial translocation. Acid–base and electrolyte
derangements occur due to dysfunction at the cellular
and organ level. Muscle damage from high temperatures
and hypoxia causes rhabdomyolysis, hyperkalemia, and
myoglobinuria, leading to further renal injury. Significant
alterations in systemic coagulation manifest as disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) with thrombosis
adding to organ dysfunction. Consumption of clotting
factors results in inappropriate bleeding that may produce
clinically significant anemia.
Treatment
Treatment of hyperthermia should be directed at correcting the underlying cause and returning the body
temperature to normal through the use of active cooling.
Active cooling techniques include placing the patient in
front of a fan to improve convective heat transfer, removing
bedding to allow contact with cool cage or floor surfaces
to maximize conductive heat loss, and application of
alcohol to the foot pads to enhance evaporative heat
dissipation. These techniques are generally sufficient for
treatment of hyperthermia of less than 41 °C (106 °F) and
should be started on animals with hyperthermia greater
than 40 °C (104 °F). If these mechanisms are ineffective or
if hyperthermia is more severe, then dousing the patient
(wet to the skin, not just the hair coat) in cool water and
placing them in front of a fan is the best way to transfer
heat from the core to the skin and subsequently to the
environment. Ice water should be avoided as it will
induce peripheral vasoconstriction and inhibit heat
transfer from the skin and delay core cooling. Application
of ice water may also induce shivering which can result in
heat generation. Cooling should be closely monitored
and active cooling stopped when the core body temperature is still above 39 °C (102.2 °F)

Hyperthermia secondary to seizure activity requires
aggressive medical management of the seizure activity
with antiepileptic drugs (diazepam 0.5 mg/kg IV) and
active cooling. Treatment of malignant hyperthermia
includes stopping the causative medication, active cooling, and administration of dantrolene (2.5–5.0 mg/kg IV).

­Fever
Hyperthermia in the form of fever is part of the systemic
acute phase response to a pathogen or tissue injury and
is aimed at decreasing the ability of infectious agents to
replicate and survive. The response may be triggered by
a variety of infectious agents including bacteria, fungi,
and viruses, as well as tissue injury from trauma or surgery. Neoplastic cells are also capable of inducing fever.
A substance that is created by the body and induces fever
is an endogenous pyrogen, the most significant of which
are the cytokines interleukin (IL)‐1, Il‐6, and tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)‐alpha. A substance released by an
infectious agent that induces fever is known as an exogenous pyrogen and includes lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
of gram‐negative bacterial cell walls. LPS and other
exogenous pyrogens bind to immune cells and result in
cytokine release and initiate the acute phase response.
Infectious agents also create tissue damage that leads to
the release of cytokines. Once released, cytokines stimulate the arachidonic acid pathway and result in the
production of prostaglandin‐E2 (PGE2). PGE2 is the main
mediator of the fever response through its action on the
hypothalamus that results in vasoconstriction to prevent
heat loss and catecholamine release (among other mechanisms) to increase thermogenesis.
The cause of fever may be obvious based on history
and physical exam, as in the case of an infected wound or
surgical site, or an abscess from a bite wound. If not
­readily apparent, an extensive work‐up may be required
to identify the underlying cause. A tiered approach to
working up a fever is often proposed, starting with a
minimum database including complete blood count,
chemistry profile, and urinalysis. Thoracic and abdominal radiographs with ultrasound are also often included
in the initial work‐up. If these tests do not provide a
diagnosis, further diagnostics including relevant
­
infectious disease titers (based on geographic area),
­
urine culture, blood cultures, echocardiogram, joint
taps, and cerebrospinal fluid analysis may be required.
Treatment
Identifying and eliminating the cause of true fever is the
mainstay of treatment. Therapeutic treatment with IV
fluids to maintain hydration and electrolyte balance may

VetBooks.ir

44 Disorders of Heat and Cold

be necessary. Broad‐spectrum antibiotics are recommended if a bacterial infection is suspected and when
possible, antibiotic therapy should be deescalated based
on culture results. Prolonged fever with no response to
antimicrobials and a thorough, inconclusive work‐up
may indicate an immune‐mediated process that requires
immunosuppression, a viral process that requires continued monitoring and supportive care, or a neoplastic
process that has yet to be identified. Treatment with
antipyretics that inhibit prostaglandin synthesis, such as
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), is controversial as inhibiting the fever may allow continued
propagation of an infectious agent. Possible side‐effects
of these medications in each individual patient should
also be considered carefully prior to their administration. Although uncommon, true fevers exceeding 41 °C
(106 °F) require more aggressive intervention with active
cooling to prevent organ damage and other systemic
effects.

­Heat Stroke
Heat stroke is probably the most common cause of life‐
threatening hyperthermia (>40 °C/104 °F) encountered
in veterinary medicine and results from inadequate heat
dissipation from the body. Classic heat stroke is caused
by exposure to high environmental temperatures, which
overwhelm the body’s ability to offload heat by means of
convection and radiation. The most common situation
causing classic heat stroke occurs when an animal is
locked in an enclosed vehicle where the temperature can
rapidly increase past the outside ambient temperature
due to solar heat and poor interior ventilation. This situation develops more rapidly in larger dogs that produce
greater body heat and have less relative surface area for
heat dissipation than smaller dogs.
Exertional heat stroke is the result of physical activity
in a hot and/or humid environment and is often seen
in working dogs. Increased environmental humidity
decreases respiratory evaporative heat loss while
increased work of breathing promotes heat production
and further exacerbates this condition. Many cases of
exertional heat stroke occur early in the warm weather
season due to lack of acclimatization to the change of
temperature. Dogs with altered means of respiratory
evaporative heat loss, such as brachycephalic dogs and
dogs suffering from laryngeal paralysis, may be more
vulnerable to exertional and classic heat stroke. Obesity
and a thick hair coat can further decrease the ability to
dissipate heat from the body in both forms of heat stroke.
Some dogs may have a genetic resistance to heat stroke
due to increased levels of heat shock proteins (HSP),
which protect and repair essential cellular proteins from

heat damage. NSAIDs upregulate HSPs and may confer
protection against heat stroke in patients that are on
NSAIDs at the time of the heat stroke incident. In fact,
in humans, NSAIDs may be indicated for heat stroke
prevention during heat waves although there is no published research on this in dogs. Importantly, NSAIDs
are contraindicated after a heat stroke event has
occurred due to the risk of negative effects on the kidneys,
coagulation system, and gastrointestinal tract.
The clinical signs of heat stroke depend on the degree
and duration of temperature elevation, as well as a significant contribution by individual patient factors. Diagnosing
heat stroke is often based on a history of confinement or
exertion on a hot, humid day. Most animals will present
with an elevated body temperature although it may be
normal or low, especially if external cooling has been initiated prior to presentation or the patient is in the advanced
stages of shock. On initial physical exam, tachycardia,
panting, and injected mucous membranes may be noted.
Cardiac arrhythmias may be ausculted or suspected due
to the presence of pulse deficits. Neurologic deficits ranging from obtundation to coma and seizure may occur.
Skin and mucous membranes should be examined for
evidence of petechiae and ecchymosis and venipuncture
sites should be monitored for appropriate hemostasis.
Initial work‐up includes an electrolyte panel (including
blood glucose), packed cell volume (PCV) with total
solids (TS), complete blood count, chemistry profile, and
coagulation assays. Common abnormalities include
hemoconcentration with elevations in PCV and TS, elevations in liver enzymes (ALT, AST, alkaline phosphatase,
bilirubin), renal and prerenal azotemia, elevated creatine
kinase, prolonged clotting times, and hypoglycemia.
Treatment
The initial therapy for heat stroke should be aimed at
rapidly returning body temperature to normal and
correcting hypovolemia and acid–base and electrolyte
derangements. Immediately upon recognition of a heat
stroke crisis, owners should be instructed to thoroughly
wet a patient with tepid water. Support staff should be
trained to instruct owners in this crucial step provided it
will not unnecessarily delay transport to a veterinary
hospital. Upon presentation, the previously described
active cooling techniques should be initiated. At least
one peripheral IV catheter should be placed and room‐
temperature fluids administered to increase effective
circulating volume and improve perfusion, enhancing
peripheral heat loss.
During fluid resuscitation, heart rate, blood pressure,
lactate, PCV/TS, and urine production should be monitored to guide therapy. A description of goal‐directed resuscitation targets is found in Chapter 41. If hypoproteinemia

435

VetBooks.ir

436

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

is present (albumin <2.0 g/dL, TP <5.0 g/dL), colloid
­therapy with natural colloids may be needed to support
intravascular volume and prevent third spacing of fluids.
If hypoglycemia is present (blood glucose <70 g/dL), an
­initial bolus of 50% dextrose (0.5–1.0 mL/kg, diluted to
25% with crystalloids) should be administered, then a
­constant rate IV infusion of a crystalloid solution with
2.5–5% dextrose initiated for continued glucose support.
Blood glucose should be monitored and dextrose supplementation titrated to prevent hyperglycemia. If coagulation parameters indicate a hypocoagulable condition
(prolonged prothrombin time [PT] or partial thromboplastin time [PTT]), appropriate blood products (ideally
fresh frozen plasma 10–20 mL/kg) may be indicated. If
bleeding is evident or the degree of derangement is great
enough to raise concern for spontaneous hemorrhage
then plasma is administered as needed until coagulation
times rechecked 1–2 hours after transfusion are normal.
Continuous ECG monitoring is recommended to allow
rapid identification of the development of cardiac
arrhythmias. In patients with severe neurologic deficits
or seizure activity, diazepam (0.5 mg/kg IV), phenobarbital (12–16 mg/kg), or levetiracetam (60 mg/kg) should be
administered to achieve seizure control. If neurologic
evaluation suggests increased intracranial pressure then
mannitol (0.5–1.0 g/kg IV over 15 min) may be considered for possible treatment of cerebral edema although
hyperosmolar agents should be used with care in animals
that have acute hypernatremia, as often happens with
heat stroke. Coverage with broad‐spectrum antibiotics is
advised due to the concern for bacterial translocation
from a disrupted gastrointestinal (GI) barrier. If evidence
of GI injury is present in the form of hematemesis
or hematochezia then GI protectants, including
­histamine‐2 blockers (famotidine 0.5 mg/kg IV BID) or
proton pump inhibitors (omeprazole 1 mg/kg PO BID,
pantoprazole 1 mg/kg IV BID) are indicated.
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatories have been associated
with preventing or decreasing the severity of a heat stroke

episode when given prior to the incident. There is no evidence of any benefit to administering NSAIDs in the face
of an active heat stroke episode and there is warranted
concern for adverse effects on the already compromised
renal, gastrointestinal, and coagulation systems. Similarly,
there is no supporting evidence for the administration of
corticosteroids during or after a heat stroke episode.
Additional treatments are indicated based on diagnostic test results and individual patient needs. For more
information on general critical care considerations, see
Chapter 35.
Prognosis
Heat stroke is a serious condition and the prognosis is
dependent on many factors, including duration of temperature elevation, extent of temperature elevation,
rapidity of initiation of treatment, and development
of complications. Poor prognostic indicators include
coma or hypothermia at the time of presentation,
progressive decline in neurologic status, worsening
­
azotemia, hyperbilirubinemia, persistent hypoglycemia, DIC, cardiac arrhythmias, and pulmonary edema.
Hypoglycemia has been found to be more profound in
nonsurvivors and persistent hypoglycemia despite
treatment with dextrose has been associated with
increased mortality. Increasing creatinine level despite
IV fluid therapy has also been associated with increased
mortality. The presence of nucleated red blood cells at
the time of presentation may indicate more severe heat
stroke and correlates with outcome.
In general, animals with moderate to severe heat stroke
should be given a guarded to poor prognosis. Animals
that survive an episode of heat stroke are expected to
make a full recovery although lasting neurologic deficits
or renal dysfunction may occur. Survival of heat stroke
does not confer protection from future events and owners
should continue to be aware of environmental conditions
to minimize the chances of occurrence.

­Further Reading
Aroch I, Segev G, Loeb E, et al. Peripheral nucleated red
blood cells as a prognostic indicator in heatstroke in
dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2009; 23: 544–51.
Bruchim Y, Loeb E, Saragusta J, et al. Pathological findings in
dogs with heatstroke. J Comp Pathol 2009; 140: 97–104.

Ettinger SJ, Feldman E, eds. Textbook of Veterinary
Internal Medicine, 7th edn. St Louis, MO: Saunders
Elsevier, 2010.
Silverstein D. Small Animal Critical Care Medicine.
St Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2009.

VetBooks.ir

437

45
Acute Poisoning
Ben O’Kelley, DVM, DACVECC
BluePearl Veterinary Partners, Tampa, FL, USA

Veterinarians are frequently presented with patients who
may have been exposed to a toxin. Often the suspected
toxicity is based on known exposure to a toxin. In other
situations, patients exhibit symptoms (such as muscle
tremors, central nervous system [CNS] dysfunction,
spontaneous intracavitary hemorrhage, acute liver failure in the absence of an obvious cause, etc.) that lead the
clinician to suspect toxicity. A basic understanding of
common toxins, diagnostic testing for toxic compounds,
general decontamination procedures, and available
antidotes is important for the practicing small animal
clinician. Prompt diagnosis and treatment of the intoxicated patient can lead to good clinical outcomes while
failure to recognize toxicity may lead to death.

­History
Obtaining a detailed history is extremely important
whenever a patient may have been poisoned. Owners
often fail to recognize a substance as possibly toxic,
especially when the onset of clinical signs is delayed or
the intoxicants are common items. Asking general questions such as “Has your pet been exposed to any toxins?”
may lead to a quick response of “No” if clients do not
identify medications (e.g., ibuprofen, phenazopyridine
[“AZO standard”], etc.) or plants (lilies in cats, sago palms
in dogs, etc.) as toxicants. Asking specific questions may
help to identify a possible exposure. It is often useful to
ask if the patient has been given any medications or
ingested any plants. It is necessary to ask clients about
toxic exposure over the past few weeks, as they may not
recognize the delay between ingestion and symptoms
that can be seen with toxins such as vitamin K antagonist
rodenticides.

­Physical Examination
A thorough physical examination of any patient suspected
to have been poisoned is important. Ensuring a patent
airway, verifying respirations, and assessing circulation
(the basic “ABCs” of examination) should always be the
first part of the physical exam. Many toxins target the CNS
or the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, and symptoms such as
mental obtundation or severe vomiting and diarrhea
may be obvious. Stimulants and cardiotoxins may cause
tachyarrhythmias, bradyarrhythmias, or signs of poor
perfusion, including pale or gray mucous membranes,
cool extremities, and poor pulse quality. Careful physical
examination may uncover subtle symptoms such as pain
on palpation of the kidneys of a patient who has ingested a
nephrotoxin. Cats who exhibit acute, severe muscle tremors often have recent exposure to topical parasiticides
such as pyrethrins or permethrins. Veterinary patients
poisoned by a vitamin K1 antagonist frequently exhibit
signs of hemorrhagic shock, including tachycardia, pale
gums, and tachypnea. Signs of hemorrhage may include
muffled ventral lung sounds, a palpable abdominal fluid
wave, hematemesis, hemoptysis, hyphema, hematuria or
ecchymoses of the skin. If history or physical exam suggests poisoning as a possibility, treatment should proceed
according to a plan designed around the suspected toxin.

­Clinical Approach
Diagnostic Testing
Every patient who is known or suspected of having been
exposed to a poison should have a minimum database
of complete blood count (CBC), blood chemistry profile,

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

438

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

and urinalysis. The urinalysis is often incorrectly omitted
in clinical practice. Failure to perform a urinalysis may
prevent the clinician from uncovering evidence of renal
injury (casturia, crystalluria, etc.) prior to the onset of
azotemia. Once azotemia develops, the window of
opportunity for successful therapeutic intervention may
have closed for some patients. More specific diagnostic
testing may be recommended on a case‐by‐case basis,
depending on the specific toxin suspected. For instance,
blood ethylene glycol testing and determination of anion
gap and measurement of blood osmolality (if possible)
are recommended if ethylene glycol ingestion is suspected. Coagulation testing, such as prothrombin time
(PT) and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT),
is recommended for suspected cases of rodenticide
ingestion.
The use of urine testing kits for illicit drug intoxication in veterinary patients has been described. One study
comparing urine test screen results with the gold standard
of urine toxin detection (gas chromatography/mass
spectrometry) found that an on‐site urine toxin screen
(QuickScreen Pro Multi‐Drug Screening Test) accurately
detected the presence of amphetamines, barbiturates,
benzodiazepines, and opiates in canine urine but did not
reliably detect THC (the main psychoactive substance in
marijuana) or methadone.
Certain Exposure to a Known Toxin
When a patient is known to have ingested a specific
substance, the clinician has a unique opportunity to
intervene. Contacting an animal poison control service
(such as the Animal Poison Control Center Hotline
[888‐426‐4435] or Pet Poison Helpline [855‐764‐7661])
provides access to a database containing all known
pharmacokinetics of the toxin, including toxic dose,
routes of metabolism, and excretion. Expected symptoms and recommended therapies to offset the toxicity
are also provided by these hotlines. A one‐time fee is
charged by the providers of these services.
If contacting a poison control center is not an
option, an internet‐based search utilizing a veterinary‐
specific network (such as the Veterinary Information
Network [VIN.com]) often provides much of the same
information. Even a search of free, nonveterinary
websites such as www.pubmed.gov can help locate
useful information or publications regarding treatment of a known toxin. If the toxin is a manufactured
product (i.e., not a naturally occurring toxin such as a
plant), the manufacturer of the product can be contacted. The manufacturer will have information
regarding the toxic potential of the substance and
may be able to provide treatment recommendations
based on the type of exposure.

When considering the approach to a patient known
to have ingested a toxin, many factors must be considered. If a patient is asymptomatic, the clinician must
consider the likelihood of toxic symptoms developing.
Although the exact dosage of toxin exposure is not
always known, treatment should proceed according to
the maximum possible dose. Let us consider, for example, an 80‐pound Labrador retriever with exposure to a
bottle of 200 mg ibuprofen tablets. The bottle initially
contained 100 tablets, but it had been opened prior to
this exposure. Twenty tablets were counted following
the ingestion but the owner is unsure how many tablets
are missing. In this scenario, the clinician should
approach the treatment of the dog as if 80 of the tablets
were ingested, constituting a toxic exposure dose of
220 mg/kg, even though the actual exposure was likely
less than this amount. Ibuprofen dosages above 125 mg/kg
have been reported to cause acute kidney injury in
dogs, so the clinician in this case should warn the client
of this risk and treat accordingly.
Every attempt should be made to establish a likely
timeline of exposure. When the development of significant symptomatic toxicity is a possibility, decontamination should be considered. Ingestion is the most common
route of toxin exposure so GI decontamination is often
needed. GI decontamination is no longer recommended
for every case of ingestion of a known toxin, but decontamination should be considered if there is a likelihood
of toxic symptoms developing (see “GI decontamination”
later in this chapter).
When the specific toxin and dosage are known and
symptoms are expected or present, available antidotes
should be administered as soon as possible. Timely
administration of an antidote following toxin exposure
is of utmost importance. Examples of common toxins for
which antidotes exist include ethylene glycol, anticoagulant
rodenticides, organophosphates, acetaminophen, and
opioids.
Two Common Examples: Timing is Everything

An in‐depth discussion of all known toxins is beyond
the scope of this chapter, but vitamin K antagonist anticoagulant rodenticides and ethylene glycol are two of
the most common toxins encountered in small animal
practice. The importance of establishing a timeline of
exposure whenever possible is highlighted by these two
poisons, because a successful outcome following intoxication depends on timely diagnosis and intervention.
Vitamin K1 antagonists inhibit activation of the vitamin K‐dependent clotting factors II, VII, IX, X, protein C
and S. These toxins typically take up to 48 hours to cause
prolongation in clotting times; clinical symptoms of
bleeding may take 4–5 days or longer to develop. Factor
VII has a significantly shorter half‐life than factors II, IX,

VetBooks.ir

45 Acute Poisoning

and X, so factor VII depletion results in the initial clotting
test abnormalities detected in animals with anticoagulant rodenticide ingestion. However, significant hemorrhage does not begin until factor II depletion occurs
3–4 days after toxin ingestion. Diagnosing anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity in the initial 3–4 days following
exposure allows for successful treatment prior to major
bleeding.
Many patients present for veterinary care very shortly
(e.g., one hour) after ingestion of anticoagulant rodenticide.
Unless a concurrent disorder of hemostasis is suspected
or clinical bleeding is present, coagulation testing is
unnecessary in these patients as long as the client is
absolutely certain that exposure occurred recently (e.g.,
within the past few hours). If exposure has occurred
more than 24 hours prior to presentation, or if timing of
exposure is unknown, diagnostic testing is indicated.
Common testing recommended for anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity includes packed cell volume (PCV), total
solids (TS), and clotting times (PT and aPTT). Activated
clotting time (ACT) can be tested if PT and aPTT are
unavailable. PT prolongation, which usually occurs
48 hours after ingestion, occurs prior to aPTT prolongation due to the short half‐life of factor VII (6.2 hours)
compared with factor II, IX, and X. aPTT prolongation
is typically seen after depletion of factor IX, whose half‐
life is 13.9 hours. Prolongation of both PT and aPTT is
expected prior to significant clinical bleeding following
anticoagulant rodenticide exposure. These different test
results at various time points after ingestion of anticoagulant rodenticide highlight the critical importance of
establishing a timeline of exposure whenever possible.
The “proteins induced by vitamin K antagonism” (PIVKA)
test and specific blood tests for anticoagulant rodenticide
levels are typically not useful in the acute diagnosis and
treatment of the routine small animal patient with anticoagulant rodenticide ingestion because plasma samples
must be sent to a diagnostic lab and there is delay in test
results. These tests may be indicated when anticoagulant
rodenticide toxicity is suspected but the patient has no
known exposure; however, samples must be collected
prior to treatment, and the clinician must proceed with
treatment before test results are available.
Treatment for a patient exposed to anticoagulant
rodenticide invariably involves enteral or parenteral
vitamin K1 therapy, but the timeline of exposure and
symptoms dictates the specific therapeutic plan for each
patient. Vitamin K1 (2.5–5 mg/kg/day IM, SC, or PO for
up to six weeks) can be started orally in the asymptomatic patient with recent exposure (<48 hours ago).
If more than 48 hours have passed since exposure and
coagulation tests are prolonged, but clinical bleeding is
not observed, a single dose of parenteral vitamin K1
can be given prior to starting oral vitamin K1 therapy.

Patients experiencing clinical bleeding secondary to
vitamin K antagonists should be treated with fresh
­frozen plasma (FFP) transfusion in addition to parenteral vitamin K1 administration.
Patients who may have ingested ethylene glycol (EG)
present a unique clinical challenge due to the extremely
time‐sensitive and dangerous nature of this toxicity. Cats
exposed to EG less than three hours prior to presentation (and dogs exposed less than eight hours prior to
presentation) must be aggressively tested and/or treated.
The presence of EG can be proven by blood tests, but
available tests are imperfect. Bedside tests include the
Kacey Ethylene Glycol Test Strips (Kacey Inc., Asheville,
NC) and the Catachem VetSpec Ethylene Glycol
Qualitative Test Kit (Catachem Inc., Oxford, CT). These
tests are subjective and based on visual determination of
color change, and the presence of other substances such
as proplylene glycol or ethanol may cause false‐positive
test results. The results of two small studies led to some
concern regarding the sensitivity and specificity of these
tests. One study evaluating the Kacey Ethylene Glycol
Test Strips published in 2008 reported a sensitivity of
only 56–67% for detection of 20 mg/dL EG (a potentially
lethal dose for cats) in blood. This study also reported a
specificity of 25–50% for detection of 80 mg/dL EG in
blood. The authors of the study concluded that the test
should not be used as a sole determinant of intoxication
due to the risk of both false‐positive and false‐negative
results.
The results of a second study were published in 2014 in
the Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care.
This study compared the Kacey Ethylene Glycol Test to
the Catachem VetSpec Etylene Glycol Qualitative Test
Kit. EG was added to canine blood at concentrations
ranging from 0 to 100 mg/dL, and 30 samples were evaluated separately by two individuals. The tests were
assigned a score of less than 20 mg/dL, 20–50 mg/dL, or
greater than 50 mg/dL. Sensitivity and specificity were
100% for the Kacey test, with good agreement between
two readers. In this study the VetSpec test performed
less well. Sensitivity and specificity were only 65%
and 70% respectively for one reader and 95% and 40% for
the other.
A separate publication evaluated an EG test kit
designed for use on a chemistry analyzer found in major
clinical pathology laboratories (the Hitachi P‐modular
800 chemistry analyzer). This test was found to accurately measure blood EG, and results were not significantly altered by the presence of propylene glycol.
Although the development and assessment of new
tests continue, most veterinary hospitals do not, at this
time, have a reliably sensitive and specific way to measure blood EG levels. Woods’ lamp evaluation of the oral
cavity, face, vomitus, and urine can provide evidence of

439

VetBooks.ir

440

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

exposure to EG since many formulations contain a fluorescent dye. Unfortunately, since some formulations do
not contain added dye, Woods’ lamp evaluation cannot
be used as a sole diagnostic test. Diagnosis of EG toxicity
must therefore be made based on clinical suspicion and
the presence of certain findings on any of the following
tests: osmole gap, anion gap, urinalysis (calcium oxalate
crystalluria), blood chemistry, or abdominal ultrasonography. Ethylene glycol is an effective osmole, and
the presence of significant ethylene glycol levels in the
blood can result in neurologic symptoms (e.g., ataxia
and stupor) due to hyperosmolality.
The presence of significant amounts of EG in the
blood leads to an increase in the “osmole gap,” which is
the difference between measured blood osmolality and
calculated blood osmolality (equation 1).
Osmole gap Measured osmolality Calculated osmolality
(Eq. 1)

Osmolality can be estimated using equation 2.
1.86

Na K

BUN/ 2.8

Glu/ 18 / 0.93 (Eq. 2)

The normal whole‐blood osmole gap has been reported
as 3.49 mOsm and the normal plasma osmole gap as
–2.01 mOsm. A significant increase in the osmole gap in
a patient who may have been exposed to EG or who is
showing symptoms should raise clinical suspicion for EG
poisoning.
Fatalities due to EG toxicity are caused by acute renal
failure as EG metabolism leads to accumulation of
­metabolic acids such as glycolic and oxalic acid. This accumulation leads to a metabolic acidosis and an ­elevated
anion gap (AG) seen at approximately three hours after
ingestion, peaking at six hours, and lasting up to 48 hours.
AG can be determined using equation 3.
Anion gap

Na

K

Cl

HCO3

(Eq. 3)

Normal AG is 12–24 mEq/L in dogs and 13–27 mEq/L
in cats. An elevated AG indicates accumulation of
unmeasured anions. An elevated AG is not specific to
EG intoxication, but an elevated AG 3–6 hours or more
after possible exposure to EG may be considered a sign
of EG exposure. The oxalic acid formed during metabolism of EG binds calcium, resulting in calcium oxalate
monohydrate crystalluria as early as three hours after
ingestion in cats (six hours in dogs).
In some cases, EG toxicity may not be diagnosed
prior to the development of oligoanuric renal failure.
Progressive azotemia may help establish a diagnosis of
EG poisoning, but this finding almost always indicates a
grave prognosis. Diagnosis of EG toxicity must be made
prior to the development of azotemia to allow the best
chance at survival. The different clinicopathologic find-

ings at different time points following EG ingestion again
demonstrate how important it is to establish a timeline
of possible exposure.
The treatment of EG toxicity is similarly dependent on
timing of exposure. Definitive treatment of EG ingestion
revolves around preventing accumulation of toxic metabolites. Metabolism of EG to glycolic acid by the enzyme
alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) is the most important step
in the development of EG toxicity. Veterinary patients
have traditionally been treated with IV ethanol administration. Ethanol is metabolized by ADH, and ADH has a
higher affinity for ethanol than EG. Administration of
ethanol, therefore, can limit glycolic acid accumulation.
At the same time, high rates of IV fluids can be given to
drive urinary excretion of unmetabolized EG molecules.
Ethanol administration can be an effective treatment for
EG ingestion, but long courses of treatment are needed
and side‐effects (including hyperosmolality, CNS signs
such as sedation, and GI signs such as vomiting) are frequently observed. ADH inhibitors such as 4‐methylpyrazole (4‐MP, also known as fomepazole) prevent
metabolism of EG to toxic metabolites while offering less
risk of side‐effects than ethanol. The primary drawbacks
to 4‐MP are limited availability and relatively high cost
compared with ethanol. Cats require very high doses of
4‐MP compared with dogs, making cats more likely to
develop side‐effects such as CNS depression and ataxia
following treatment with 4‐MP. Treatment of cats with
ADH inhibition using ethanol or 4‐MP is typically ineffective if not begun within three hours of ingestion,
whereas treatment of dogs is typically successfully if
started within eight hours of ingestion.
Hemodialysis is a very effective treatment for removal
of EG and glycolic acid; 90–95% of circulating EG can be
removed in a single hemodialysis session. Intermittent
hemodialysis may also effectively treat azotemia and
hyperkalemia in patients with acute kidney injury from
EG toxicity, allowing time to determine if recovery of
kidney function occurs over the span of several weeks.
Regardless of the mode of treatment, prompt intervention is of utmost importance due to the time‐dependent
nature of this lethal toxin.
Uncertain Exposure to a Known Toxin
When treating a patient who may or may not have been
exposed to a known toxic substance, the clinician must
formulate a diagnostic testing and treatment plan based
on the presence or absence of clinical symptoms, the
likelihood of clinical symptoms developing if toxic
exposure did in fact occur, and the danger of the toxin
involved. The clinician should consider contacting an
animal poison control center to obtain the most extensive
and up‐to‐date information regarding the probability of
toxicity from any possible exposure to the substance in

VetBooks.ir

45 Acute Poisoning

question. Patients exhibiting symptoms consistent with
toxicity from the substance should be treated as if they
have been poisoned, even if exposure cannot be completely confirmed. If symptoms of toxicity are not present and the possible toxicity is not life‐threatening, then
a “wait and see” approach of close monitoring may be all
that is needed. If signs of toxicity are not present, but the
toxin to which the patient was possibly exposed carries
some risk of significant morbidity, then decontamination
(see “Decontamination” later in this chapter) should be
considered if appropriate, and close monitoring should
be recommended. If the possible exposure involves a
toxin conferring serious risk of organ failure and/or
death, then aggressive testing to confirm or rule out
exposure is recommended. Decontamination and treatment should also be instituted, even if toxic exposure
cannot be definitively confirmed.
Certain Exposure to an Unknown Substance
Frequently, small animal veterinarians are presented with
a patient who was observed to lick, ingest or otherwise
contact an unknown substance. This situation typically
involves ingestion of a plant while outdoors. A good
familiarity with the local flora will prove useful to the
clinician in this instance. Even if the client has obtained a
sample of the ingested plant, it may be difficult or impossible for the clinician to identify whether or not the plant
is dangerous. If clinical symptoms are present and consistent with a poison known to be present in the local
environment, then treatment should proceed as if the
poisonous compound in question caused the symptoms.
One commonly encountered situation utilizing this
approach is the young, otherwise healthy dog presented
for muscle tremors after being exposed to rotten food or
compost. In this situation, the clinician cannot be completely certain that there has been toxin ingestion, and
even if ingestion is strongly suspected, the exact toxic
compound is unclear. The patient in this scenario is typically assumed to have ingested a tremorgenic mycotoxin.
Diagnostic testing of the patient should aim to rule out
other causes of muscle tremors (hypocalcemia, hypoglycemia, etc.). Once these other common causes have been
ruled out, treatment of this patient should involve centrally acting muscle relaxants such as methocarbamol
and supportive measures such as IV fluids to prevent
dehydration resulting from increased muscle activity in a
patient who is unable to drink properly. The client should
be informed that tremorgenic mycotoxin toxicity is
suspected but cannot be confirmed. If initial diagnostic
testing reveals no obvious cause of the symptoms, and if
symptoms do not improve over 24–48 hours despite
appropriate treatment for tremorgenic mycotoxin toxicity,
then further diagnostic testing is recommended to search
for a separate cause of the muscle tremors.

­Decontamination
Topical Decontamination
Topical exposure to a toxin most often involves parasiticides such as permethrins or pyrethrins. Patients with
topical poison exposure should be bathed thoroughly
in a mild soap (such as Dawn® liquid dishsoap) as soon
as safely possible. Minimum protective equipment for
veterinary personnel should include rubber gloves. Eye
protection and a rubber apron may be needed, depending
on the nature of the toxin involved.
Ocular Decontamination
Eye injury may occur when ocular surfaces contact a
caustic irritant. The resultant corneal damage can be
minor (only resulting in discomfort) or severe enough to
cause melting corneal ulceration. The pH of the ocular
irritant strongly influences the severity of corneal injury.
Acid compounds injure the corneal epithelium, but alkaline compounds are associated with more severe damage
and a higher likelihood of anterior chamber changes and
permanent vision impairment. The pH of an ocular
irritant can be checked by applying litmus paper to the
conjunctival fornix. This may help the clinician prepare
the client for the likelihood of severe damage.
Regardless of the specific chemical toxin, the degree of
damage is also related to the duration of exposure, so the
eye must be flushed as soon as possible. Continuous
flushing of the cornea should continue for at least
15 minutes following ocular surface exposure to a toxin;
many resources recommend a full 20–30 minutes of
flushing. The eye can be flushed using a balanced fluid
such as 0.9% NaCl or lactated Ringer’s solution (LRS). Tap
water is an acceptable flushing solution, but the hypoosmolality of tap water may contribute to corneal edema
formation following toxic injury. Bottles of eye wash solution are typically too small (i.e., contain too little volume)
to effectively flush the surface of the eye for 15 minutes
or longer. The damage caused by severe chemical burns
of the cornea can be reduced by using buffered eye wash
solutions such as Diphoterine®, but these solutions are
not available in most veterinary hospitals.
Gastrointestinal Decontamination
Emesis

Induction of emesis may be indicated whenever a toxin
has been ingested and may still be in the stomach. If
ingestion has occurred within the previous 4–6 hours, it
is reasonable to consider inducing emesis. While usually
a safe procedure, there are potential risks associated
with inducing emesis, including aspiration pneumonia
and esophageal or oropharyngeal injury. In general,

441

VetBooks.ir

442

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

only asymptomatic patients should be made to vomit, as
the risk for aspiration pneumonia is greatly increased by
CNS dysfunction or neuromuscular weakness. The risk
of esophageal or oropharyngeal injury is increased if
large or sharp objects have been ingested along with the
toxin. Though uncommon, these possible complications
must be considered and discussed with the client when
deciding whether or not to induce emesis in a patient
that has ingested a toxin. Patients that have ingested
caustic substances (e.g., bleach) or hydrocarbons (e.g.,
gasoline) should never be made to vomit. Ingestion of
zinc phosphide rodenticide leads to liberation of phosphine
gas in the acidic environment of the stomach; induction
of emesis following zinc phosphide rodenticide must be
done carefully in a well‐ventilated area (ideally, outdoors)
to reduce the risk of dangerous phosphine gas inhalation
by veterinary staff.
Hydrogen peroxide and apomorphine are the two
most common agents used to induce emesis in dogs.
Due to an increased risk of side‐effects, the use of syrup
of ipecac, sodium chloride salt, dishwashing liquid or
mustard powder is not recommended. Inducing emesis
is typically easy in canine patients. Hydrogen peroxide
(3%) can be given PO at a dose of 2.2 mL/kg (up to
a maximum of 45 mL) and repeated if vomiting has
not occurred within 10–15 minutes of administration.
Hydrogen peroxide causes vomiting by acting as a
local irritant in the oropharynx and stomach. Rarely,
protracted vomiting can occur after administration.
­
Occasionally, mild side‐effects such as lethargy and diarrhea can occur. Very rare instances of symptomatic gastric
ulceration or even gastric dilation and volvulus (GDV)
have been anecdotally reported following administration
of hydrogen peroxide. A prospective observational study
reported a relatively low incidence of mild side‐effects
(14%) in 70 clinical canine patients following induction
of emesis using hydrogen peroxide; no serious or life‐
threatening side‐effects were reported in this study.
Apomorphine is a centrally acting emetic agent that
reliably induces emesis in dogs by stimulation of the
chemoreceptor trigger zone. It can be given as a 0.03–
0.04 mg/kg intramuscular (IM) or IV injection. Vomiting
typically occurs soon after apomorphine injection.
If vomiting does not occur, dosing can be repeated once
or twice more, but the drug may depress the vomiting
center in the medulla, so repeat administration may be
unlikely to induce vomiting if the first dose was unsuccessful. Conjunctival application of apomorphine is also
a very effective way of inducing emesis in dogs. The conjunctiva should be thoroughly flushed after emesis to
limit further absorption of apomorphine and decrease
the risk of CNS depression or protracted vomiting. PO
administration of apomorphine to induce emesis is not
recommended due to slow absorption and high first‐pass

clearance by the liver. If prolonged vomiting occurs after
apomorphine treatment, administration of an injectable
antiemetic (e.g. maropitant, metoclopramide, or ondansetron) is indicated. Rarely, significant sedation will
occur after apomorphine administration. The sedative
effects of apomorphine can be reversed using naloxone.
Induction of emesis in cats is more challenging than in
dogs. Injectable administration of an alpha‐2‐adrenergic
agonist is currently the method of choice. Xylazine
is commonly given at a dose of 0.44 mg/kg IM for
this ­
purpose; as much as 1.1 mg/kg can be given.
Dexmedetomidine (20–40 μg/kg IM) can also be used.
One major drawback to the use of alpha‐2‐adrenergic
agonists for this purpose is that profound sedation
may occur. Reversal of the alpha‐2‐adrenergic agonist
using yohimbine (0.1 mg/kg IM or IV) or atipamezole
(50 μg/kg IM) is recommended following emesis to prevent sedation from interfering with interpretation of
symptoms of poisoning.
Gastric Lavage

When induction of emesis is unsuccessful or contraindicated and an ingested toxicant is likely to cause significant morbidity or mortality, gastric lavage may be
considered. Gastric lavage should always be done under
general anesthesia (unless the patient is already unconscious), and a cuffed endotracheal tube should always be
placed to guard the airway against aspiration of gastric
contents. Lavage is performed using warm (body temperature) water given through a large orogastric tube, keeping
the head below the level of the chest throughout the procedure to discourage aspiration of gastric contents (which
can occur even in the presence of a cuffed endotracheal
tube). Initial lavage volumes are typically 5–10 ml/kg, and
lavage is repeated until the fluid obtained from the stomach is completely clear. If indicated, a dose of activated
charcoal can then be given through the orogastric tube
prior to its removal. The tube should be kinked in more
than one place during removal from the stomach to prevent fluid within the tube from spilling into the airway.
Gastric lavage carries risks, including anesthesia and
aspiration pneumonia; careful consideration of the
­
risk:benefit ratio must ­precede this intervention.
GI Adsorption

Activated charcoal (AC) has been, and will likely continue to be, one of the most common treatments administered to veterinary patients who have ingested a toxin.
The use of AC in human medicine has recently been
critically reevaluated, and routine use has been discouraged due to a lack of evidence that its administration
affects outcome. There have been no published veterinary studies comparing conventional therapy with AC
versus conventional therapy alone. Inherent differences

VetBooks.ir

45 Acute Poisoning

between veterinary small animal patients and human
patients make the veterinary application of human
guidelines questionable. Veterinary patients may be
more likely than human patients to ingest large quantities of toxins, and paradoxically veterinary patients may
present for medical care sooner after ingestion than
human patients due to the intentional nature of many
human intoxications. Furthermore, advanced treatments
such as hemofiltration for toxin removal or prolonged,
aggressive hospital‐based care for treatment of organ
dysfunction are more readily available and more often
pursued in human medicine than in veterinary patients,
making it that much more important to limit toxin
adsorption in veterinary patients as much as possible
prior to signs of intoxication.
Products containing AC are administered at a dose of
1–5 g/kg body weight PO or via orogastric intubation to
bind any remaining toxin within the GI tract and prevent
further absorption of the toxin. AC administration is
indicated when the ingested poison binds to AC, is likely
to cause significant toxicity, and has been recently
ingested (within the past 4–6 hours) and/or undergoes
enterohepatic recirculation. Repeated dosing (every
4–6 hours for four total doses) is recommended for
dangerous toxins for which enterohepatic recirculation
is known to occur and no antidote is available. The use
of AC‐containing products may lead to vomiting, and
aspiration of gastric contents or charcoal creates a risk
of pneumonia. Injection of an antiemetic prior to AC
administration may help decrease the incidence of emesis.
AC may bind water within the GI tract, and repeated
doses have been associated with dehydration and
hypernatremia in rare cases. When repeated doses of AC
are needed, many sources recommend the repeat doses
be given at a lower dose (for instance, half the initial
administered dose), and IV fluid administration is recommended to help prevent significant dehydration. It is
also important that veterinarians and clients know which
patients have received AC so that the resultant black
stools are not misinterpreted as melena.
Activated charcoal binds to most but not all toxins; it
does not bind alcohols, heavy metals, or small organic
molecules. Use of AC is therefore not indicated for toxic
ingestions of xylitol, ethylene glycol, zinc, nitrates, or
sodium chlorate, among others. It is important to confirm that the suspected toxin binds to AC prior to
administration of AC. If the binding affinity of a poison
to AC is unknown by the clinician, a poison control
hotline should be contacted prior to administration.
Studies have shown that the timing of AC administration
in relation to toxin ingestion directly influences the
percentage of ingested toxin that is bound within the GI
tract. If AC use is indicated, it is important that the treatment be administered as soon as possible.

Few dogs (and almost no cats) willingly ingest AC
solutions. One commonly utilized clinical method of
administration involves combining the charcoal with a
small amount of highly palatable food. While the food
binds to the charcoal and reduces binding capacity, a
published veterinary study suggests the reduction in
toxin‐binding capacity is clinically insignificant.
Cathartics

Cathartics are given to speed GI transit times in an effort
to decrease the time a toxin is available for absorption
within the GI tract. The two types of cathartics used in
veterinary medicine are saccharides (e.g., sorbitol) and
saline (e.g., magnesium sulfate); sorbitol is the most
commonly used cathartic, and it is most commonly
stocked in veterinary hospitals as an AC‐sorbitol combination product. Because cathartics such as sorbitol act
by drawing water into the GI lumen, significant risk of
dehydration and hypernatremia exists with repeated use
of these products. When a cathartic is used, it is typically
only administered as a one‐time dose. The most common clinical practice is to give only the first dose of AC
with sorbitol, utilizing AC products without a cathartic
for repeated doses.
Decontamination of Blood
Extracorporeal Therapies

One of the most effective methods to treat certain
­poisonings is removal using extracorporeal therapies
such as hemodialysis and hemoperfusion. Hemodialysis
involves circulating blood through an extracorporeal circuit and allowing for transfer of solutes and water across
a semipermeable membrane. Toxins are good candidates
for removal via hemodialysis if they are relatively small
(<1500 daltons), poorly protein bound and with a low
volume of distribution. Ethylene glycol and aspirin are
examples of compounds that are readily cleared by hemodialysis. Hemoperfusion refers to the direct exposure of
blood in an extracorporeal circuit to an adsorbent column of charcoal or (less commonly) a different adsorbent
specially designed to bind a specific toxin. Hemoperfusion
greatly increases the number of poisons that can be
removed using extracorporeal therapy. Hemodialysis and
hemoperfusion require specialized, often expensive,
equipment and highly trained personnel. The availability
of hemoperfusion is currently limited in veterinary medicine, but the number of facilities offering this potentially
life‐saving intervention will likely increase in the future.
Intravenous Lipid Therapy

Administration of intravenous lipid emulsions (IVLE) is
a common therapy for the treatment of poisoning with
lipophilic toxins. IVLE therapy was first used to treat

443

VetBooks.ir

444

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

cardiotoxicity secondary to local anesthetic administration in humans. The proposed mechanism of action
involved overriding the local anesthetic‐induced inhibition of myocardial carnitine acylcarnitine translocase,
potentially by mass effect or competitive inhibition,
allowing fatty acids to reach the mitochondria and be
used for energy production.
Since its initial introduction into the arsenal of available
medical treatments, IVLE therapy has proven beneficial in
the treatment of lipophilic toxins other than local anesthetics. Many of these lipophilic toxins cause dysfunction
to organs other than the heart, yet their effects may still be
reversed by IVLE administration, suggesting that IVLE
treatment has a different or additional mechanism of
action beyond improved free fatty acid availability or
intracellular calcium accumulation. The most widely
proposed mechanism of action for the beneficial effects of
IVLE treatment of patients poisoned by liphophilic substances is the “lipid sink” theory. This theory states that
increasing the plasma lipid content “sequesters” lipophilic
toxins within the plasma, decreasing movement out of the
bloodstream and into target organs such as the brain.
Anecdotal and published reports describe successful
IVLE use in the treatment of a wide variety of toxins
ranging from local anesthetics (bupivacaine) and vasoactive drugs (amlodipine, propranolol) to antiparasitic
drugs (ivermectin, moxidectin) and antidepressant medications (bupropion, etc.). IV lipid emulsions are available
as 20% formulations. The optimal dose is unclear at this
time, but recommendations have been extrapolated from
available human literature, animal research, and veterinary case reports. Current guidelines suggest 1.5–4 mL/
kg IV bolus be given over one minute and followed by a
constant rate infusion (CRI) of 0.25 mL/kg/min over
30–60 minutes. Patients who fail to respond to this protocol may require additional boluses of 1.5 mL/kg every
4–6 hours for 24 hours. Continued CRI doses of up to

0.05 mL/kg/h for up to 24 hours can be considered for
patients who remain severely symptomatic. Utilizing a
“lowest effective dose” approach is recommended due to
the general lack of information regarding adverse effects
of IVLE therapy in veterinary patients.
Reported side‐effects in human medicine include
infection due to contamination of the lipid product,
anaphylactoid reactions, and allergic reaction to the egg
or soybean component of the IVLE. A syndrome known
as “fat overload syndrome” (FOS) has been observed in
humans. FOS is associated with fat embolism, liver
dysfunction, or coagulation system dysfunction (thrombocytopenia and prolonged clotting times). These side‐
effects have not yet been reported in clinical veterinary
patients, but the use of IVLE as a treatment for lipophilic
toxins is still somewhat new in veterinary medicine.
When considering IVLE administration, the clinician
must carefully weigh the severity and duration of toxic
symptoms against the cost and potential complications
associated with this intervention.

­Conclusion
Small animal veterinarians commonly encounter acute
poisoning. A sound, comprehensive approach to patient
care (building on the fundamentals of a good history,
physical exam, and diagnostic work‐up) is important for
diagnosing toxic exposure. A solid understanding of
common toxins and appropriate utilization of available
resources such as poison control hotlines help the
­clinician to establish the treatment plan most likely to
result in a successful outcome. Exciting new therapies
such as hemoperfusion and IVLE administration continue to evolve, making it important for the practicing
small animal clinician to remain up to date on the most
current available treatments.

­Further Reading
Fernandez AL, Lee J, Rahilly L, et al. The use of
intravenous lipid emulsion as an antidote in
veterinary toxicology. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2011;
21(4): 309–20.
Khan SA, McLean M, Slater M, et al. Effectiveness and
adverse effects of the use of apomorphine and 3%
hydrogen peroxide solution to induce emesis in dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 241: 1179–84.

Lee JA, Welch S. When and how to use activated charcoal.
Vet Med 2013; 108(3): 124–32.
Scherk JR, Brainard B, Collicutt N, et al. Preliminary
evaluation of a quantitative ethylene glycol test in dogs
and catas. J Vet Diagn Invest 2013; 25: 219–25.
Tietler JB. Evaluation of a human on‐site urine multidrug
test for emergency use with dogs. J Am An Hosp Assoc
2009; 45: 59–66.

VetBooks.ir

445

46
Medical Management of Trauma and Burns
Nathan Peterson, DVM, DACVECC
VCA West Los Angeles Animal Hospital, Los Angeles, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
The pathophysiology of trauma and burns is complex
and explains why trauma and burn wounds are capable
of affecting organs distant from the original insult and
why the clinical course of disease can be so variable. Our
current understanding of the pathophysiology of trauma
is based on the theory that both primary and secondary
insults contribute to morbidity and mortality. This is
termed the two‐hit theory. Primary insults (first hits)
result in direct tissue injury from the trauma or burn
(fractures, soft tissue destruction, organ rupture or
­vascular disruption). These factors are not under the
control of the veterinarian. Secondary insults can be
­further divided into endogenous or exogenous causes.
Typical endogenous second hits include shock, hypoxia,
ischemia/reperfusion injuries, and infection. Exogenous
(interventional) second hits include surgical trauma,
anesthetic complications, and transfusion of blood
products.
Systemic Inflammatory Response
The magnitude of the primary and secondary insults
determines the systemic inflammatory response of the
host. Immediately following a trauma load, the patient
begins mounting a systemic response composed of both
pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory components
intended to limit entry of microorganisms, on the one
hand, and limit secondary tissue damage, on the other.
The balance, or lack thereof, determines if the patient will
mount an appropriate response, or whether a pro-inflammatory or anti-inflammatory state will predominate.
Plasma levels of primary pro-inflammatory cytokines
rise within 1–2 hours following trauma. Secondary
­pro-inflammatory cytokines begin to rise several hours

following trauma and contribute to the systemic inflammation and activation of immune cells associated with
severe trauma. The culmination of this activation is an
increased number of circulating polymorphic nucleic
cells (PMNs) and additional tissue injury.
Concurrent with the systemic inflammatory response
(SIRS), an anti-inflammatory response called the
­compensatory anti-inflammatory response syndrome
(CARS) is taking place. The purpose of this response is
to minimize the tissue damage induced by the proinflammatory response and is achieved through release
of anti-inflammatory mediators that reduce the synthesis of pro-inflammatory cytokines by their action on
transcription factors necessary for their production.
Coagulation and Inflammation
Activation of the inflammatory system is closely tied to
activation of the coagulation and complement cascades.
Complement activation occurs through both the contact phase pathway and the classic pathway and results
in recruitment and activation of phagocytic cells, induction of the hepatic acute phase response, and degranulation of mast cells. Mast cell degranulation releases
vasoactive mediators including histamine, leading to
leukocyte adhesion and increased vascular permeability
(edema). Activation of the complement system also
results in activation of the coagulation ­cascade although
the most important inciting cause of activation of the
coagulation cascade in the context of trauma is through
the tissue factor pathway. Direct and secondary tissue
injury exposes tissue factor (TF) on the endothelial cell
surface which then complexes with factor VII (FVII) and
activates the coagulation cascade. In severely traumatized patients, activation of the coagulation cascade can
result in development of disseminated intravascular
coagulation (DIC).

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

446

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

Acute Phase Response
The release of pro-inflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)‐alpha, interleukin (IL)‐1‐beta, and IL‐6 following trauma induces the acute phase response in the
liver which results in up-regulation of positive acute
phase proteins, including fibrinogen and prothrombin.
At the same time positive acute phase proteins are being
up-regulated, the production of negative acute phase
proteins albumin, protein‐C, protein‐S, and antithrombin (AT) is reduced. The net effect of the acute phase
response is generally in the direction of enhanced coagulation through the increased production of prothrombin,
fibrinogen and the decreased production of endogenous
anticoagulants protein‐C, protein‐S, and AT. The resultant hypercoagulable state can contribute to the development of DIC in patients following severe trauma or
burns.
Ischemia and Reperfusion
Systemic ischemia can occur following trauma and is
attributed to hypoxemia and hypotension immediately
following trauma and during the early resuscitative
period (<24 hrs). Local ischemia can occur due to blunt
trauma, disruption of local blood supply or compartment
syndrome. During periods of ischemia, several important intracellular changes occur. As energy stores are
depleted, adenosine triphosphate (ATP) levels decrease
and ATP is degraded to adenosine diphosphate (ADP)
and hypoxanthine. As ischemia continues, intracellular
pH decreases and lactate, hypoxanthine and sodium and
calcium ion concentrations increase, leading to cellular
swelling. Upon reperfusion, oxygen interacts with
hypoxanthine, resulting in the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). This occurs within seconds of reintroduction of oxygen to ischemic tissues. Reactive
oxygen species are capable of causing lipid peroxidation
and cell death. The release of ROS into the systemic circulation and their subsequent delivery to the lungs following reperfusion may form the basis for the
development of acute lung injury associated with trauma.
The liver and gut may be particularly sensitive to ischemia/
reperfusion injury. In fact, ischemia and reperfusion of
the gut following shock and subsequent resuscitation
result in the gut becoming a source of proinflammatory
mediators capable of inducing SIRS.
Traumatic Brain Injury/Spinal Cord Injury
The response of the brain and spinal cord to trauma is
unique. Similar to general trauma, brain injury consists
of primary (direct result of trauma) and secondary injury
(subsequent to primary injury). Secondary brain and

spinal cord injury is composed of hemorrhage, edema,
vasospasm or enzymatically induced neurotoxicity. As
an organ, the brain is particularly sensitive to injury by
ROS due to high levels of unsaturated fatty acids and
low antioxidant capacity. Periods of hypoxia and hypotension lead to the accumulation of the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate in the interstitial compartment.
High extracellular levels of glutamate in addition to
intracellular depletion of ATP lead to accumulation of
calcium and sodium ions within the neuronal cell and
culminate in cellular dysfunction and death. Because of
this, several autoregulatory countermeasures have been
developed, including the brain’s ability to regulate blood
flow across a wide range of blood pressures. However, if
hypoxia or shock is severe enough in magnitude or duration, these defense mechanisms are overcome and secondary neuronal injury occurs.
It is important to remember that primary brain injury
can impair the autoregulatory functions of the brain,
making it susceptible to secondary injury that would
otherwise not occur. For this reason, initial resuscitative
measures should be focused on improving oxygen delivery
to the vital organs, especially the brain.
Burns
Local burns covering less than 30% of total body surface
area (TBSA) rarely cause severe systemic effects while
severe burns (those covering more than 30% of TBSA)
are capable of inducing a syndrome called “burn shock”
that is characterized by decreased intravascular volume,
reduced cardiac output (CO), and increased systemic
vascular resistance.
The physiologic response to burns is generally divided
into two distinct phases. The resuscitation phase begins
immediately following burn injury and is characterized
by depleted circulating volume with increased vascular
permeability and protein‐rich fluid loss into the interstitial space, resulting in edema formation of both burned
and unburned tissue. This phase coincides with a systemic response similar to that observed in severe
trauma patients as described above. Hypoproteinemia in
burn patients occurs secondary to protein loss in the
form of edema fluid and fluid loss from the affected skin
surface and can develop during the resuscitative phase of
burn management.
Following the resuscitation phase of burn injury
(3–5 days), a hyperdynamic/hypermetabolic phase, primarily mediated by counter-regulatory hormones
including cortisol, glucagon, and catecholamines, begins.
During the hyperdynamic phase, cardiac output is
increased and vascular permeability begins to return to
normal. In addition to the circulatory changes, an
increase in metabolic rate occurs that results in negative

VetBooks.ir

46 Medical Management of Trauma and Burns

energy balance with protein catabolism, gluconeogenesis,
glycogenolysis, hepatic insulin resistance, lipolysis,
decreased lean body mass, and fever. Ultimately, energy
requirements during this period can be increased threefold above basal metabolic rate.
Patients that suffered burn injuries in an enclosed structure fire are also at risk for developing inhalation injury.
The inhalation of hot gas and particulate debris results in
direct thermal injury to the airway mucosa and chemical
irritation. Patients are at risk for developing upper airway
obstruction, bronchospasm, small airway occlusion, pulmonary infection, and respiratory failure. The effect of
direct thermal injury and chemical irritation is development of an inflammatory response resulting in interstitial
edema formation. The damaged mucosal surface generates large amounts of cellular and necrotic debris, leading
to further inflammation and distal migration within the
bronchial tree with resultant lower airway plugging. This
typically occurs 3–5 days post inhalation injury and, in
conjunction with mucociliary dysfunction, can lead to
development of bronchopneumonia.

­Epidemiology
The incidence of trauma in veterinary medicine is relatively unknown with one large retrospective study finding that trauma accounted for 13% of admissions to an
urban referral hospital. When it does occur, trauma in
veterinary patients appears to be more likely to affect
dogs than cats, with dogs comprising approximately
80–90% of trauma patients. In dogs, the mechanism of
trauma is most likely to be blunt trauma associated with
vehicular injury followed by sharp trauma and animal
attacks. In the feline population, the mechanism of
trauma is often unknown. In cases where the mechanism
behind the trauma is known, cats are essentially equally
as likely to suffer from blunt vehicular trauma, falls from
height, crush injury or weapon‐related trauma. The prehospital mortality rate of veterinary patients suffering
trauma is unknown; in hospital, mortality ranges from
approximately 10% to 20%.
Blunt trauma in the canine patient is more thoroughly
described. The thorax and extremities are the most likely
sites of injury from blunt trauma in dogs, with pelvic
fracture, head trauma, and abdominal trauma occurring
less frequently. The most common thoracic injuries
incurred are pulmonary contusions, pneumothorax, and
chest wall trauma/rib fractures. In blunt abdominal
trauma, the most commonly encountered injuries are
hemoperitoneum (25%), body wall hernia (5%), and rupture of the urinary system (3%). The two most commonly
encountered orthopedic injuries are pelvic fractures
and long bone fractures. Axial orthopedic injuries are

relatively uncommon. Head trauma is more likely to be
encountered in animals with a higher total trauma load
and is associated with a worse outcome
Little is known about the incidence of penetrating
ballistic injuries in dogs and cats although a recent study
of military working dogs sheds some light on the topic.
Obviously, military and law enforcement working dogs
are at a higher risk than the general pet population of
ballistic trauma and that trauma is more likely to be due
to high‐velocity/high‐energy projectiles (rifle bullets). A
higher incidence of penetrating ballistic injury is also
likely in young, male dogs of the working breeds with
lower velocity/energy ballistics (shotgun pellets) more
likely.

­Signalment
Young (1–3 years) large‐breed dogs of both sexes are
more likely to suffer blunt trauma (hit by car) than small‐
breed dogs. Conversely, small‐breed dogs are more likely
than large‐breed dogs to be victims of animal attacks,
with males being more commonly affected than females.
Male cats are more likely to suffer trauma associated
with vehicles or animal interaction than female cats
while female cats appear more likely to fall from heights.
Burn injuries most often occur in the veterinary hospital
setting (heating pads) or structure fires; there is no
species, breed or sex predilection.

­History and Clinical Signs
The diagnosis of trauma is generally made based on
history and physical exam findings rather than diagnostic test results. Often, the medical history is incomplete
and it is not uncommon for the animal to be presented
by a Good Samaritan rather than the owner. Cats frequently present with no history but with physical exam
findings that are consistent with trauma.
Clinical signs associated with trauma will be dependent
on the mechanism behind the trauma and the location
on the body at which that trauma was inflicted. Typical
injuries following trauma include fractures, contusions
and abrasions, bruising or bleeding. Any animal presenting
with one or more of these findings should be considered
to have suffered trauma until proven otherwise. Blunt
trauma patients are frequently presented with few outward signs of trauma but often have difficulty breathing,
reluctance or inability to ambulate or decreased mentation.
Initially, clinical signs may be mild and the animal may
appear stable due to the catecholamine surge associated
with the fight or flight response. Animals suspected of

447

VetBooks.ir

448

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

suffering blunt trauma should be reevaluated frequently for new clinical signs or progression of existing
clinical signs.
Penetrating trauma is much less difficult to diagnose,
as these patients will have visible external wounds
­consistent with sharp or ballistic injuries. Very often in
penetrating trauma, the amount of apparent external
blood loss is small and animals with thick coats should
be closely inspected for small penetrating wounds.

­Diagnosis
Trauma is not often a diagnostic challenge. However,
elucidating the extent of injuries can be. In all cases of
suspected trauma, a complete medical history and a
detailed description of the traumatic event, if possible,
are essential. Owners should be asked about the patient’s
behavior immediately following the traumatic event.
Specifically, the owner should be questioned about loss
of consciousness, ambulation status, and whether the pet
has urinated since the event. The owner should be asked
to estimate the speed of the vehicle, height of the fall, and
size of attacking animal, as applicable. Additionally,
the owner should be asked to describe where on the pet
they believe most of the trauma occurred. If a car hit the
pet, the owner should be asked if the pet was seen traveling under the car or tire. If the pet was attacked by an
animal, it should be determined if the pet was bitten and
released or clenched and shaken. Finally, if a patient fell
from height, the type of substrate upon which they
landed should be ascertained.
A complete physical examination should be performed,
with special attention paid to the neurologic system and
thoracic and abdominal cavities. When evaluating the
neurologic system in a trauma patient, a stepwise
approach targeting life‐threatening injuries first is utilized.
The patient’s mentation and level of consciousness
(LOC) should be evaluated and their motor activity
should be noted. Decerebrate rigidity (extension of all
four limbs and opisthotonus) is associated with brainstem
compression and altered LOC. Decerebellate rigidity
(extension of forelimbs with hindlimb flexion) indicates
cerebellar herniation and may be associated with normal
or altered LOC. Motor function should be noted, taking
care to discriminate between spinal reflexes and voluntary movement. Finally, brainstem reflexes are assessed.
Pupil size, symmetry, and responsiveness are evaluated.
Attempts should be made to elicit an occulocephalic
reflex, taking care to avoid exacerbating possible cervical
injuries.
Following evaluation of the neurologic system, the
thorax should be evaluated for evidence of trauma.
A visual inspection of the thorax should be performed

and any lacerations, puncture wounds, abrasions or
bruising should be noted. The patient should be observed
while breathing prior to auscultation. Careful attention
should be paid to the rate, depth, and pattern of breathing. Paradoxical movement of the thoracic wall inward
during inspiration (flail chest) is indicative of segmental
fracture of contiguous ribs. Thoracic auscultation should
be performed in a quiet environment. The presence of
breath sounds should be evaluated. Decreased breath
sounds ventrally may indicate the presence of pleural
fluid whereas decreased or absent breath sounds dorsally
may indicate the presence of pneumothorax. In addition
to ventral and dorsal differences, the breath sounds in
each hemithorax should be compared to determine if
unilateral pleural space disease (e.g., tension pneumothorax) is present.
Once the presence of breath sounds is confirmed, the
quality of the sounds should be evaluated. Increases
in bronchovesicular sounds or the presence of focal or
diffuse crackles may indicate pulmonary contusion or
hemorrhage. Detection of borborygmi within the thoracic cavity indicates herniation of abdominal contents
through the diaphragm. Auscultation of the trachea
should also be performed. Tracheal injury may result in
loud guttural sounds while laryngeal injury may result in
higher pitched wheezes (stridor).
The oral mucous membranes should be evaluated for
color and capillary refill time (CRT). Pale mucous membranes can be present from anemia or peripheral vasoconstriction and decreased cardiac output, as seen with
shock. Cyanosis may be observed if severe pulmonary or
pleural space disease is present. Normal CRT is 1–2 seconds. Prolongation of CRT is consistent with decreased
cardiac output and early to late decompensated shock.
Patients in compensated shock may have a brisker than
normal CRT and mucous membrane color may be bright
pink to red.
The presence of cardiac sounds should be confirmed
and the rate and regularity of the rhythm should be noted.
Tachycardia can occur secondary to shock, pain or anxiety. Bradycardia may occur during shock in cats, but its
presence in dogs is a harbinger of circulatory collapse and
cardiopulmonary arrest. The absence of heart sounds
may indicate pleural space disease (hemothorax), pericardial effusion or cardiac arrest. Pulses should be palpated
during cardiac auscultation and should be evaluated for
strength and synchrony with the heart. Heart sounds that
do not generate a palpable pulse or pulses of varying
strength are abnormal and electrocardiography should be
considered. Severe peripheral vasoconstriction as seen in
shock states results in the distal limbs being cooler to the
touch than the trunk. A rectal temperature below normal
is consistent with decompensated shock and should be
considered a negative prognostic indicator.

VetBooks.ir

46 Medical Management of Trauma and Burns

Evaluation of the abdomen consists of visual inspection and palpation. Small puncture wounds over the
abdomen, especially puncture wounds associated with
animal bites, may belie severe trauma to the abdominal
wall or abdominal viscera. Abdominal distension with or
without a palpable fluid wave may occur with traumatic
hemoabdomen. Palpation of the urinary bladder should
be attempted although the presence of a palpable urinary
bladder does not exclude the possibility of uroabdomen.
A rectal exam should be performed in any animal that
suffered blunt trauma to the caudal half of the body.
Palpation of the pelvic ring for fractures and evaluation
of anal tone are important components of a complete
physical exam.
Assessment of the abdomen with ultrasound is becoming commonplace and has been shown to be a more sensitive indicator of free abdominal fluid than blind
four‐quadrant abdominocentesis or diagnostic peritoneal lavage. To perform an abdominal focused assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST) exam, the
patient is placed in either left or right lateral recumbency.
The ultrasound probe is placed at the first location on
midline just caudal to the xyphoid process (diaphragmatico‐hepatic position). The probe is then rotated cranially, caudally, and laterally in both directions. If no free
fluid is observed then the probe is moved to the second
site. The process is repeated, targeting the four points of
investigation: diaphragmatico‐hepatic, spleno‐renal (left
body wall over the left kidney), cysto‐colic (midline over
the urinary bladder), and hepato‐renal (right body wall
over the right kidney). If free fluid is found, the test is
considered positive and an attempt should be made to
obtain a sample for evaluation.
In most cases, orthopedic and cutaneous wounds are
not immediately life threatening and their evaluation
should complete the physical examination when the
patient is deemed stable. The patient should be fully
evaluated for the presence of lacerations, puncture
wounds, abrasions or bruising. Gross deformity of
limbs is assessed followed by a detailed orthopedic
exam targeting long bones and joints of the appendicular skeleton. If not already done, the animal should be
observed ambulating, if able. Radiographs of any areas
of pain or instability should be obtained to determine
the extent of the injuries. Wounds should be gently
clipped to facilitate assessment.
Burn‐Specific Considerations
When evaluating patients that have been burned, it is
important to assess both the depth of the burn and the
TBSA affected. Burn depth is classified as follows: superficial burns, superficial partial thickness, deep partial
thickness, and full thickness. This terminology has

supplanted the older classification scheme of grading
burns by degree and provides a better description of
burn severity. It is important to remember that the depth
of the burn may vary across the affected area. Superficial
wounds are erythematous and may have a dry, flaky
appearance. Superficial partial‐thickness burns are
erythematous and moist. They blanch and blisters may
be present. Deep partial‐thickness burns are characterized by an absence of blisters and they appear waxy with
reduced pain sensation. Full‐thickness burns are white
and may have eschar formation. Hair is easily plucked
from the burn site.
Special attention should be paid to the airways of
patients that have suffered burns in fires. The oropharynx should be evaluated for the presence of soot and the
thorax should be carefully auscultated for evidence of
airway or pulmonary parenchymal injury. If the animal
smells of smoke then there is a high likelihood that
some degree of inhalation injury is present. Notation of
respiratory rate and effort should be made immediately
and respiratory patterns and oxygenation status should
be reevaluated regularly.

­Therapy
The treatment of trauma patients can be divided into two
distinct phases. The primary or acute phase of trauma
management is focused on restoration of systemic and
local oxygen delivery to preinjury levels to minimize secondary ischemic injury. The second phase of trauma
management lasts until the patient is discharged and
centers on maintaining oxygen delivery, definitive treatment of wounds or fractures, provision of nutritional
support, and pain management.
Primary Phase
Successful resuscitation begins with recognition of its
need. Resuscitation should be directed at reexpansion
of effective circulating volume and re-establishment of
systemic and local blood flow. The exact method of
resuscitation is less important than the goals that are
targeted. Classic resuscitation endpoints have focused
on macrocirculatory findings such as heart rate, pulse
quality, and blood pressure. Recent developments in
shock treatment have identified microcirculatory markers that may be better for determining when resuscitation is complete (i.e., adequate oxygen delivery and
usage has been restored).
Beyond the traditional resuscitation endpoints, the
evaluation of biochemical markers such as base deficit,
lactate, and central venous oxygen saturation has been
advocated for use in veterinary medicine. The rationale

449

VetBooks.ir

450

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

for using biochemical markers depends on the fact that
cellular hypoxia may continue despite normalization
of traditional resuscitation endpoints and the selected
markers can detect this ongoing oxygen debt. If undetected, occult shock can be prolonged and can lead to
further secondary injury. The best approach for determining when resuscitation is complete is one that incorporates both traditional and goal‐directed endpoints.
Volume expansion should be achieved using replacement crystalloid fluids, hypertonic crystalloid fluids,
synthetic colloids or blood products (packed red blood
cells, fresh frozen plasma, fresh whole blood) as needed,
although low‐volume resuscitation (hypertonic saline
and synthetic colloid) should be considered as the best
choice for patients suffering head trauma or pulmonary
contusions to minimize the likelihood of overresuscitation and exacerbation of vascular leak. There is no evidence that achieving supraphysiologic values for any of
the macrocirculatory variables confers a benefit; on the
contrary, overresuscitation may lead to increased morbidity (wound edema, fluid overload, dilutional coagulopathy) and should be avoided. Once normalization of
macrocirculatory variables occurs then biochemical
analysis should be performed to determine if oxygen
debt is ongoing.
The provision of supplemental oxygen should be considered in any patient that has suffered trauma to the
thorax or head, any patient in shock, or any patient that
may have suffered inhalation injury. The ideal method to
provide supplemental oxygen would allow the animal to
move freely without restraint and would not contribute
to stress. Oxygen cages or chambers approach this ideal.
Flow‐by oxygen or oxygen provided by facemask may
prove useful during the initial evaluation period when
it is imperative that the animal be handled. Nasal cannulation using purposemade nasal oxygen prongs is
well tolerated by some patients and may allow for provision of supplemental oxygen without significant restraint.
In rare circumstances, it may be necessary to secure
an airway via orotracheal intubation or tracheostomy.
In these cases, 100% oxygen is provided via an anesthetic
circuit or self‐inflating rescue bag.
Early analgesic management is an important part of
the resuscitation phase of trauma management. Once it
is determined that the patient’s life is not in immediate
danger, analgesia should be administered. In general,
veterinary patients are less sensitive to the respiratory
depressant effects of opioid medications and due to the
minimal impact on cardiac indices and their reversibility,
pure opioid agonists (morphine, hydromorphone, oxymorphone or fentanyl) should be considered the analgesic of choice in the acute setting. Head trauma patients
should be treated for pain once it is determined that their
neurologic status is stable. Completely withholding

­analgesia from head trauma patients is no longer advocated. Adequate analgesia improves patient comfort,
facilitates examination, and improves healing.
Primary Wound Management

The goal of wound management during the primary
phase of treatment is to prevent further contamination
of the wounds and prevent additional tissue injury
from occurring. Wounds should be clipped, cleaned
with an antiseptic solution (chlorhexidine or betadine)
and lavaged with saline. Following lavage, the wounds
should be gently probed for depth and extent and then
covered with a nonadherent sterile dressing until the
patient has been stabilized and definitive treatment is
possible. Very recent thermal burn wounds should be
lavaged with cool saline to arrest ongoing thermal
injury and should then be covered with silver sulfadiazine and a nonadherent bandage. Most chemical burns
can be immediately lavaged with tap water for 30 minutes although some alkaline agents may take longer to
remove. Elemental metals, including solid sodium, can
ignite when they come in contact with water and
should instead be covered with mineral oil. Wounds
should never be allowed to go unaddressed for longer
than 2–4 hours.
Any gross deformities suggesting luxation or fracture
should be identified. If fractures are present distal to the
stifle or elbow, the limb should be immobilized with a
soft bandage, ensuring that the joints above and below
the affected area are incorporated. Attempts to reduce
fractures are not necessary in the acute phase of management. Fractures of the humerus, femur, pelvis or scapula
are not bandaged due to muscular coverage and inability
to achieve adequate immobilization. Patients with suspected cervical or spinal fracture or luxation should
be sedated, treated for pain, and immobilized using a
backboard to prevent further injury to the spinal cord. If
sedation or analgesia is inadequate, these patients
often struggle and can exacerbate their injuries.
Luxations are treated in a similar fashion to fractures
and attempts at reduction should be delayed until the
patient’s condition has stabilized.
Secondary Phase
The secondary phase of treatment begins when the
endpoints of resuscitation have been met and the patient
is either admitted to the hospital or moved to surgery.
As stated previously, the focus of the secondary treatment phase is ensuring adequate oxygen delivery is
maintained and establishing definitive treatment for surgical wounds. Additionally, at this stage supportive care
including nutritional support, analgesia, and preventive
nursing care is considered.

VetBooks.ir

46 Medical Management of Trauma and Burns

Fluid Therapy

Arguably the most important part of medical management of trauma patients is fluid therapy. Trauma and
burn patients have unique fluid needs that require
special consideration. Judicious use of crystalloid fluids
in patients that suffer thoracic trauma and, in particular,
those that develop pulmonary contusions is needed. It
should be remembered that endothelial cell dysfunction
and perturbations in vascular integrity might contribute
to fluid loss from the intravascular space. Excessively
high volumes of crystalloid fluid may exacerbate pulmonary contusions due to their rapid redistribution into the
interstitial space following administration. Patients
with head trauma should be treated in a similar fashion.
If brain edema develops secondary to exuberant fluid
resuscitation, cerebral blood flow may be impaired. This
concern must be balanced by the need to maintain
adequate blood pressure for brain perfusion.
Hypoproteinemia is common in trauma patients,
especially following burn injury, animal bites, or crush
injury. The routine use of synthetic colloids in veterinary
medicine is somewhat controversial due to concerns associated with development of coagulopathy and possibly
renal failure. However, no clinical veterinary trials to
date have demonstrated a negative association and their
use should be considered to maintain colloid osmotic
pressure and reduce edema formation in nonaffected
tissue. In addition to its importance for maintaining colloid osmotic pressure (COP), albumin is an important
carrier molecule and facilitates healing. Therefore,
canine patients may benefit from receiving human serum
albumin or canine‐specific lyophilized albumin rather
than synthetic starches for colloidal support.
Pain Management

The importance of effective pain management goes
beyond the ethical consideration of ameliorating pain.
The presence of pain causes increases in sympathetic
tone and catecholamine secretion, leading to increased
cardiac output, peripheral vascular resistance, and myocardial oxygen consumption. While important for the
fight or flight response, these changes, if chronic, further impair oxygen delivery to tissues. In addition to the
cardiovascular effects of pain, a neuroendocrine
response occurs, resulting in elevated levels of catabolic
hormones including cortisol while a concurrent decrease
in the anabolic hormones insulin and testosterone is
present. The net result of the neuroendocrine response
is the development of a catabolic state characterized
by hyperglycemia, type B hyperlactatemia, and keto­
genesis. Treatment of pain reduces or eliminates these
responses, facilitates patient evaluation, improves
patient quality of life, and leads to more rapid healing
and reduced morbidity.

Patients that suffer severe trauma or burns should be
considered to be very painful and analgesia should be
provided liberally. The best method of pain management in traumatized or burned patients utilizes a multimodal approach. Pure opioid agonists are the mainstay
of pain management and should be provided early in the
course of treatment. Opioid medications have no ceiling
effect, meaning that there is no maximum dose at which
­further administration would not be expected to affect a
result. In most cases, administration should be continued throughout the duration of hospitalization. While
opioids are capable of depressing respiratory drive in
veterinary patients, this is rarely clinically relevant.
If there is concern over a patient’s ventilatory drive then
the dose of opioid can be reduced or broken into ­aliquots
and administered to effect.
The dissociative agent ketamine has some analgesic
properties, particularly for superficial pain. More importantly, perhaps, are the n‐methyl D‐aspartate (NMDA)
antagonistic properties of ketamine that may alter spinal
modulation and prevent or ameliorate central sensitization (wind‐up). In order to derive the full benefit of ketamine with regard to sensitization prevention, it should
be administered for at least 24 hours as a constant rate
infusion (CRI) (5–15 μg/kg/min). The use of ketamine
alone is not effective for deep or visceral pain and can
result in behavioral changes, therefore ketamine should
almost always be administered in conjunction with an
opioid. When discontinuing ketamine for patients that
have been on a CRI for longer than 24 hours, a gradual
reduction of the infusion rate over several hours is used
to prevent behavioral changes associated with abrupt
discontinuation.
Clinically, the alpha‐2‐agonists are most commonly
used for sedation although their use for pain management
is becoming more common. Their short half‐lives and
reversibility make them theoretically attractive options in
many trauma patients but careful consideration should be
taken prior to their use since clinically relevant cardiovascular side‐effects are possible. Animals in shock or with
significant heart disease (especially diseases causing
decreased systolic function) should not be administered
alpha‐2‐agonists. A CRI is often employed to most effectively use this class of drugs as a component of the pain
management protocol. When used at rates of 0.5–2 μg/
kg/h, dexmedetomidine can result in anxiolysis and analgesia without significant cardiovascular side‐effects.
Regional or local anesthesia should be considered as
an adjunct to traditional, systemic analgesic methods.
The use of regional or local anesthesia often requires
coordination with the surgical team since these interventions often require general anesthesia or sedation to be
performed. Placement of diffusion catheters for repeated
administration of local anesthetic medication should be

451

VetBooks.ir

452

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

considered at the time of surgery, if applicable; their use in
contaminated wounds (bite wounds) should be avoided,
however. Epidural administration or placement of an epidural catheter can provide excellent pain management
for animals with pelvic limb or pelvic ring trauma. If sacral
fracture or sacroiliac luxation is present or the landmarks
used for epidural administration are disrupted then
epidural administration should not be performed. Local
anesthetic drugs can also be used systemically, with IV
infusion of lidocaine being useful as both an analgesic
adjunct and a promotility agent for management of ileus.
Both blunt trauma and burn injury are capable of
inducing a very pronounced inflammatory state. The use
of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can
be very beneficial in these patients. However, animals
that are severely traumatized or are in shock should not
be administered NSAIDs until all tissue perfusion has
normalized and is not anticipated to change abruptly.
Patients with severe soft tissue injury or crush injury are
at risk for development of myoglobinuria and renal
failure. Any animal that has pigmenturia or evidence of
renal insufficiency should not receive NSAIDs. The decision to use NSAID medications should be deliberate and
if case selection is appropriate then NSAIDs may prove
to be a very useful analgesic adjunct. Due to the risk of
systemic side‐effects, including further impairment of
the already compromised immune system in these
patients, animals that have suffered severe trauma or
burn injury should not receive corticosteroid medications unless specifically indicated.
Many animals that suffer severe soft tissue injury
require repeated sedation events on concurrent days or
even multiple sedation events within the same 24‐hour
period. Patients that are going to require repeated sedation should be identified early in the course of hospitalization and measures should be taken to coordinate
their care. Following repeated sedation with the same
anesthetic medications it is common to see recovery
times become more prolonged and patients require
larger doses of drugs to achieve the same level of sedation due to the development of tolerance. It is good
practice to alter the sedation protocol every few days to
prevent development of tolerance or toxicity with
repeated dosing such as reported with propofol administration in cats. Additionally, animals that are sedated
serially are at risk for nutritional deficiency due to
repeated fasting. Efforts should be made to sedate the
animal at the same time every day to allow for the most
opportunities to provide nutrition.
Nutrition

The benefits of enteral nutrition (EN) for critically ill
patients are well documented and include stimulating
production of local antibody, prevention of villous

atrophy and prevention of gut‐derived inflammatory
complications. There are many ways of providing EN,
including voluntary ingestion, force feeding or syringe
feeding, nasogastric, nasoesophageal or nasojejunal
tube feeding or surgically placed feeding tube (esophagostomy tube, percutaneous gastrostomy tube, surgically
placed gastrostomy tube, jejunostomy tube or gastrojejunostomy tube). The best way to provide EN will likely
vary on an individual case basis and consideration should
be given to several factors when deciding the best
method for each patient.
Nasoesophageal or nasogastric feeding tubes are useful
for animals that are not stable enough for an anesthetic
event or for those that need a temporary bridge to
voluntary eating or placement of a longer term feeding
tube option. Nasogastric tubes can be useful for gastric
decompression in animals with severe ileus and delayed
gastric emptying. One major limitation to the use of
nasoenteral feeding tubes is the limited number of diets
that can be administered through the small diameter of
the tube. Although generally well tolerated in the hospital
setting, these tubes are not particularly useful to send
home with patients. Nasoenteral feeding tubes can be
used in most veterinary patients but some small dogs
and cats may not be able to accommodate the tubes
comfortably within the nasal cavity.
Animals that require a definitive surgical treatment
may benefit from placement of a longer term feeding
tube option at the time of surgery. Esophagostomy tubes
or PEG tubes can be placed quickly in patients under
general anesthesia. Esophagostomy tubes can be used for
provision of nutritional support immediately following
placement but are often limited in the types of food that
they can accommodate. Tube clogging is a common
problem and may necessitate altering the food formula
to a more watery consistency. Percutaneously placed
gastrostomy tubes cannot be used for nutritional support for the first 24 hours to prevent leakage of gastric
contents until a fibrous adhesion forms at the stoma.
Surgically placed gastrostomy or gastrojejunostomy
tubes can be utilized immediately.
The optimal timing of implementing nutritional support is not known but evidence suggests that earlier is
better. The clinician should strive to provide nutritional
support within the first 24–48 hours following severe
trauma or burns. Patients that are hemodynamically
compromised should not have nutritional support begun
until they are fully resuscitated and stable.
When starting nutritional support, it is important to
have a plan in place for meeting nutritional requirements. There is no evidence that provision of calories in
excess of basal energy requirement (BER) is beneficial; in
fact, it may be detrimental. Many formulas are available
for calculating caloric requirements but the basal energy

VetBooks.ir

46 Medical Management of Trauma and Burns

formula 30(BW in kg) +70 = kcal/day is both easy to use
and remember. When instituting a feeding plan, begin by
feeding a fraction (1/3 to 1/2) of the calculated resting
energy requirement (RER) for the first 24 hours with
the goal of achieving full RER over the next 48–72 hours.
It is common for the actual delivered kcal to be less
than the calculated requirement due to the fact that animals may be intolerant of the volume or rate required to
meet the RER, the need to water food down (reducing
the caloric density) to prevent tube clogging, or the
necessity to fast animals for sedation or anesthetic events.
Selection of a calorically dense formula (≥1 kcal/mL) is
best in most settings to ensure that the caloric target is
being reached. If available, the use of immune‐modulating formulas enriched with omega‐3 fatty acids and antioxidants may be a good choice.
Parenteral nutrition (PN) has been associated with a
variety of complications such as hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia, electrolyte disturbance (hypophosphatemia,
hypokalemia), and septiciemia. Although enteral nutrition is always preferable to parenteral nutrition, sometimes it is not feasible due to intolerance of EN or
nonfunctional GI tract (severe ileus, preexisting disease).
For patients that were healthy prior to trauma, PN is not
considered necessary for the first 5–7 days of hospitalization while the patient’s progress is monitored.
If anorexia persists or GI dysfunction becomes evident then PN should be instituted.
Trauma patients are at high risk for development of
ileus due to voluntary or involuntary immobilization,
opioid administration, pain, and general anesthesia.
Aggressive management of ileus should be attempted
with metoclopramide, cisapride, lidocaine, erythromycin
or ranitidine. Consideration should be given prior to routine treatment with H2 blockers due to the potential for
bacterial overgrowth in the proximal GI tract and subsequent complications. Ideally, the use of gastric alkalinizing medications would be based on evidence of gastric
ulceration or esophagitis or the probability of either of
these complications developing.
Transfusion

Severely traumatized patients may require red blood cell
or plasma component therapy due to hemorrhage or
development of complications such as DIC. Red blood
cell transfusion increases the oxygen‐carrying capacity
of the blood and helps to reestablish the oxygen reserve
normally present in health. Determining a transfusion
trigger is clinician dependent and no clear guidelines
have been established. The decision is made on a case‐
by‐case basis, carefully weighing the pros and cons of
each transfusion. As a general rule, the more acute the
drop in hemoglobin, the higher the transfusion trigger
since the necessary time to adapt to the decrease in blood

oxygen content has not passed. If a patient is exhibiting
clinical signs associated with anemia, is in hemorrhagic
shock refractory to crystalloid or colloid resuscitation, or
is undergoing a planned surgical procedure with anti­
cipated blood loss then transfusion of red blood cells
should be considered. The target packed red blood cell
volume (PCV) for blood transfusion is also unknown but
achieving a PCV of 25–30% is reasonable, with little evidence that higher values are beneficial. Improving blood
oxygen content can subsequently improve wound healing
and prevent or ameliorate secondary injury associated
with ischemia or inadequate oxygen delivery.
Since blood transfusion is becoming more common in
veterinary medicine, it is important to obtain a full
transfusion history from the owner prior to administration of any blood product. Pretransfusion testing will
vary by case according to how urgently the product is
needed. If time allows then complete pretransfusion
testing, including blood typing and major cross‐match,
should be performed. Blood typing of cats is mandatory
in all cases regardless of time sensitivity due to the
potential for fatal reactions to first‐time transfusions.
Cross‐matching of cats should be considered in all
transfusions if time permits due to the prevalence of
preformed antibodies in this species. It is not necessary
to cross‐match dogs receiving their first blood transfusion, as the existence of preformed antibodies is very
uncommon, and in the emergency setting a universal
donor or DEA 1.1‐negative donor unit can be given with
little to no pretransfusion testing. Animals that require
multiple transfusions during a hospitalization should
have a major cross‐match performed for all transfusions
occurring 72 hours after the first due to the risk of severe
hemolytic transfusion reaction.
The rate at which blood is administered is determined
by the patient’s volume status and cardiovascular stability.
In patients that are in hypovolemic shock secondary to
massive hemorrhage, blood can be administered as fast
as it will flow into the patient. Under more controlled
circumstances, most blood transfusions are started at
reduced rates that are gradually increased with the goal
of completing the transfusion over several hours. Close
attention should be paid to vital signs in an effort to
detect transfusion reactions early.
Fluid overload is an uncommon complication in dogs
receiving packed red blood cells but may be a concern in
cats (especially if underlying heart disease is present).
In addition to volume concerns, each red blood cell
transfusion will expose the patient to foreign antigen and
will stimulate an immune response to a greater or lesser
degree. In patients that are already experiencing systemic inflammation, this second hit may precipitate further injury, as in the case of transfusion‐related acute
lung injury.

453

VetBooks.ir

454

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

Sepsis Prevention

While animals with penetrating injuries or with grossly
contaminated wounds should be started on antibiotics,
the use of prophylactic antibiotics in animals that have
suffered blunt trauma without disruption of the integument is controversial. When necessary, first‐generation
cephalosporins are generally adequate for wounds not
related to animal bites. Patients that suffer animal bites
should be treated with potentiated penicillins or fluoroquinolones to cover common oral pathogens. Available
evidence suggests that burn patients should not routinely
be administered prophylactic antibiotics. If signs of
infection develop, such as redness, new or worsening
pain, or malodorous or purulent discharge, then antibiotic therapy should be instituted at that time. As always,
antibiotic therapy guided by culture results is the best
practice and when possible, cultures should be obtained
prior to administration of antibiotics.
Strict adherence to catheter hygiene should always be
followed (gloves worn, IV lines kept off the floor), and IV
catheters should be monitored daily for signs of phlebitis
or infection and should be replaced or removed if present. Any patient that develops a fever while in hospital
should have all catheter and tube sites inspected for signs
of infection. In addition to daily visual inspection, catheter wraps should be changed daily. Urinary catheters
should be connected to a closed collection system upon
placement and the collection system should be changed
daily. IV fluid lines should be changed on a routine basis
and disconnections of the IV fluid line from the patient
should be avoided as much as possible. Any gross contamination of the IV line should be immediately cleaned
and the line should be changed.
Severely traumatized or burned patients should always
be handled with gloves to prevent colonization with
bacteria from caregivers. Colonization with methicillin‐
resistant Staphylococcus species is common in healthcare
professionals and can put patients at risk if normal barrier prophylaxis and hand hygiene are not followed.
Monitoring

Critically ill trauma and burn patients are at risk for
decompensating acutely due to myriad causes including
multiorgan failure, acute lung injury or acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS), pulmonary thromboembolism, pneumonia, DIC or sepsis. Diligent monitoring of
these patients will allow the clinician to identify possible
complications early and increase the likelihood of successful intervention.
Severe trauma patients, especially those that have suffered traumatic brain injury or thoracic trauma, should
be placed on a respiratory watch and have both respiratory rate and effort evaluated at least hourly. Continuous
electrocardiographic monitoring should be strongly

­considered in all trauma patients, especially those with
­thoracic trauma. If continuous ECG monitoring is not
feasible then heart rate and pulse synchrony should be
checked frequently. Blood pressure monitoring should
be performed regularly. Monitoring mentation, central
venous pressure, direct arterial pressure, pulse oximetry,
urine output, and body weight can provide invaluable
information on progression of the patient’s condition.
Laboratory monitoring should include serial blood gas
analysis (venous or arterial), blood lactate and blood glucose measurement. Serum biochemistry analysis, complete blood count, and urinalysis should be performed at
admission and then every 2–3 days as the patient’s condition dictates. Coagulation assays should be considered
if DIC is suspected or if the patient has had substantial
blood loss or blood component therapy. Serial radiographs are useful for monitoring progression of pulmonary injury and serial ultrasound can aid in monitoring
progression of abdominal disease.
The nursing staff is often the first to be aware of a
patient’s changing condition and the longer they work
with a patient, the more attuned they become to subtle
changes in status. Therefore, a good working relationship with the nurses providing treatments is imperative
for successful monitoring of severely injured patients.
Preventive Nursing Care

It is important to prevent trauma patients from remaining
recumbent for long periods of time. Nonambulatory
patients should be repositioned several times a day to prevent pressure sores from developing. Mobility facilitates
mucus clearance from the lower airways and supervised
walks should be encouraged as soon as possible. If walks are
not possible, patients should have passive range of motion
performed several times a day. In addition to encouraging
mobility, recumbent patients should be provided with soft
bedding to distribute weight over pressure points and further decrease the likelihood of pressure ulcer formation.
A concerted effort should be made to keep the patient
clean and free from fecal or urine contamination. Prompt
removal of waste and bathing when necessary will aid in
prevention of fecal or urinary scalding that can lead to
compromise of the integumentary barrier. If urine or
fecal scalding is present then the fur from the area should
be clipped, the area should be cleaned with dilute antiseptic solution and a barrier ointment such as zinc oxide
should be applied several times a day. Many of these
patients may require urinary management such as
intermittent bladder catheterization, indwelling urinary
catheter placement or intermittent urinary bladder
expression. The presence of an indwelling urinary catheter is a risk factor for development of urinary tract
infection and can be an important contributor to
patient morbidity. If a urinary catheter is present then

VetBooks.ir

46 Medical Management of Trauma and Burns

the collection system should be maintained closed to
reduce the chances of ascending contamination and urinary tract infection.
Patients with bandages covering wounds should have
the bandages changed immediately if strikethrough is
present or if the bandage becomes contaminated with
feces or urine to prevent bacterial contamination of the
wound bed. Regardless of contamination, bandages
should be changed at least daily initially.
Burn‐Specific Therapy

In the early postresuscitation phase of burn management
(2–24 hours), patient fluid needs are likely to be much
greater than would normally be expected. With this in
mind, care should be taken to avoid excessive fluid
administration and the goals of fluid administration
should focus on maintaining blood pressure and urine
production within normal limits.
Due to decreased local perfusion, burn wounds should
be treated with topical antimicrobial agents and covered
with nonadherent dressings after initial decontamination to prevent bacterial colonization rather than relying
on systemic antimicrobial therapy. The topical antimicrobial of choice is silver sulfadiazine (SSD), which has a
broad antimicrobial spectrum and few side‐effects.
Manuka honey can be used as an alternative to SSD.
Rehabilitation

Comprehensive management of trauma and burn patients
does not end with hospital discharge. These patients
often require weeks to months of physical rehabilitation,
which should begin in hospital, to regain lost mobility
and to complete the healing process. Often patients are
discharged earlier than planned due to financial limitations of the owner. In these instances, it is imperative that
in‐depth discharge instructions be provided to the owner
on how to perform nursing care, including passive range
of motion, tube feedings, bladder expression, medication
administration, etc. Consideration should be given to
referring the client to a certified veterinary rehabilitation
specialist, especially if spinal trauma, long bone fractures
or severe soft tissue injuries were present. Burn patients
are at risk for development of contracture as burns heal
and physical therapy can help to prevent severe contracture deformity and maintain functional mobility.

­Prognosis
Euthanasia is always a confounding factor when determining prognostic factors in veterinary patients.
However, factors that appear to be correlated with an
increased mortality include higher injury severity score,
presence of head trauma, requirement of mechanical

ventilation, hemoperitoneum, and vertebral fractures.
Many scoring systems have been recommended for both
human and veterinary patients to help predict patient
outcomes. While care should be taken when using scoring systems to predict likely outcomes for individual
patients, they may be useful to assess risk of death.
The Animal Trauma Triage (ATT) Score (Box 46.1)
was developed to estimate risk of death following trauma.
The ATT is easy to use and has been validated in several
patient populations. The score uses a numerical value
from 0 to 3 in six categories with a total possible score of
18. For every one‐point increase in ATT, the patient’s
risk of death increases by 2.3–2.6 times. While the ATT
has proven useful in trauma patients, it fails to take into
account the presence of preexisting disease or nontarget
organ system evaluation.
The use of a Modified Glasgow Coma Score (MGCS)
for prognostication following head trauma has been
reported in the veterinary literature (Box 46.2). The
MGCS assigns a conglomerate score from 3 to 18 based
on scores ranging from 1 to 6 in three categories: motor
activity, brainstem reflexes, and level of consciousness.
The lower the score, the worse the patient’s performance
is within each category, and a total score of less than 8
correlates with 50% survival at 48 hours. While the utility
of a one‐time MCGS performed at presentation is open
for debate, serial evaluation can be used and may help
the clinician to make a more objective assessment of
the progression of traumatic brain injury. A worsening
MGCS during the first 24–48 hours should be considered a negative prognostic indicator. The short‐term
prognosis for dogs with traumatic brain injury is similar
to mortality rates for blunt trauma in general (12–15%).
The long‐term neurologic outcome of dogs surviving
after head trauma is generally considered to be good to
excellent. However, it is reported that 7% of dogs suffering head trauma develop a seizure disorder.
The prognosis for animals suffering blunt trauma is generally good with aggressive supportive care. Animals that
suffer blunt trauma secondary to vehicular injury have a
reported mortality rate of approximately 15–25%.
Negative prognostic indicators include cranium fractures,
recumbency at admission, development of DIC, multiple
organ dysfunction syndrome, the need for ventilation or
vasopressor therapy and cardiopulmonary arrest.
Animals that suffer bite wounds from larger animals
should be considered critically ill until proven otherwise.
The amount of trauma to the underlying tissue is disproportionate to the amount of external injury visible
during examination and all of these wounds should be
considered contaminated with bacteria. Small dogs and
cats that have been bitten by larger canids also are likely
to have a component of crush injury associated with the
wound. For these reasons, animals with severe bite injury

455

VetBooks.ir

Box 46.1 Animal Trauma Triage Score (ATT)
Perfusion
MM pink/moist CRT 2 s, T ≥100F, strong or bounding
femoral pulse quality
MM hyperemic OR pale pink, tacky, T ≥100F, CRT
0–2 s, fair femoral pulses
MM very pale pink and tacky, CRT 2–3 s, T <100F,
detectable but poor pulses
MM gray/blue/white, CRT >3 s, T <100F, no palpable
femoral pulses

0
1
2
3

Cardiac
HR canine 60–140 bpm, feline 120–200 bpm, normal
sinus rhythm
HR canine 140–180 bpm, feline 200–260 bpm, NSR or
VPC <20/min
HR canine >180 bpm, feline >260 bpm, consistent
arrhythmia
HR canine <60 bpm, feline ≤120 bpm, erratic
arrhythmia

0
1
2
3

Respiratory
Regular resp rate with no stridor, no abdominal
component to resp
Mild incr resp rate and effort, +/‐ abd comp, mild
upper airway sounds
Mod incr resp rate and effort, some abd comp, elbow
abduct, mod incr upper airway
Marked resp effort OR gasping/agonal resp, little/no
air passage

0
1
2
3

Eye/muscle/integument
Abrasion/laceration – none or partial thickness. Eye:
no fluorescein uptake
Abrasion/laceration – full thickness. NO deep tissue
involved. Eye: corneal lac, not perf
Abrasion/laceration – full thickness, deep tissue
involved. Artery/nerve/muscle intact. Eye: corneal
perforation, punctured globe or proptosis

0

Penetration of abdomen/thorax. Abrasion/laceration
full thickness, deep tissue involved. Artery/nerve/
muscle compromised

3

Skeletal
Wt bearing 3 or 4 limbs. No palpable fx/jt laxity
Closed limb fx/rib fx or any mandibular fx. Single jt
laxity/lux (including SI), pelvic fx with unilateral
intact SI‐ilium‐acetabulum. Single limb open/closed
fx at or below carpus/tarsus
Multiple grade 1 conditions, single long bone open fx
above carpus/tarsus with cortical bone preserved.
Nonmandibular skull fx
Vertebral body fx/luxation except coccygeal, multiple
long bone open fx above tarsus/carpus, single long
bone open fx above tarsus/carpus with loss of
cortical bone

0
1

2
3

Neurologic
Central: consciousness: alert to sl dull. Periph: normal
spinal reflexes; purposeful movement and
nociception in all limbs
Central: dull/depressed/withdrawn. Periph: abn.
spinal reflexes with purposeful movement and
nociception intact in all 4 limbs
Central: unconscious. Responds to noxious stimuli.
Periph: absent purposeful movement with intact
nociception in 2 or more limbs OR nociception
absent in 1 limb. Decr anal or tail tone
Central: nonresponsive to all stimuli, refractory
seizures. Periph: absent nociception in 2 or more
limbs; absent tail or perianal nociception

0
1
2

3

1

Source: Adapted from Rockar et al. (1994).

2

CRT, capillary refill time; HR, heart rate; MM, mucous membranes;
NSR, normal sinus rhythm; SI, sacroiliac; VPC, ventricular premature
contraction.

Box 46.2 Modified Glasgow Coma Score (MGCS)
Motor activity
Normal gait, normal spinal reflexes
Hemiparesis, tetraparesis, or decerebrate activity
Recumbent, intermittent extensor rigidity
Recumbent, constant extensor rigidity
Recumbent, constant extensor rigidity with
opisthotonus
Recumbent, hypotonia of muscles, depressed or
absent spinal reflexes

6
5
4
3
2
1

Brainstem reflexes
Normal pupillary light reflexes and oculocephalic reflexes
Slow pupillary light reflexes and normal to reduced
oculocephalic reflexes
Bilateral unresponsive miosis with normal to reduced
oculocephalic reflexes
Pinpoint pupils with reduced to absent oculocephalic
reflexes

6
5
4
3

Unilateral, unresponsive mydriasis & reduced to
absent oculocephalic reflexes
Bilateral, unresponsive mydriasis & reduced to absent
oculocephalic reflexes

2
1

Level of consciousness
Occasional periods of alertness and responsive to
environment
Depression or delirium, responsive, but response may
be inappropriate
Semicomatose, responsive to visual stimuli
Semicomatose, responsive to auditory stimuli
Semicomatose, responsive only to repeated noxious
stimuli
Comatose, unresponsive to repeated noxious stimuli
Source: Adapted from Platt et al. (2001).

6
5
4
3
2
1

VetBooks.ir

46 Medical Management of Trauma and Burns

have a worse prognosis than animals with a comparable
blunt trauma load. For small to medium‐sized dogs with
severe bite wounds, a mortality rate of approximately
20% has been reported although a subset of patients
(those with crush injury and development of pigmenturia) appear to have a much worse prognosis.
The prognosis for veterinary burn patients is unknown.
The overall mortality rate in human burn victims without

inhalation injury is approximately 14%. This increases to
20% in humans with inhalation injury and burns. Factors
that affect prognosis in humans include TBSA affected
and concurrent inhalation injury. The mortality rate for
dogs and cats with smoke inhalation alone is approximately 10%. Animals that have suffered burns in addition
to inhalation injury should be expected to have a higher
mortality rate.

­Further Reading
Bali MS, Lang J, Jaggy A, et al. Comparative study of
vertebral fractures and luxations in dogs and cats.
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2009; 22: 47–53.
Bruce CW, Brisson BA, Gyselinck K. Spinal fracture and
luxation in dogs and cats. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
2008; 21: 280–4.
Friedenberg SG, Butler AL, Wei L, et al. Seizures following
head trauma in dogs: 259 cases (1999–2009). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2012; 241(11): 1479–83.
Hall KE, Holowaychuk MK, Sharp CR, et al. Multicenter
prospective evaluation of dogs with trauma. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2014; 244(3): 300–8.
Platt SR, Radaelli ST, McDonnell JJ. The prognostic value
of the modified Glasgow coma scale in head trauma in
dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2001; 15: 581–4.
Rockar RA, Drobatz KS, Shofer FS. Development of a
scoring system for the veterinary trauma patient. J Vet
Emerg Crit Care 1994; 4: 7–‐84.
Scheepens ET, Peeters ME, L’Eplattenier HF, et al. Thoracic
bite trauma in dogs: a comparison of clinical and

radiological parameters with surgical results. J Small
Anim Pract 2006; 47: 721–6.
Simpson SA, Syring R, Otto CM. Severe blunt trauma in
dogs: 235 cases (1997–2003). J Vet Emerg Crit Care
2009; 19(6): 588–602.
Streeter EM, Rozanski EA, De Laforcade‐Buress A, et al.
Evaluation of vehicular trauma in dogs: 239 cases
(January–December 2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009;
235(4): 405–8.
Vaughn, L, Beckel N. Severe burn injury, burn shock and
smoke inhalation injury in small animals. Part 1: Burn
classification and pathophysiology. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
2012; 22(2): 179–86.
Vaughn L, Beckel N, Walters P. Severe burn injury, burn
shock and smoke inhalation injury in small animals.
Part 2: diagnosis, therapy, complication, and prognosis.
J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2012; 22(2): 187–200.
Zulauf D, Kaser‐Hotz B, Hassig M, et al. Radiographic
examination and outcome in consecutive feline trauma
patients. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2008; 21: 36–40.

457

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

459

47
Venomous Snake Bites
Nathan Peterson, DVM, DACVECC
VCA West Los Angeles Animal Hospital, Los Angeles, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
The degree of pathology related to snakebites is determined by
two main factors: the composition of the venom and the
amount of venom injected into the victim. In veterinary
medicine, there are two families of venomous snakes that
are responsible for the vast majority of envenomations: the
Viperidae and Elapidae. In general, vipers are capable of
injecting venom through hollow fangs and once they
(vipers) are mature, they have the ability to control the volume of venom injected with each bite. The Elapidae do not
have such an advanced venom delivery system and rely on
introduction of venom secreted from a venom gland
through a wound created by biting. These snakes use their
teeth and underdeveloped fangs in a chewing motion to
create the wound. Therefore, elapid envenomation usually
requires a snake to “adhere” or “chew” on a victim for some
amount of time to allow adequate envenomation and consequently, these snakes strike and hold to allow for venom
introduction whereas vipers strike and retreat, allowing the
venom injected during the bite to immobilize the patient.
The composition of snake venom is extremely complex and it varies between species and within species
based on geographic range. Venom composition also
varies with age of the snake and the time of year. There
are many potential effects of snake envenomation
including flaccid paralysis, systemic myolysis, coagulopathy and hemorrhage, renal damage/failure, cardiotoxicity, and local tissue injury at the bite site. While the
traditional view of venomous snakes was that vipers
caused local and hemorrhagic effects (hemotoxic
venom) and elapids caused systemic and nonhemorrhagic effects (neurotoxic venom), the reality is that any
species of snake is capable of producing venom that
can affect one or more of the body systems. Some Asian
and African cobras (vipers) produce profound tissue
injury while some South and Central American

­rattlesnakes (also vipers) produce primarily paralytic
or neurotoxic venoms.
The venom of the North American pit vipers (Crotalidae)
is typically classified as necrogenic/hemorrhagic and is
capable of causing massive tissue damage and inducing
life‐threatening inflammation or hemorrhage. The venom
is primarily composed of water, with proteins and peptides making up approximately 10% of the total volume. It
is this portion of the venom that is responsible for most of
the direct tissue injury and hemostatic perturbation seen
with envenomation. It is also this portion that is responsible for inducing endothelial cell damage leading to endothelial dysfunction, cell lysis, and ultimately circulatory
collapse. So far, over 60 purified polypeptides and approximately 50 enzymatic fractions have been identified with
at least 10 enzymes and 3–12 nonenzymatic proteins and
peptides present in any individual snake’s venom.
Hyaluronidase and collagenase act to break down
­connective tissue, facilitating the spread of venom and
beginning the digestive process. Together, these enzymes
are capable of causing massive tissue damage and necrosis and are responsible for many of the outward sings of
envenomation. The impact of envenomation on hemostasis is profound and can be considered in light of the
areas of hemostasis that are affected.
Venom proteins acting directly on coagulation factors
include procoagulant proteins such as factor V (FV) activators, FX activators, prothrombin activators, and
thrombin‐like enzymes. Anticoagulant venom factors
also exist and include FIX/X binding proteins, protein C
activators, thrombin inhibitors, and phospholipase A2.
Finally, factors acting on fibrinolysis include fibrinolytic
enzymes (metalloproteinases and serine proteases) and
plasminogen activator.
Many of the components of snake venom exert an effect
on platelet function. The C‐type lectins, disintegrins,
and proteinases inhibit platelets by a variety of

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

460

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

­mechanisms, including interactions with von Willebrand
factor (vWF) receptors and fibrinogen receptors. Platelet
activation occurs through a thrombin‐like effect of proteinases and phospholipase A2, among other mediators.
Besides the effect of venom on primary and secondary
hemostasis, proteins in the venom can affect the endothelium. Metalloproteinases, disintegrins, and C‐type lectins degrade the blood vessel extracellular matrix, induce
endothelial cell apoptosis, and inhibit platelet binding
through interference with vWF. The net result of this
combined action is consumption of fibrin and development of bleeding diathesis that is not generally characterized by thrombosis or intravascular coagulation.
Neurotoxins contained in snake venom exhibit a
­predilection for peripheral nervous tissue and relatively
few are capable of crossing the blood–brain barrier.
Venoms that exert a primarily neurotoxic effect act as
either presynaptic (beta‐neurotoxins) or postsynaptic
(alpha‐neurotoxins) neuromuscular blocking agents;
most neurotoxic venoms contain toxins that affect both
the pre‐ and postsynaptic neuron. Presynaptic or beta‐
neurotoxins have been isolated from members of the
Elapidae and Viperidae (including Crotalidae) families.
Most of these toxins inhibit neurotransmitter (acetylcholine) release although a small number have been
identified that actually enhance neurotransmitter
release. Postsynaptic or alpha‐neurotoxins result in a
curare‐like syndrome by binding acetylcholine receptors on the postsynaptic membrane or interfering with
acetylcholine interaction with its postsynaptic receptors. The degree of inhibition is related to the number
of receptors occupied by toxin molecules. Most of these
toxins bind irreversibly to the acetylcholine (ACh)
receptor although treatment with antivenin seems to
accelerate toxin–receptor dissociation.
A unique syndrome resulting in myokymia (spontaneous undulating fine contractions of multiple individual motor units) has been identified with venom from
timber rattlesnakes (Crotalus horridus). Primarily neurotoxic snake bites result in much less local tissue inflammation and pain than their necrogenic counterparts.
Large necrosing wounds are uncommon in these cases.

­Epidemiology
Of the approximately 2300 species of snakes worldwide,
about 420 are venomous. Venomous species can be
found on every continent except Antarctica, with members of the Viperidae family found throughout the world.
In North, Central, and South America, the Viperidae
family is represented primarily by the pit vipers
(Crotalidae) and is responsible for the majority of veterinary envenomations. The true incidence of veterinary

patients bitten by snakes every year is unknown but it is
estimated to be between 150 000 and 300 000. Animals
that are most at risk are those that live in a rural or semirural environment although dogs that are taken on walks
in wilderness areas are also at high risk, especially if
allowed off leash. There is a strong seasonal influence on
the incidence of snake bites, with the majority of bites
occurring in the spring and summer months.
The severity of a bite depends on several variables,
including the time that has elapsed since the snake’s last
meal (it takes approximately 20 days for pit vipers to
replenish venom stores), the motivation of the snake
(defensive or offensive), and its age. Bites from immature
snakes in the spring months are often more severe than
bites that occur later in the season since juvenile pit vipers
have not developed the ability to control the amount of
venom that is injected with each strike but rather deliver an
“all or nothing” bite. Therefore, somewhat counterintuitively, it is arguably better for an animal to be bitten by a
large adult pit viper than a juvenile. The metabolic demands
required to synthesize venom are quite high so adult snakes
will often deliver an initial “dry bite” (a bite containing no
venom) as an attempt to deter a pet from further harassing
them. Subsequent defensive strikes, however, are often
very severe as the snake continues to feel threatened and is
committed to finally deterring its assailant.
The most common location of bite wounds is the head
(79%) followed by extremities (16%) while bites to the
torso account for less than 2% of confirmed snake bites.
Additionally, single bites are much more common than
multiple bites, with multiple bites occurring approximately 15–30% of the time. The small puncture wounds
typical of snake bites are often difficult to locate and can
be easily overlooked, especially if no surrounding local
tissue reaction is present. Only 20–25% of known rattlesnake bites are actually envenomating.
Cats appear to be inherently more resistant to pit viper
venom than dogs. However, when cats do present for
veterinary care, their clinical condition is generally more
advanced. This may be due to cats’ habit of hiding and
avoiding human contact following a snake bite compared
to dogs who are more likely to seek human interaction.
Cats’ smaller body size and inclination to “toy” with
possible prey may also be contributing factors to explain
these findings.
The species of snake is known in less than 50% of cases
although this can often be inferred based on the known
ranges of different species. Owners should be discouraged from attempting to identify the snake due to the
danger that is posed with handling a live or very recently
dead snake. Envenomating bites can occur from recently
dead or decapitated snakes. These agonal bites typically
inject the entire volume of the venom gland, making
them very severe.

VetBooks.ir

47 Venomous Snake Bites

Coral snake envenomations are relatively uncommon
in the United States and are most likely to occur in the
southeastern US and Gulf Coast region. The infrequency
of bites is due to the reclusive nature and physical limitations of the snake. North American coral snakes are
small in size and have small fixed fangs that are incapable
of penetrating thick undercoats. Coral snakes depend on
venom being introduced through a chewing motion
rather than being injected. This requires the snake to be
attached to the victim for some time to allow sufficient
venom delivery. Dogs may even present to a veterinarian
with the snake still maintaining its grip on the victim.
Due to the rural location in which bites often occur
and the relative proximity or distance to veterinary care,
the time from bite to veterinary care is highly variable
but is usually within the first 2–3 hours.

­Signalment
Young dogs of both sexes are equally at risk of being
bitten by a snake. Although a clear breed predilection
has not been identified, the sporting and working breeds
appear to be overrepresented. Any dog or cat that spends
time outdoors, especially if off leash or unsupervised in a
rural or semirural environment, is at risk for being bitten
by a snake.

­History and Clinical Signs
Pets that have been bitten by snakes will have a very
short pertinent history that may include known exposure to snakes. Owners will often report the presence of
a swelling on the face or limbs that seems to be getting
worse rapidly. The pet will be exhibiting signs of pain and
may be either seeking or eschewing attention. Snakes are
reclusive animals and owners frequently do not see them
interact with their pet, making observation of a strike
uncommon. When presented with a patient that has
clinical signs consistent with snake bite, the veterinarian
should question the owner about observed snake activity
and possible exposure. Signs of snake envenomation
almost always occur within the first four hours but may
be delayed up to 24 hours, making the possibility of
determining when snake bite could have occurred relatively easy.
Patients with necrogenic snakebites will exhibit swelling or erythema around the puncture wounds. Localized
swelling is present in approximately 90–95% of cases at
the time of initial examination. If the patient is presented
very early following the bite then outward clinical signs
can be initially very mild and may easily be overlooked
but signs reliably appear within 30 minutes from the

time of bite. When evaluated early, these patients can be
mistaken as having a hypersensitivity reaction as is
commonly seen with Hymenoptera stings. If the owner
cannot provide a history that supports a diagnosis of
snake bite, these patients may initially be incorrectly
treated for hypersensitivity reactions. A distinguishing
feature of snake bite is significant pain associated with
the swelling whereas severe pain is generally absent in
hypersensitivity reactions. Petechiae may be seen at
presentation about 20% of the time.

­Diagnosis
The diagnosis of snake bite is usually suspected based on
a history of snake interaction observed or suspected by
the owner. Confirmation of the diagnosis is achieved
through examination of the patient with the presence of
characteristic puncture wounds and local, progressive
lymphedema.
Initial biochemical laboratory evaluation is usually
normal although creatine kinase (CK) and aspartate
aminotransferase(AST) may be elevated secondary to
muscular injury. Complete blood count may reveal
thrombocytopenia. When present, thrombocytopenia is
generally moderate (135 000–160 000 platelets/μL). Mild
to moderate leukocytosis may also be present during
the initial evaluation. Pit viper envenomation has been
shown to cause echinocytosis and a blood film revealing
significant echinocytosis is supportive of a diagnosis of
envenomation. Coagulation assays performed at the
time of hospitalization may reveal prolongation of
prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time
(PTT) or activated clotting time (ACT). When present,
the prototypical venom‐induced coagulopathy is defined
by low fibrinogen and platelet counts, increased fibrin
split products (FSP), normal D‐dimer concentration, and
prolonged PT and PTT. This characteristic coagulation
profile is due to the defibrination of plasma without
overt coagulation resulting in failure of D‐dimer concentration to become elevated. Clinically, D‐dimer levels are
often mildly elevated, most likely reflecting systemic
inflammation and clot formation at the site of the bite
wound. Recently, thromboelastography has been used to
evaluate dogs with snake bite and may prove a useful
adjunct for both diagnosis and prognosis.
Although uncommon, snake venom is capable of causing
cardiac arrhythmias. Routine monitoring of electrocardiographs (ECGs) is probably not necessary but any
animal that has tachycardia and/or an audible irregularity should have an ECG performed to evaluate for the
presence of potentially malignant arrhythmias. While
not specific, the presence of an arrhythmia in a patient
exhibiting signs of snake bite may support the diagnosis.

461

VetBooks.ir

462

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

Diagnosing coral snake envenomation is complicated
by the lack of local tissue reaction and the fact that signs
may not develop for up to 12 hours following envenomation. Any patient exhibiting signs of a rapidly progressive
ascending paralysis in coral snake endemic areas should
be considered at risk and be treated appropriately.
Owners may not be as aware of coral snake exposure due
to the smaller size of the snakes and the lack of a warning
system such as a rattle.

­Therapy
First Aid
Appropriate veterinary care should not be delayed to
allow first aid measures to be performed. First aid for
snake bites has a long and storied past, including lancing
and suctioning the wound, placing tourniquets, ice packing, warm packing, and administering electroshock,
among other techniques. To date, none of these measures has demonstrated any improvement in outcome; in
fact, some can significantly worsen the clinical course of
disease. Placement of tourniquets may exacerbate the
amount of tissue injury by preventing dilution of the
venom as it is distributed throughout the body and prolonging the duration of time that venom is present in
the affected tissue bed. Envenomation that would not
otherwise induce tissue necrosis might therefore result
in massive tissue loss if a tourniquet is placed inappropriately in the field. Cold packing can induce local vasoconstriction and exacerbate tissue injury through a similar
mechanism. Incision and suction should never be performed. It is not likely to result in any improvement in
outcome and may put the care provider at risk. The best
first aid measure available is to immobilize the affected
area if possible and to transport the patient to the nearest
veterinary facility capable of treating snake bite. Due to
the preponderance of snake bites being located on the
head and muzzle of dogs and cats, immobilization is not
often feasible and rapid transport is the best option.
While first aid measures in necrogenic snake bites do
not include application of a tourniquet or compression
bandage, coral snake envenomations do benefit from
constriction. There is very little local tissue injury associated with coral snake envenomations, meaning the application of a tight compression bandage on the affected
area should be performed if possible.
Antivenin Therapy
Regardless of the primary effect of the venom, the mainstay of treatment for snake bite is the administration of
venom antibodies (antivenin) specific to the envenoming

species if possible. Because the effectiveness of antivenin
is dependent on binding circulating venom molecules, a
molar dosing regimen is followed, meaning that the
dose of antivenin is dependent on the volume of venom
injected rather than the patient’s body size. In fact,
smaller animals often require higher doses of antivenin
due to differences in the volume of distribution of venom
in a small versus large dog. Antivenin therapy is most
effective when instituted early in the disease course
although it is effective as long as circulating venom is
present and should be considered even many hours
after an envenomation if clinical signs are severe or progressive or if a coagulopathy develops.
Unfortunately, the cost of antivenin therapy can be
quite high and often results in patients receiving less
antivenin than ideal circumstances would dictate. When
faced with the predicament of whether or not to administer a dose of antivenin with the belief that it will not be
a completely effective dose, the clinician should err on
the side of treatment since binding even a portion of the
free venom may improve the clinical course.
There are currently two major types of antivenin commercially available. Polyvalent whole molecule antivenin
is derived from the serum of horses sensitized to several
North, Central, and South American pit viper species
and contains the entire IgG antibody and may contain
equine albumin, depending on manufacturer. The second type of antivenin is composed of the Fab portion only
of an ovine‐ or equine‐derived antibody rather than the
complete immunoglobulin molecule. Whole immunoglobulin antivenin is generally less expensive and more
readily available than Fab‐based antivenins but due to the
presence of the entire IgG molecule and possibly additional foreign proteins (equine or ovine albumin), the
possibility of hypersensitivity reaction is increased.
Antivenins containing the smaller Fab portion of the
immunoglobulin molecule are less immunogenic and
may be better able to diffuse into damaged tissue due to
their smaller size. However, this smaller size results in a
shorter elimination half‐life than the larger complete molecule antivenins. This can lead to a situation in which the
antivenin is eliminated more rapidly than it is capable of
binding circulating venom molecules, resulting in recurrence of clinical signs. If using an Fab‐based antivenin, the
clinician should be aware of this possibility and recognize the fact that repeated dosing may be needed every six
hours to most effectively treat the patient.
While the Fab‐based antivenins are less immunogenic
than the whole molecule formulations, both types of
antivenin are capable of causing immediate and delayed
immune reactions, with a reported incidence of 5–13%.
Anaphylactic (type I) or anaphylactoid hypersensitivity
reactions occur immediately upon administration of
antivenin, are dose related and are due to either an

VetBooks.ir

47 Venomous Snake Bites

IgE‐mediated response (type I) or direct activation of the
complement cascade (anaphylactoid). Signs of anaphylactoid reactions are identical to signs of true anaphylaxis and can range from mild facial edema and pruritus
to complete circulatory collapse. Premedication with
antihistamines has been reported but has not been
proven to be beneficial in reducing the incidence of reactions. Delayed (type III) hypersensitivity reactions have
been reported up to several weeks after administration
and are the result of immune complex formation and
complement activation. Clinical signs associated with
delayed type III hypersensitivity reactions include fever,
lethargy, vasculitis, peripheral edema, and glomerulonephritis. Type III hypersensitivity reactions are generally
self‐limiting but can rarely be life threatening. The risk of
hypersensitivity reactions, including acute anaphylactic
reactions, increases in animals that have been previously
treated with antivenin products.
When edema formation is severe or when the location of
the bite wound is likely to result in life‐threatening complications (airway obstruction), early and aggressive antivenin
therapy should be instituted. Antivenin should be administered to effect until the progression of the signs abates (i.e.,
there is no further evidence of new edema formation,
bruising has stopped spreading, and coagulopathy is controlled). Median doses of antivenin for dogs have been
reported as one vial (range 1–10), and beginning with one
vial given over 30 minutes is reasonable. Additional doses
can be administered every 30–60 minutes as needed. It
should be remembered that ­antivenin products have colloidal properties that can significantly expand the vascular
space. Volume overload is a concern in small patients,
especially those that require higher doses of antivenin.
Serial measurement of muzzle or limb circumference
can help the clinician decide whether progression has in
fact stopped. It is important to remember that as edema
matures, it becomes gravity dependent. Recognition of
edema migration rather than progression is difficult and
is best achieved through good‐quality serial evaluations.
Cage‐side rounds provide an opportunity for all staff to
observe the site, decreasing interobserver variation in
assessment. Similarly, maturation of bruising should
not be confused with ongoing bruising. Clipping the fur
from affected areas and marking the leading edge of
bruising can help the clinician differentiate the two. The
use of digital photography may aid the clinician in monitoring progression and can facilitate communication
between team members if questions arise.
It should be emphasized that snake bite‐induced
coagulopathy is not identical to other types of consumptive coagulopathy, so treatments used for common
coagulopathies are often ineffective if applied to snake
bite coagulopathy. Because the coagulopathy observed in
snake envenomation is the result of defibrination rather

than disseminated coagulation, the treatment of choice
is not factor replacement, at least not initially. The
underlying cause of defibrination is the presence or persistence of venom components in the blood. As long as
venom components are circulating, fibrin and fibrinogen
will continue to be degraded and treatment with factor
replacement therapy in the form of fresh frozen or frozen
plasma is not expected to be beneficial. In fact, administration of plasma products in the presence of circulating
venom may exacerbate coagulopathy by providing more
substrate for degradation, leading to higher levels of FSP,
which further inhibit coagulation. Consequently, the
most vital treatment is inactivation of circulating venom
components by administration of antivenin.
Even with early and aggressive antivenin therapy, bite
wounds to the head can result in severe, progressive edema
and swelling and may pose a threat to airways. Often, early
placement of a temporary tracheostomy is beneficial. Once
edema has stopped forming, it will become gravity dependent and can result in severe swelling of the ventral muzzle
and neck. If the decision to perform a tracheostomy is
made too late, the dissection through edematous tissue is
significantly more difficult.
If open wounds develop, they should be treated like
any other contaminated, large, soft tissue wound. Any
areas of necrosis should be surgically debrided; the
wound should be cleaned daily and protected with a
sterile bandage. Consultation with a surgeon should be
considered for large wounds or wounds involving the
joints. Primary closure of these wounds is rarely feasible
due to the large amount of tissue loss that occurs. When
wounds are present on limbs, the affected limb should be
immobilized in a functional position to reduce the likelihood of wound contracture resulting in decreased range
of motion. Most snake bites result in venom deposition
within subcutaneous tissue rather than muscle bellies, so
fasciotomy is rarely needed in dogs and cats.
Antibiotic therapy for snake bite is controversial in both
human and veterinary medicine. There is little evidence
that prophylactic antibiotic therapy improves the clinical
course or prevents wound infection. The rationale for
antibiotic use is grounded in the fact that bacterial cultures of snakes’ mouths document heavy pathogenic bacterial loads; however, the actual incidence of documented
infection is small. Therefore, the routine use of prophylactic antibiotics is likely not necessary and the decision to
treat with antibiotics is clinician dependent. If used,
broad‐spectrum antibiotics should be selected. Antibiotic
therapy is less controversial once a necrotic wound is present. As always, antibiotic therapy should be guided by
culture and sensitivity results when possible to allow for
deescalation and more responsible antibiotic usage.
Analgesia is an important component of snake bite treatment and should be considered early in the treatment

463

VetBooks.ir

464

Section 5 Critical Care Medicine

course. Administration of antivenin can reduce the acute
pain associated with the snake bite although antivenin
alone is insufficient to provide adequate analgesia. The use of
opioid analgesics has been discouraged due to the possible
respiratory depressant effects of this class of drugs. However,
clinically significant respiratory depression in veterinary
patients is uncommon with opioid medications and should
not be considered a reason for withholding their administration. Administration of bolus opioids may be insufficient
to manage the severe pain associated with snake bite.
Constant rate infusion (CRI) of fentanyl (3–5 μg/kg/h) or
morphine (0.1–0.3 mg/kg/h) should be considered in cases
of severe envenomation. As always, a multimodal approach
to pain management may be more effective than reliance on
a single analgesic protocol. Ketamine has good somatic
analgesic properties and a CRI (5–15 μg/kg/min) can be a
nice addition to the analgesic protocol for snake bite victims. Lidocaine (50 μg/kg/min) and dexmedetomidine CRI
(0.7–1.5 μg/kg/h) have both been demonstrated to provide
analgesia, especially when used in conjunction with opioids. The ultimate pain management strategy implemented
should take patient factors such as age, conformation, location and severity of envenomation, and cardiovascular status into consideration.
Edema formation of the face can impair the pet’s ability to
prehend food and move the lips and tongue. Accumulation
of mucus in the buccal pouch can lead to bacterial overgrowth and development of oral ulcerations. Good oral
care, including rinses with water and/or antiseptic solution,
should be instituted if muzzle swelling is severe.
Some components of snake venom have been demonstrated to result in mast cell degranulation. While
theoretical benefits of antihistamine administration
exist, the routine use of H1 and H2 blocking drugs is not
currently recommended for human snake bite victims and
their use in veterinary patients is up for debate.
As is often the case with corticosteroids, their use is controversial. There is little conclusive veterinary or human
literature to either support or refute their use for snake bite.
Due to the lack of evidence of a clear advantage to patients
receiving corticosteroids and their well‐documented side‐
effects, the routine use of corticosteroids in snake bite
cannot be advocated. Administration of corticosteroids
may be indicated if a patient develops signs of an acute or
delayed hypersensitivity reaction to antivenin administration. Similarly, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) should not be administered to snake bite victims
until any venom‐induced coagulopathy has been effectively
managed due to the potential for NSAID‐induced thrombocytopathia. Following appropriate management of
coagulopathy and hemodynamic stabilization, NSAIDs
may prove useful in the analgesic management of snake bite
victims. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory medications
should not be administered if myoglobinuria is present.

A rattlesnake vaccine (Red Rock Biologics, Woodland,
CA) is commercially available in the United States for
use against western diamondback rattlesnakes (C. atrox).
There are currently no peer‐reviewed studies evaluating
the clinical efficacy of vaccination in mitigating signs and
none are likely to be performed due to the high incidence
of dry bites and variability in venom dose between
patients. In fact, owners who have had their pets vaccinated may have a false sense of security when it comes to
snake bite and may be slower to seek veterinary care. For
this reason, it is not recommended to vaccinate for snake
bite. Aversion training is available but is also considered
unreliable as this too may result in a false sense of security when in snake habitats.

­Prognosis
Fatality associated with snake bite injury is generally
uncommon although these patients experience significant morbidity. Reported mortality rates range from 4%
to 20% and are correlated with antivenin treatment.
Despite the overall favorable prognosis for survival
from snake bite, many pets are euthanized due to the
financial burden associated with hospitalization and
antivenin therapy, which can easily reach several thousand dollars.
The prognosis is directly dependent on the severity of
the envenomation and the treatment received. Progression
of envenomation is subjective and can be difficult to
assess. One tool that can be utilized is the assignment of a
snake bite severity score (SSS) at the time of admission
and then every 4–6 hours for the first 24 hours (Box 47.1).
The SSS assigns a numerical value ranging from 0 to 4 in
six categories, with a total possible score ranging from 0
to 20, with more severe bites having higher scores. While
the SSS has not been validated in dogs and cannot be
used to assess a particular patient’s risk for death, it aids
the clinician in evaluating progression by assigning value
to objective findings.
The prognosis for patients exhibiting signs of neurotoxicity secondary to envenomation is less clear. The
severity of signs depends on the volume of venom introduced through the bite. Because of the limited local
­tissue reaction associated with coral snake bites, the
severity of envenomation may not be readily apparent at
the time of presentation. If patients develop severe clinical signs then the prognosis is guarded to poor if
mechanical ventilation is not available. Commercially
available coral snake antivenin is difficult to obtain but
has proven useful for treatment of elapid envenomation
in the US. Fortunately the majority of coral snake bites
are nonenvenomating (a consequence of the snake’s
primitive venom delivery system).

VetBooks.ir

47 Venomous Snake Bites

Box 47.1 Snake bite severity score
Pulmonary system
Signs within normal limits
Minimal – slight tachypnea
Moderate – respiratory compromise, tachypnea, use
of accessory muscles
Severe – cyanosis, dyspnea, extreme tachypnea,
respiratory insufficiency or respiratory arrest from
any cause

Gastrointestinal system
0
1
2
3

0
1
2
3

Hematologic system

Cardiovascular system
Signs within normal limits
0
Minimal – tachycardia, general weakness, benign
1
dysrhythmia, hypertension
Moderate – tachycardia, hypotension
2
Severe – marked tachycardia, hypotension (systolic
3
<80 mmHg), malignant dysrhythmia or cardiac arrest
Local wound
Signs within normal limits
Minimal – pain, swelling, ecchymosis, erythema
limited to bite site
Moderate – pain, swelling, ecchymosis, erythema less
than half of extremity
Severe – pain, swelling, ecchymosis, erythema more
than half of extremity, rapid spread
Very severe – pain, swelling, ecchymosis, erythema
beyond affected extremity, significant tissue slough

Signs within normal limits
Minimal – abdominal pain, tenesmus
Moderate – vomiting, diarrhea
Severe – repetitive vomiting, diarrhea, or
hematemesis

0
1
2
3
4

­Conclusion
The only proven effective treatment for snake bites is the
early administration of antivenin therapy. When patients
are presented very early following a bite, the clinical signs
may be very mild. The astute clinician will recognize the

Within normal limits
Minimal – coagulation parameters slightly abnormal,
platelets 100 000–150 000/mm3
Moderate – coagulation parameters abnormal,
platelets 50 000–100 000/mm3
Severe – coagulation parameters markedly abnormal,
platelets 20 000–50 000/mm3
Very severe – coagulation parameters markedly
abnormal with bleeding present or threat of
spontaneous bleeding, platelets <20 000/mm3

0
1
2
3
4

Central nervous system
Signs within normal limits
Minimal – apprehension
Moderate – chills, weakness, faintness, ataxia
Severe – lethargy, seizures, coma

0
1
2
3

Source: Adapted from Peterson et al. (2011).

risk of rapid progression of signs and will be prepared to
intervene early and appropriately. Ultimately, the best
treatment for snake bite is prevention. Veterinarians
should have frank discussions with owners of at‐risk pets
about the need for leashing at all times when in snake
habitat.

­Further Reading
Armentano RA, Schaer M. Overview and controversies in
the medical management of pit viper envenomation in
the dog. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2011; 21(5): 461–70.
Armentano RA, Bandt C, Schaer M, et al.
Thromboelastographic evaluation of hemostatic
function zin dogs treated for crotalid snake
envenomation. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2014; 24(2):
144–53.
McCown JL, Cooke KL, Hanel RM, et al. Effect of
antivenin dose on outcome from crotalid envenomation:

218 dogs (1988–2006). J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2009;
19(6): 603–10.
Pashmakova MB, Bishop MA, Black DM, et al. Multicenter
evaluation of the administration of crotalid antivenom in
cats: 115 cases (2000–2011). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2013;
243(4): 520–5.
Peterson ME, Matz M, Seibold K, et al. A randomized
multicenter trial of Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab
antivenom for the treatment of rattlesnake envenomation
in dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2011; 21(4): 335–45.

465

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

467

Section 6
Gastrointestinal Disease

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

469

48
Gastrointestinal Imaging
Susanne M. Stieger‐Vanegas, DVM, PhD, DECVDI
Carlson College of Veterinary Medicine, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA

­General Imaging Principles
Medical imaging is an important element of the clinical
work‐up of a patient with gastrointestinal disease. Plain
radiography is commonly used to evaluate patients with
suspected gastrointestinal disease, but plain radiography
can often be unremarkable and abdominal ultrasonogra­
phy or cross‐sectional imaging techniques such as con­
trast‐enhanced abdominal computed tomography might
be required to further evaluate the etiology of the disease.
Plain Radiography
Plain radiography is a widely available imaging technique
and in many cases, it is the principal method used to eval­
uate the abdomen. Numerous studies have evaluated the
usefulness of this technique in cats and dogs with sus­
pected lesions of the oral cavity, esophagus, and gastroin­
testinal tract, in patients with acute abdominal signs,
gastrointestinal foreign bodies, and small intestinal
obstructive disease. However, in the past decade, abdom­
inal ultrasound and more recently contrast‐enhanced
computed tomography have become major imaging
modalities in patients with acute or chronic gastrointesti­
nal signs. When abdominal radiographs are obtained,
they often are used as a screening test. Abdominal radio­
graphs have demonstrated the greatest value in patients
in whom intestinal obstruction and/or perforation and
urinary calculi are suspected. Therefore, the major
value of abdominal radiographs is to exclude intestinal
obstruction or free air in the peritoneal cavity secondary
to perforation of a hollow organ such as the gastrointesti­
nal tract. Despite advances in other imaging modalities,
plain radiography remains the first modality of choice in
patients with suspected gastrointestinal perforation.

Additionally, abdominal radiographs are often used to
evaluate tube or drain placement.
The most commonly used views are ventrodorsal (VD)
and right and/or left lateral recumbent views. The VD
view is usually preferred over the dorsoventral (DV)
view as it is easier to position the abdomen close to
and aligned with the cassette than in a DV view. There
differences in the radiographic appearance
are slight ­
between right and left lateral recumbent views, which
mainly include the change of position of mobile viscera
and of the gas and fluid in the gastrointestinal tract due
to the effect of ­gravity. Additional views, dependent on
the clinical q
­ uestion asked, may include DV for evalua­
tion of gas, contrast agent or foreign material in the
stomach. Lateral or VD views with a horizontal beam are
occasionally used to evaluate for the presence of gas/air
in the peritoneal cavity.
Imaging Contrast Agents and Pharmacoradiology
Contrast radiography or computed tomography are both
valuable imaging techniques, often providing additional
information in the management of patients with gastro­
intestinal signs. Typically, the greatest value is in patients
where radiographic and clinical signs suggesting gastro­
intestinal obstruction are equivocal. Contrast imaging
may help to identify the extent and cause of gastrointes­
tinal obstruction. Contrast agents currently used for gas­
trointestinal imaging can be classified into three groups:
(1) intraluminal contrast agents for gastrointestinal tract
studies; (2) intravascular contrast agents for computed
tomography (CT) and angiography; (3) contrast agents
for magnetic resonance tomography (MRI). These vari­
ous types of contrast agents are discussed separately in
the following sections.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

470

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Intraluminal Contrast Agents
Barium Sulfate

Barium sulfate suspension is the most commonly used
contrast agent for gastrointestinal radiographic studies
in veterinary medicine. Barium sulfate is a white crystal­
line powder, which is inert and does not support bacte­
rial growth. Coating of the mucosa of the gastrointestinal
tract or opacification of the lumen of the gastrointesti­
nal tract can require different barium formulations.
Throughout the gastrointestinal tract, the pH, type, and
amount of mucus and type of mucosa vary and therefore
optimal coating in one segment does not necessarily
result in optimal coating in another segment.
Aspiration of small amounts of barium formulations is
of very little clinical significance. Barium within the tra­
chea and main bronchi is usually cleared within 30 min­
utes. If barium aspiration is more extensive, it is retained
within the interstitium of the lungs and a very slow
decrease of barium in the lungs might be noted over sev­
eral months to years (Figure 48.1). If diffuse extensive
alveolar infiltration of barium occurs throughout the
lungs, though, this can lead to death of the patient.
Therefore, if major concerns for aspiration exist before
the study, nonionic iodinated contrast agents should be
considered.
Hypersensitivity reactions to barium have not been
reported in veterinary medicine, but have been reported
rarely in human medicine.
Barium leakage into the peritoneal cavity can occur
due to a preexisting perforation of the gastrointestinal
tract or secondary to a procedure such as a barium
enema. In veterinary medicine, it is commonly accepted
that the suspicion of gastrointestinal perforation is a
contraindication for barium studies in patients. Most of
(a)

our knowledge regarding barium peritonitis is from
human medicine but the small number of reported reac­
tions in small animals seem to be similar. If large amounts
of barium are spilled into the peritoneal cavity, profound
hypovolemia can develop secondary to exudation of
large quantities of fluid associated with the chemical
peritonitis. Furthermore, bacterial contamination may
lead to sepsis and shock within hours. If a barium leakage
occurs, immediate treatment should be started, includ­
ing intravenous fluid therapy and antibiotic adminis­
tration due to the commonly associated bacterial
contamination. Once the patient is stabilized, abdominal
surgery is commonly performed. However, barium can
be difficult to remove surgically as new barium formula­
tions can adhere strongly to the peritoneum.
Negative Contrast Agents

Air is one of the cheapest contrast agents for gastrointes­
tinal studies. In veterinary patients, it is most commonly
used to outline the colon, especially in patients where a
small intestinal foreign body is suspected. Another appli­
cation is in double contrast studies of the gastrointestinal
tract; the most common application of this technique is
in evaluating the stomach for the presence of a foreign
body or to identify the location of the colon and differen­
tiate the colon from small intestine in cases of intestinal
obstruction.
Iodinated Contrast Agents

Water‐soluble, iodine‐containing contrast agents are
most commonly used for gastrointestinal imaging when
esophageal or gastrointestinal perforations are sus­
pected. However, the role of water‐soluble iodinated
contrast agents and the merit of these compounds for

(b)

Figure 48.1 Left lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) radiographs of the thorax of a dog illustrating a previous aspiration of barium
contrast agent, which occurred during a contrast radiographic study performed six years before. The barium is persistently present
in the parenchyma of the right and left caudal as well as accessory lung lobes. Barium has localized to the tracheobronchial lymph
nodes (arrows), which has no clinical significance.

VetBooks.ir

48 Gastrointestinal Imaging

general imaging of the gastrointestinal tract are areas of
controversy. Water‐soluble iodinated contrast agents do
not coat the gastrointestinal mucosa. The most com­
monly used iodinated contrast agents formulated for the
gastrointestinal tract are hypertonic and therefore pull
fluids into the intestinal tract, resulting in distension of
the intestinal lumen and better definition of the intesti­
nal walls. The hypertonicity and fluid pull into the gas­
trointestinal tract can result in diarrhea and dehydration.
If the contrast agent is aspirated or enters the lungs
through a fistulous tract from the esophagus, severe pul­
monary edema can result. If a perforation into the pleura
or lungs is suspected, nonionic iodinated contrast agents
can be used and are reported to be safer than ionic iodi­
nated contrast agents.
Intravascular Contrast Agents

All currently used contrast agents used for vascular
enhancement (except agents used for MRI) utilize
iodine for X‐ray absorption. Currently, the dominant
areas for use of intravascular contrast agents are CT
and MRI. No routine techniques have been described
for evaluation of the gastrointestinal tract using radiog­
raphy and intravascular contrast agents. Significant
improvements in the composition of intravascular con­
trast agents have been made in the past decades, mak­
ing them safer to use and better tolerated. As sodium
iodide is toxic, it must be delivered in a molecule struc­
ture that is safe to use. The closer the osmolarity of the
contrast agent is to water, the lower the toxicity of the
contrast agent. When iodinated contrast agents are
used, the patient should always be well hydrated as
iodinated contrast agents can cause renal toxicity.
Adverse reactions to intravenous iodinated contrast
agents are rare in veterinary patients, but can range
from anaphylactic shock to local reactions.
Ultrasonography
Ultrasonographic examination is one of the most useful
techniques for evaluating the gastrointestinal tract in
most veterinary patients. Ultrasound of the gastrointes­
tinal tract is not only used to make an initial diagnosis,
but also to monitor response to treatment or disease pro­
gression. Ultrasound can be used to evaluate superficial
aspects of the esophagus in the cervical area and in the
abdomen to evaluate the stomach to descending colon.
Superficial structures are better evaluated with a high­
frequency ultrasound probe, whereas deeper structures
may require the use of low‐frequency probes. Higher‐
frequency ultrasound probes have less tissue penetration
but provide a better resolution of intestinal structures,
including wall layering, compared to low‐frequency
ultrasound probes.

Ultrasound of the gastrointestinal tract provides infor­
mation about the gastrointestinal wall and peristalsis of
the gastrointestinal tract, which is information currently
not provided by any other diagnostic technique, includ­
ing radiography (plain and using oral or gastric contrast
agents), CT, and endoscopy. One of the biggest limita­
tions of the use of ultrasound when evaluating the
­gastrointestinal tract is its inability to penetrate air‐filled
structures, which can include air in the peritoneal cavity
secondary to a perforation or recent surgical procedure
or luminal air in the gastrointestinal tract. However,
this limitation can often be overcome by repositioning
the patient or ultrasound probe relative to the air‐filled
viscera or peritoneal air.
The ultrasound examination of the abdomen in the
dog and cat is commonly performed in lateral or dorsal
recumbency. Usually, the ultrasound exam is started cra­
nial in the abdomen for evaluation of the gastrointestinal
tract or other abdominal disease and then progresses
caudally, usually in the anatomic order of the gastroin­
testinal tract.
Computed Tomography of the
Gastrointestinal Tract
In small animals and humans, CT is used extensively to
evaluate the abdomen, but veterinary reports of its use to
evaluate the intestines, especially the intestinal wall, are
rare. Gastrointestinal CT has been used in veterinary
patients to diagnose intraluminal gastrointestinal foreign
bodies. However, no significant improvement in sensi­
tivity and specificity was reported in comparison to plain
film radiography. Future veterinary applications using
gastrointestinal CT are likely to develop, particularly
with the advent of new multidetector row helical CT
(MDCT) scanners. Faster scan times and greater spatial
resolution are achievable with these new scanners, allow­
ing for high‐resolution multiphasic and multiplanar
evaluation of the gastrointestinal tract, gastrointestinal
wall, and lumen.
In human medicine, CT enterography and enterocly­
sis, in which oral contrast is used to distend and illumi­
nate the gastrointestinal wall, are extensively used to
evaluate the gastrointestinal tract as they allow evalua­
tion of extraluminal pathology in addition to luminal dis­
ease. They are regularly used in the diagnosis and
treatment of inflammatory bowel disease, to assess the
severity and extent of disease, as well as inflammatory
activity. CT without luminal contrast has successfully
been used in dogs and cats to evaluate the anatomy of the
gastrointestinal tract, to assess segments of the gastroin­
testinal tract for the presence of intraluminal or wall
lesions, and to measure the intestinal width. The use of
gastrointestinal CT examination to evaluate for foreign

471

VetBooks.ir

472

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

bodies and obstructive intestinal disease in small ani­
mals has not been shown to have statistically significant
increased sensitivity or specificity compared to plain
radiography. In gastrointestinal CT without the use of
intraluminal contrast agents, the lack of distension of the
small intestine hinders evaluation of the intestinal wall
throughout the entire gastrointestinal tract.
In human medicine, it has been well demonstrated
that a critical technical requirement for CT of the bowel
is full distension of a clear lumen with complete separa­
tion of the intestinal walls. In CT enterography, combi­
nations of positive and neutral attenuation oral contrast
agents are used, which allow distension of the intestinal
tract and outlining of the wall. Conventional positive
attenuation oral contrast media such as barium‐ or
iodine‐based agents are used for evaluation of the gas­
trointestinal tract similarly to their use in radiography or
fluoroscopy (Figure 48.2). Conventional positive attenu­
ation oral contrast agents allow visualization of the
mucosal detail and assessment of mucosal enhancement.
Neutral oral contrast agents, which are more commonly
used in human medicine, have an attenuation close to
water and are mainly used to distend the small intesti­
nal tract and therefore better outline the intestinal
walls, allowing for better evaluation for mural lesions.
(a)

(b)

(c)

Commonly used neutral attenuation luminal contrast
agents include water, milk, polyethylene glycol, 12.5%
corn‐oil emulsion, and methylcellulose.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
of the Gastrointestinal Tract
Magnetic resonance imaging is rarely used for evaluation
of the gastrointestinal tract in human and veterinary
patients. In human patients, new MRI applications for
imaging of the colon are being developed. The most
common use of MRI related to digestive disease in vet­
erinary patients involves imaging of the oral cavity or
cranial neck in patients where abscesses secondary to
perforating injuries or foreign bodies are suspected.
Gastrointestinal Scintigraphy
Ultrasound and contrast radiography continue to be the
most common imaging techniques used for the gastroin­
testinal tract. However, contrast radiography, similarly to
contrast‐enhanced CT, provides only very limited or no
information about esophageal or gastrointestinal motil­
ity. It has been suggested that esophageal scintigraphy
might provide valuable information in gastroesophageal
Figure 48.2 Dorsally reconstructed CT
enterography image (a) and corresponding
transverse CT images at the level of the
stomach (b) and midabdomen (c). Iodinated
contrast agent is noted in the stomach and
small intestinal tract (arrows). The pylorus (P)
and fundus (F) of the stomach are fluid filled
and the gastric body is gas filled as the
patient was scanned in dorsal recumbency.
No contrast agent filling is noted in the
colon (Co).

VetBooks.ir

48 Gastrointestinal Imaging

reflux patients. Scintigraphy is considered to be the gold
standard for noninvasive evaluation of gastric emptying
and intestinal transit times. Gastric emptying is evalu­
ated by providing the animal with a standardized radi­
olabeled food and carrying out repeated nuclear imaging
of the patient at defined intervals and in various posi­
tions for 4–6 hours. The variability of gastrointestinal
transit times in dogs is very high, however, which limits
the application of scintigraphy for clinical use.
Scintigraphy may have a use in clinical patients, if
serial studies are done so that progression or response to
treatment can be followed. However, in addition to the
high variability of the gastrointestinal transit times, the
lack of access to scintigraphy equipment and the need for
the use of radiopharmaceuticals, which requires radia­
tion safety precautions, limit the use of this technique in
the daily clinical work‐up of gastrointestinal disease.

­The Pharynx
Normal Anatomy and Examination Technique
The pharynx is at a three‐way crossroads of respiration,
swallowing, and vocalization. The pharynx is located
caudal to the oral and nasal cavities and cranial to the
esophagus; this region allows transport of food from the
mouth to the esophagus. During respiration, the phar­
ynx allows the passage of air from the nasopharynx to
the larynx. During vocalization, the pharynx functions
as a resonating chamber and can alter sounds. Disorders
of the pharynx may therefore result in dysfunction of
swallowing, respiration or vocalization. Patients may
therefore present with signs of dysphagia, choking, gag­
ging and retching, or voice changes and the generation of
unusual sounds.
Structural abnormalities of the pharynx are rare. The
most commonly reported congenital abnormality of the
pharynx is an elongated soft palate. Rarely, unilateral or
bilateral hypoplasia or aplasia of the soft palate or mid­
line clefts have been reported. Even less commonly,
nasopharyngeal or intrapharyngeal stenosis has been
described.
Head and neck survey radiographs are often a first step
to evaluate for problems in the oropharyngeal phase of
digestion. The most common radiographic views include
a lateral and DV or VD view of the head and neck. In the
VD and DV view, the pharyngeal and cricopharyngeal
structures can be difficult to evaluate due to the com­
plexity of the anatomy and the summation with adjacent
skeletal and soft tissue structures. Survey radiographs
are evaluated for the presence of anatomic abnormalities,
including clefts, fractures of the adjacent osseous struc­
tures including the hyoid apparatus and abnormalities or

fractures of the temporomandibular joints. With a cleft
palate, an abnormal connection between the oral and
nasal cavity exists, allowing food to enter the nasal cavity
from the oral cavity. Radiographically, lack of air filling
of the nasal cavity and abnormal content within the nasal
cavity may be noted. Neuropathies are less commonly
encountered reasons for oropharyngeal dysphagia.
Survey radiographs mainly provide morphometric infor­
mation in neuropathy patients, as there is often no ana­
tomic abnormality present. Although survey radiographs
followed by contrast radiographs with barium adminis­
tration can provide valuable information, fluoroscopy is
often needed to identify functional abnormalities.
Commonly, contrast imaging for pharyngeal motility
studies is performed by administering liquid barium sul­
fate contrast agent; this should always be followed by
administration of a mixture of solid food coated with
barium sulfate. Patients may exhibit more signs when
swallowing liquid or solid material and therefore both
aspects should be evaluated. Additionally, thoracic radi­
ographs should be considered, as secondary lung disease
might be present.
Ultrasound Examination of the Pharynx
Ultrasound is infrequently used to evaluate the pharyn­
geal area as the summation with surrounding air‐filled
and osseous structures limits the evaluation of this region.
Ultrasound has shown value if perforating injuries by
plant material are present and can help to identify pene­
trating foreign bodies and assist in surgical interventions.
Assessment of Pharyngeal Function
Dysphagia is a nonspecific term and mainly describes
abnormal swallowing. Common clinical signs include
regurgitation, recurrent respiratory disease or weight
loss. Dysphagia can result from functional or anatomic
lesions, which can be intrinsic to the alimentary tract or
extrinsic from adjacent structures causing compression
of the alimentary tract. Dysphagia can involve any or all
of the structures involved in swallowing, including the
tongue, hyoid apparatus, soft palate, pharyngeal muscle,
cranial esophageal sphincter, esophagus, and caudal
esophageal sphincter. Various classifications of dyspha­
gia have been made. Typically, dysphagia will be classi­
fied based on the location of the swallowing impairment
as oropharyngeal, esophageal, or gastroesophageal.
Oropharyngeal dysphagia can occur in any of three
different phases of swallowing: oral, pharyngeal, or cri­
copharyngeal. Dogs with disturbances in the oral phase
of swallowing usually have difficulty with prehension of
food and moving the bolus to the caudal aspect of the
tongue. The main indications for radiography in cases of

473

VetBooks.ir

474

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

suspected oropharyngeal dysfunction include screening
for anatomic, mechanically obstructive lesions, particu­
larly if there is a history of trauma or concern for a neo­
plastic lesion. In the early stages of the disease, oral
neoplasms rarely cause swallowing disorders. When
swallowing disorders are noted secondary to neoplasia,
the disease process is typically very advanced.
In routine barium swallow studies, contrast medium
may be noted in the dependent buccal fold, oral cavity,
and valleculae. No contrast should be noted in the phar­
ynx, cranial esophageal sphincter, and esophagus.
Pharyngeal phase dysphagia is associated with inade­
quate peristalsis, leading to retention of the contrast
agent bolus in the oral cavity and reflux into the naso­
pharynx, oral cavity, and potentially the larynx.
With cricopharyngeal dysphagia, discoordination of the
motor activity of the pharynx, cricopharyngeus muscle,
and upper esophageal sphincter occurs. Cricopharyngeal
achalasia refers to a lack of opening of the cricopharyngeal
sphincter; radiographically, the passage of contrast agent
is impeded and contrast agent can reflux into the naso­
pharynx, larynx, oropharynx, and piriform recesses.
Cricopharyngeal chalasia is a failure to close the cri­
copharyngeal sphincter. Radiographically, this is seen
as a persistent passage of contrast agent between the
pharynx and cranial esophageal sphincter. Additional
reflux of contrast agent is typically noted, including
into the piriform recesses. Pharyngeal and cricopharyn­
geal dysphagia show similar patterns of retention of
contrast agent. If pharyngeal dysfunction is suspected,
it is important to evaluate the swallowing of liquid and
solid material.
Esophageal dysphagia causes a problem in transport of
food through the body of the esophagus. Gastroesophageal
dysphagia occurs secondary to a functional abnormality,
which includes a motility disturbance or an obstructive
process.

­The Esophagus
The esophagus is a muscular tube that extends from the
cricopharyngeus muscle at the level of the cricoid carti­
lage to the stomach. The largest aspect of the esophagus
is located within the middle mediastinum. The normal
esophagus is usually not visualized radiographically;
occasionally a normal esophagus can be visualized due to
small quantities of air present in the esophageal lumen
secondary to swallowing of air. A normal esophagus
might also be visualized if air is present in the mediasti­
num (pneumomediastinum). The normal esophagus may
also be dilated during or immediately following general
anesthesia; repeat radiographs can be necessary, with the
patient awake, to exclude esophageal disease. The normal

esophageal wall consists of four layers: mucosa, submu­
cosa, muscularis, and serosa. In the dog, the entire mus­
culature of the esophagus is striated. In the cat, the caudal
third of the esophagus, caudal to the heart base, is smooth
muscle. This causes obliquely directed folding of the
overlying mucosa of the esophagus, resulting in a charac­
teristic herringbone pattern noted during contrast imag­
ing studies of the esophagus in cats.
The most common indications for radiography of the
esophagus include a history of regurgitation and dyspha­
gia, recurrent unexplained respiratory illness, ptyalism,
gagging, change in attitude often associated with feed­
ing, or cervical pain and swelling. The most common
reasons for further imaging of the esophagus after survey
radiographs include generalized dilation (megaesopha­
gus), localized dilation, suspected esophagitis, esopha­
geal foreign body or masses, and esophageal perforation.
It is important to remember that failure to visualize the
esophagus on plain radiographs does not exclude the
presence of esophageal disease. An early sign of esopha­
geal disease might include the retention of air in the
esophagus noted on survey radiographs. This might war­
rant further evaluation of the esophagus, which can
include an upper gastrointestinal tract radiography or
endoscopy.
Upper Gastrointestinal Tract Radiography
(Esophagram)
An exhaustive examination of the esophagus includes
contrast radiographic examination as well as fluoro­
scopic evaluation of the motility of the esophagus.
Contrast radiography of the esophagus requires no spe­
cial preparation; however, plain radiographs should
always be obtained prior to administration of contrast
agent to outline abnormalities of the esophagus. It is
important to include the entire esophagus in the study,
from the pharyngeal area to the stomach.
The normal esophagus is collapsed after a primary
peristaltic wave and contrast studies should therefore be
performed with a reasonable amount of oral contrast
agent to ensure adequate coating and distension of the
esophagus for evaluation. Barium sulfate suspensions or
paste are usually administered at a dosage of 2–6 mL/kg
bodyweight. It is important to give a large enough bolus
(usually 5–20 mL of contrast agent) to ensure complete
swallowing. Smaller sized boluses may not stimulate a
strong primary esophageal peristalsis sufficient to clear
the contrast agent from the esophagus. Therefore, at
least medium‐sized fluid or solid boluses are recom­
mended for evaluation of swallowing and the esophagus.
The high‐density, low‐viscosity barium formulations
designed for the stomach and small intestinal tract also
coat the esophagus well. If, however, inadequate coating

VetBooks.ir

48 Gastrointestinal Imaging

of the esophagus results, barium paste should be used to
enhance coating of the mucosa.
Double contrast esophagus studies are commonly per­
formed in human patients but are rarely used in veteri­
nary medicine. In some patients, where air is present
in the dilated esophagus, it functions as an endogenous
negative contrast agent and no additional contrast
medium may be needed. If barium sulfate suspension is
used for the esophagram, no contrast should be remain­
ing in the esophagus in approximately 5 minutes; if bar­
ium paste is used, all contrast agent should be cleared
from the esophagus by approximately 30 minutes. In
general, in the normal esophagus, no contrast agent
should be stored or remain after a contrast agent study
has been performed.
In patients with suspected esophageal perforation,
water‐soluble contrast solutions should be used for eval­
uation of potential leakage from the esophagus. However,
water‐soluble iodine solution contrast agents should be
used with great care for an esophagram, as ionic iodi­
nated contrast agents are hypertonic and, when aspi­
rated, will most likely cause severe pulmonary edema. If
a bronchoesophageal fistula is suspected, nonionic iodi­
nated contrast solutions should be used to reduce the
risk of iatrogenic pulmonary edema. Water‐soluble con­
trast agents for outlining the esophagus are usually
administered at a dosage of 2–3 mL/kg bodyweight to
achieve approximately 700 mg iodine per kg bodyweight
and adequate distension of the esophagus. However, if
no contrast leakage is identified, a repeat study with a
higher density barium suspension can be performed to
allow visualization of a smaller sized lesion that was
potentially missed using a water‐soluble contrast agent.
Figure 48.3 Severe generalized dilation of
the esophagus with fluid and gas
(megaesophagus) in a cat. Right lateral (a)
and ventrodorsal (b) radiographs of the
thorax demonstrating severe dilation of
the esophagus (megaesophagus) resulting
in ventral and right lateral displacement of
the trachea (T) and ventral deviation of
the cardiac silhouette.

(a)

It has been noted in studies in humans as well as experi­
mentally in rats that no significant mediastinitis was
identified post barium leakage through a very small
esophageal defect, nor was a significant interference
with subsequent radiographic evaluations noted. It has
been recommended to warm up the barium solution to
40 °C when a perforation is suspected, as this decreases
the viscosity of the barium sulfate solution without
decreasing the radiopacity and increases the sensitivity
of detecting smaller sites of leakage in the esophagus.
Generalized Esophageal Dilation (Megaesophagus)
Megaesophagus is a disorder caused by diminished
esophageal tone and hypomotility, causing generalized
dilation of the esophagus. Congenital and acquired forms
of megaesophagus are recognized in the dog and cat. The
underlying cause of congenital megaesophagus remains
unknown, but inadequate development of the esopha­
geal innervation or altered biochemical properties of the
esophagus have been discussed.
Survey radiographs are often diagnostic for a dilated
esophagus, when the esophagus contains food, water or
air (Figure 48.3).
On lateral radiographs, the dilated esophagus is usually
well demarcated dorsally by the longus colli muscle or
summating within the thoracic vertebrae and ventrally
summating with the dorsal aspect of the trachea, leaving
the impression of a dorsally thickened trachea wall (the
tracheal stripe sign; Figure 48.4). It is important not to
confuse the tracheal stripe sign with pneumomediasti­
num, where the esophagus is circumferentially sur­
rounded by air. In severe esophageal dilation, a ventral
(b)

475

VetBooks.ir

476

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

(a)

(b)

deviation of the trachea and cardiac silhouette may be
noted. When the esophagus is fluid filled, a wide soft tis­
sue attenuating area can be seen in the dorsal aspect of
the thorax. In the VD or DV view of megaesophagus, the
esophagus is usually located on or to the right of midline.
A fluid‐ or gas‐filled, dilated esophagus typically shows a
V‐shape narrowing from cranially to caudally on a VD or
DV radiograph, with the narrowest area at the level of the
esophageal hiatus at the diaphragm. A contrast esopha­
gram is recommended if it is not possible to differentiate
between generalized and focal esophageal dilation.
Vascular Ring Anomalies
Vascular ring anomalies are the most common reason
for focal dilation of the esophagus in the cranial medi­
astinum. Other, less common causes for focal esophageal
dilation include bronchoesophageal fistulae, neoplasia
or strictures secondary to trauma of the esophagus. In
addition to regurgitation, patients with vascular ring
anomalies are often smaller than their littermates, have
an overall low body condition and can have a history of
regurgitation of solid food when weaning.
Vascular ring anomalies are developmental abnormali­
ties of the primordial aortic arches resulting in a com­
plete or partial circle of tissue around the trachea and the
esophagus, causing compression of the encircled struc­
tures. Most commonly, a focal dilation of the esophagus
cranial to the base of the heart is noted on imaging stud­
ies. Additionally, a marked focal leftward shift of the
­trachea is noted on DV or VD radiographs. A ventral
deviation of the esophagus can be noted on lateral radio­
graphs (Figure 48.5). In the dog, the persistent right aor­
tic arch is the most commonly encountered vascular

Figure 48.4 Moderate generalized
dilation of the esophagus with gas in a
dog. Left lateral (a) and dorsoventral (b)
radiographs of the thorax. The ventral wall
of the dilated esophagus is summating
with the dorsal wall of the trachea
resulting in a “tracheal stripe sign” (arrow)
in the lateral radiograph. The borders of
the dilated esophagus (arrowheads) show
in the dorsoventral view a characteristic
V‐shape.

anomaly, reported in 95% of dogs with vascular ring
anomaly. In patients with persistent right aortic arch, the
aorta is formed by the right instead of the left fourth aor­
tic arch. The left ligamentum arteriosum, connecting
between the abnormally positioned aorta and the pul­
monary artery, creates a vascular ring anomaly around
the trachea and esophagus. Approximately one‐third of
these dogs also have an aberrant left subclavian artery,
which, in combination with the persistent right aortic
arch, can contribute to an additional partial ring forma­
tion, resulting in focal dilation of the esophagus.
In the cat, vascular ring anomalies occur less frequently
than in the dog and reported vascular anomalies include
a persistent right aortic arch with right or left ligamentum
arteriosum, double aortic arch or aortic coarctation. If, in
addition to the aforementioned imaging changes, a tra­
cheal stenosis and/or malformation of the tracheal rings
is present, a double aortic arch should be considered.
Contrast‐enhanced CT angiography will help to more
accurately define and outline the vascular anomaly
responsible for the focal dilation of the esophagus and
can therefore help to improve surgical planning.
Esophageal Foreign Bodies
Esophageal foreign bodies occur commonly in dogs, but
are less commonly noted in cats. Esophageal foreign bod­
ies are most commonly found in the caudal esophagus and
are often located between the heart base and the dia­
phragm. However, esophageal foreign bodies in the mid‐
mediastinum dorsal to the heart, in the cranial mediastinum
cranial to the heart as well as just caudal of the pharynx
have also been reported. Esophageal obstruction second­
ary to foreign bodies can lead to perforation (Figure 48.6).

VetBooks.ir

48 Gastrointestinal Imaging

(a)

(b)

Figure 48.5 Dorsoventral (a) and right lateral (b) radiographs of the thorax of a young dog with a persistent right aortic arch and left
ligamentum arteriosum confirmed at surgery. The esophagus cranial to the base of the heart is dilated (esophageal diverticulum), which
is noticeable as a soft tissue attenuating structure within the cranial mediastinum, displacing the trachea (arrows) to the right and mildly
ventrally (arrowhead). A small amount of mineral attenuating material is noted in the dilated aspect of the esophagus. Mild narrowing of
the trachea is noted in the deviated segment.

(a)

(b)

Figure 48.6 Esophageal perforation with secondary mediastinitis and pleuritis in a dog secondary to esophageal foreign body caused by
swallowing a hoof dog treat. Dorsoventral (a) and right lateral (b) thoracic radiographs. Pleural fluid (arrow) and mediastinal fluid and gas
(arrowheads) is present. The borders of the esophagus are indistinct.

Esophageal foreign bodies may be radiopaque and
easily visualized (Figure 48.7) or soft tissue opacity and
difficult to identify. Sometimes gas within the esopha­
geal lumen might help in outlining the foreign body. A
negative or positive contrast agent study of the esopha­

gus might provide additional information. If perfora­
tion of the esophagus is suspected, small quantities
of water‐soluble contrast agent should be used to dem­
onstrate the esophageal wall defect instead of barium
sulfate suspension.

477

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

VetBooks.ir

478

Figure 48.7 Esophageal foreign body. In the cranial cervical
esophagus on a lateral radiograph of the neck of a dog a bone
surrounded by gas is noted.

Esophagitis, Gastroesophageal Reflux
Common causes for esophagitis include gastroesopha­
geal reflux, structural abnormalities of the hiatus of the
esophagus (hiatal hernia), neoplasia, trauma, medica­
tion, and chronic vomiting. Esophagitis is difficult to
diagnose on survey radiographs. On an esophagram, a
caudally thickened and irregular esophagus might be
noted. Radiographically, reflux esophagitis can be con­
firmed by filling the stomach with barium and pressing
on the stomach. If reflux esophagitis is present, reflux of
contrast agent into the esophagus is likely to be noted.
Esophageal Strictures
Esophageal strictures can occur secondary to severe ero­
sive esophagitis, and are often associated with perianes­
thetic esophageal reflux or secondary to foreign body
impaction, trauma or a surgery, where the esophagus
was displaced and/or manipulated, such as during ven­
tral cervical slot surgery. Plain contrast esophagram is
usually diagnostic, revealing a segment of esophagus that
persistently fails to dilate.
Esophageal Fistula
An esophageal fistula is an abnormal connection between
the esophagus and trachea, bronchus, lung parenchyma
or skin. Veterinary reports of esophageal fistulae are
rare. Esophageal fistulae are very rarely reported in dogs

and cats. The disease is occasionally reported in humans,
especially children. The most commonly reported clini­
cal signs include spontaneous coughing, coughing after
drinking water, and recurrent chronic respiratory disease.
The most commonly reported fistulae are congenital,
but acquired fistulae secondary to injury of the esopha­
gus, such as secondary to a foreign body, have been
observed. The most commonly reported acquired fistulae
are esophagobronchial, with less common reports of
esopha­gotracheal and rarely esophagoaortic fistulae. As
the clinical presentation of esophageal fistulae is similar
to patients with aspiration pneumonia, it is crucially
important to differentiate between the two conditions.
It is possible that the fistula opening can be identified
during bronchoscopy or endoscopy of the esophagus;
however, contrast agent swallowing studies using fluor­
oscopy are often more reliable for identification of the
connection between the trachea, bronchus or lung and
the esophagus. All images should be carefully evaluated
for leakage of contrast agent outside the esophagus. If a
fistula is suspected and not noted on an initial esopha­
gram, it might be necessary to dilute the barium contrast
medium (1:1) as dilution of the barium sulfate suspen­
sion decreases the viscosity and therefore allows visuali­
zation of smaller defects in the esophageal wall.
Additional imaging techniques, such as contrast‐
enhanced CT, might help to further define the precise
location and size of a fistula. In humans, the use of air as
a negative contrast agent to outline the esophagus has
further helped to demonstrate the presence of the
fistula.
Tumors of the Esophagus
Tumors of the esophagus are rare, likely accounting for
less than 0.5% of the tumors reported in cancers in dogs.
Similar epidemiologic studies in cats are currently lacking.
Clinical signs of esophagus disease such as regurgitation
are often only observed when the tumor has grown to
such a size that it is causing obstruction of the esophagus.
In the dog, leiomyomas or leiomyosarcomas affecting
the lower esophageal sphincter have been described
(Figure 48.8). Aggressive neoplasms of the esophagus are
extremely rare in dogs in areas not endemic for Spirocerca
lupi. Extremely rarely, squamous cell carcinomas, neu­
roendocrine carcinoma or adenocarcinomas of the
esophagus have been reported in the dog and cat.
Endoscopy of the esophagus may allow identification
of esophageal masses. Similarly, contrast radiography
will allow outlining of smaller masses. If the mass is large,
it is likely to be noted on survey radiographs (see
Figure 48.8). Additionally, tumors in the caudal esopha­
gus might also be noted during an abdominal ultrasound
exam, when the cardia of the stomach is evaluated.

VetBooks.ir

48 Gastrointestinal Imaging

Figure 48.8 Neoplasia of the caudal
esophagus. In the caudal mediastinum, a
soft tissue attenuating mass is noted. On a
barium esophagram, ventral displacement
of the esophagus and an irregular contrast
pattern are noted outlining a soft tissue
attenuating structure. A small amount of
contrast agent is noted in the stomach.

Figure 48.9 Sliding hiatal hernia (type 1
hiatal hernia) in a dog, which presented for
thoracic radiographs to evaluate for the
presence of pulmonary metastatic disease.
(a) Right lateral radiograph. The stomach is
in normal position but part of the stomach
is summating cranially with the right
diaphragmatic crus. (b) Left lateral
radiograph. Part of the stomach is cranially
positioned (arrow) and the esophagus is
dilated (arrowheads).

(a)

Masses of the esophagus may lead to hypertrophic
osteopathy, which might be noted on imaging studies
before an esophagus lesion is identified.
Abnormalities of the Gastroesophageal Junction
Gastroesophageal Intussusception

Gastroesophageal intussusception is rare, and is caused
by invagination of the stomach without or with other
abdominal organs into the esophagus. This intussus­
ception is only possible if a predisposing condition such
as a megaesophagus, dilation of the esophageal sphincter
or chronic vomiting is present.
Radiographically, a well‐defined soft tissue mass is
present in the caudal esophagus. Rugal folds might be
seen within the soft tissue mass. Dilation of the more
orad esophagus might be noted. The stomach or part
of it might be absent on abdominal radiographs.
Sonographically, no stomach or only part of the stom­
ach might be identified in the abdomen. The cardia of
the stomach might be severely dilated.

(b)

peritoneopericardial hernias. Hiatal hernias may occur
as transient or persistent hernias. Transient or sliding
hernia is the most common form of hernia diagnosed in
dogs and cats, where it is most frequently diagnosed in
young animals. Occasionally, it is also noted in adult
animals, in whom it is more likely to be an acquired form.
The acquired form can occur secondary to trauma or
severe upper respiratory disease. Commonly represented
dog breeds include the English bulldog and SharPei.
In cats, domestic shorthairs are more commonly affected.
Animals with hiatal hernias may present with signs of
regurgitation, hypersalivation, vomiting, and delayed
growth. Sliding hernia may be difficult to diagnose due
to its intermittent nature.
Radiographically, a dilated esophagus and abnormally
cranial position of the stomach may be noted. In parae­
sophageal hernias, the gastroesophageal sphincter/junc­
tion remains in the correct position, but the fundus is
displaced through the hiatus into the caudal esophagus.

­The Stomach

Hiatal Hernia

Diaphragmatic hernias are relatively common abnor­
malities. These hernias can involve the esophagus
in hiatal hernias (Figure 48.9) and paraesophageal
hernia, or the entry of stomach and abdominal viscera in

The stomach is the most distensible organ of the diges­
tive system, and plays an important role in the second
phase of digestion. The stomach is positioned caudal of
the liver and is fixed in position at the diaphragm and

479

VetBooks.ir

480

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

duodenum. The stomach consists of four major anatomic
divisions: the cardia, fundus, body, and pylorus. There
are two sphincters, one each at the orad and aborad
aspects of the stomach. The caudal esophageal sphincter
extends into the cardia, while the pylorus is located at
the junction between the stomach and duodenum. The
pylorus is divided into the pyloric antrum and canal. The
pylorus has an important gatekeeper function, only
allowing smaller sized particles to exit the stomach into
the small intestinal tract.
Radiographic Examination of the Stomach
In a survey radiographic study, the stomach is located
predominantly to the left of midline with the cardia
located slightly to the left of midline, ventral to the 11th
and 12th thoracic vertebrae. The fundus is positioned
to the left of midline and just caudal to the liver and
­diaphragm. The fundus is the only aspect of the stom­
ach which can be in direct contact with the diaphragm.
The antrum is usually not distinctly outlined and is
located between the fundus and pyloroduodenal junc­
tion. The pylorus is located on or to the left of midline in
the cat and on midline or to the right of midline in the
dog. The gastric axis in the dog is usually perpendicular
to the spine or parallel with the ribs. In the cat, it is usu­
ally more perpendicular to the spine. In a lateral radio­
graph, the pylorus is located approximately at the ventral
aspect of the ninth rib.
Radiographic attenuation of the stomach is dependent
on its content. The stomach usually contains both gas
and fluid, but if the stomach is empty or only a small
amount of fluid is present in the stomach, it may be
difficult to visualize as it summates with the liver. The
stomach has rugal folds, which are usually best seen on a
contrast study or ultrasound evaluation. Rugal folds
within the fundus of the stomach often create a mosaic
pattern. In the body of the stomach, the rugal folds are
more parallel and in the pylorus the number of rugal
folds is reduced. Subjectively, rugal folds in the cat are
less prominent than in the dog.
Obtaining multiple projections in various positions of
the patient is important when evaluating the stomach
radiographically. Changing the position of the stomach
affects the position of the gas and fluid in the stomach.
In dorsal recumbency (VD view), gas is located in the
gastric body and pyloric antrum and can be noted as a
gas opacity structure summating with the stomach at the
right and left side of midline. In ventral recumbency (DV
view), the gas is present in the fundus of the stomach,
which is then the most dorsal aspect of the stomach. In a
DV view, a gas opacity structure is noted summating
with the left cranial aspect of the stomach in the location
of the fundus. In a right lateral recumbency view, the gas

is located in the fundus region and the fluid is located in
the gastric body/antrum. The fluid in the gastric body/
antrum creates a round, circular, soft tissue attenuating
area in the cranial abdomen, which is occasionally mis­
taken for a foreign body in the pylorus or a mass in the
cranial abdomen. In the left lateral recumbent view, gas
is present in the pyloric region, appearing as a gas opac­
ity oval or triangle‐shaped structure in the cranioventral
aspect of the abdomen (Figure 48.10).
Ultrasound Examination of the Stomach
An ultrasound examination of the stomach helps evalu­
ate the gastric mucosa and gastric content. If possible,
patients should be fasted for 12 hours before an ultra­
sound examination is performed as food in the stomach
might create artifacts. The stomach is positioned caudal
to the liver, predominantly central to left of midline, and
adjacent to the spleen. The cardia is located to the left of
midline and can usually be seen as a thick bulge with a
smooth mucosal outline at the border of the thoracic
esophagus to fundus. The pylorus is located to the right
or on midline in the dog and is usually on or slightly to
the left of midline in the cat. The stomach wall thickness
ranges from 3 to 5 mm in normal dogs and cats. The
pyloric wall thickness in the cat is 3.8–5 mm, which is
similar to established gastric wall thickness measure­
ments of 3–5 mm. Under optimal conditions, five layers
of the stomach and small intestine are visualized
(Figure 48.11). The innermost hyperechoic layer corre­
sponds to the luminal surface of the mucosa. The next
hypoechoic layer is the mucosa, which is followed by
another hyperechoic thin layer, the submucosa. The
outer hypoechoic layer is the muscularis, which is adja­
cent to the outermost hyperechoic layer, the subserosa/
serosal layer.
Gastrography
Indications for contrast studies of the stomach (gastrog­
raphy) include vomiting, regurgitation, a history of
foreign body consumption, chronic weight loss, bloat­
ing, and anorexia. Contraindications for performing gas­
trography include suspected gastric rupture, large
amounts of ingesta or large amounts of fluid in the stom­
ach. A potential contraindication could be a rigid stom­
ach as overfilling of the stomach might cause vomiting,
resulting in aspiration. Before a gastrography is per­
formed, survey radiographs of the abdomen should be
obtained. For all gastrography studies, 12 hours of fast­
ing of the patient is recommended to reduce the risk of
artifacts caused by food or other material in the stomach.
Most of the study can be performed without sedation of
the patient; however, if the patient is not sufficiently

VetBooks.ir

48 Gastrointestinal Imaging

Figure 48.10 The movement of gastric
content is dependent on the patient
positioning. In a left lateral radiograph
(a), fluid (barium contrast agent) is located
in the fundus (F) of the stomach and the
pylorus (P) is gas filled. In a right lateral
radiograph (b), fluid is in the pylorus (P)
and gas is in the fundus (F). In a
ventrodorsal radiograph (c), fluid is in the
fundus and gas is in the gastric body
(b) and pyloric antrum. In a dorsoventral
radiograph (d), gas is in the fundus and
fluid is located in the gastric body (b) to
pyloric area.

(a)

(c)

relaxed, mild sedation should be administered, ideally
one which does not or only minimally affects gastroin­
testinal motility. Contrast studies of the stomach can
be performed using negative contrast agents, positive
contrast agents or as a double contrast study.
Negative contrast studies of the stomach are mainly
performed to evaluate for the presence of a gastric for­
eign body or to evaluate the location of the stomach.
Orogastric intubation is performed, followed by filling
the stomach with room air at a dose of 6–12 mL/kg bod­
yweight, or filling the stomach until it is palpably dis­
tended. Alternatively, a carbonated beverage can be
given into the buccal pouch (at least 30–60 mL) if the
patient does not drink it voluntarily. After distension of
the stomach is achieved, four views of the abdomen
should be obtained. If a foreign body in the pyloric
antrum is suspected, a horizontal beam view with the
patient in left lateral recumbency might help to better
outline the foreign body.

(b)

(d)

Positive contrast gastrography is performed by using
either barium sulfate suspension or an iodinated con­
trast agent to outline the stomach. An iodinated contrast
agent should be used if a perforation of the stomach is
suspected or if surgery is planned immediately after the
positive contrast agent study. Iodinated contrast agents
provide less coating of the gastric wall compared to
barium sulfate suspension. For large dogs, use 5–7 mL/
kg bodyweight barium sulfate 30% weight to volume
­suspension and for small dogs or cats 8–12 mL/kg body­
weight barium sulfate suspension. In cats, the
recommended barium sulfate suspension volume can
range up to 20 mL/kg.
Orogastric intubation for application of the contrast
agent is recommended to reduce the risk of aspiration.
Otherwise, the contrast agent can be placed in the buccal
pouch using a syringe, but if the patient struggles the
procedure should be stopped and orogastric tube place­
ment should be considered. If ionic iodinated contrast

481

VetBooks.ir

482

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 48.11 Normal gastrointestinal ultrasound images. Longitudinal ultrasound image of the stomach wall (a). Only the wall in the near
field can be evaluated, as gas is present in the stomach causing reverberation artifacts and therefore limiting visualizing of the far wall.
Longitudinal ultrasound image of the duodenum (b). The individual layers and lumen (L) are marked on a magnified image. Mu, mucosa;
Sm, submucosa; M, muscularis; S, serosa. Longitudinal ultrasound image of the ileocolic junction (c) marked by an arrow. On the right side
of the image is the ileum and on the left side is the ascending colon containing a small amount of gas. Between the ileocolic junction and
the abdominal wall, a segment of jejunum (J) is noted. Longitudinal image of the ileum (d) and transverse image of the colon (e). The
mucosa of the ileum is thinner when compared to the duodenum and jejunum. The colon wall is thinner and the individual wall layers are
more similar in thickness.

agents are used, extreme caution is necessary to reduce
the risk of aspiration as most ionic iodinated contrast
agents designed for the gastrointestinal tract are hyper­
osmolar and draw in water, causing severe pulmonary
edema when aspirated. Iodinated contrast agents are
used at a dose of 2–3 mL/kg bodyweight. The iodinated
contrast agent can also be diluted 1:4, but then the dose
should be increased to 6–12 mL/kg bodyweight. Four
views of the abdomen should be obtained to evaluate the
stomach. A sufficient degree of distension of the stomach
must be achieved to obtain a good‐quality study.
The four views of the abdomen result in different
appearances of the stomach due to the effect of gravity;

the contrast agent will be positioned in the dependent
aspect of the stomach and gas will be positioned in the
nondependent aspect of the stomach similar to the dis­
tribution of water and gas in a four‐view survey radio­
graphic study. On the VD view, the barium sulfate
suspension is located in the fundus region on the left and
in the pyloric region in the right side of the abdomen.
The body of the stomach is filled with air. In a DV view,
the barium sulfate suspension is present in the body of
the stomach and the fundus and pyloric area are gas
filled. In a right lateral view, the barium sulfate suspen­
sion is located in the pyloric area and gas is noted in the
body and fundus of the stomach. In a left lateral view, the

VetBooks.ir

48 Gastrointestinal Imaging

barium sulfate suspension is in the gastric fundus, while
air fills the body and pyloric area of the stomach. Borders
of the gastric wall to luminal contrast agent filling are
normally distinct and well defined.
The diameter of the pylorus is usually approximately
half that of the body of the stomach; if it is larger than
that, disease of the pyloric canal may be present. The
peristaltic wave normally runs from the fundus to
the pylorus. During peristalsis, symmetric narrowing of
the gastric fundus to pylorus wall may be noted.
Expected times for gastric emptying of contrast are
quite variable. After administration of liquid barium
sulfate suspension, emptying of the stomach should
occur within the first 5–10 minutes, latest by 30 min­
utes. The stomach should be completely empty by a
maximum of 2.5–3.5 hours in the dog and 15–60 min­
utes in the cat, if the barium was not mixed with food.
Food material empties more slowly from the stomach
and it can take up to 12 hours to observe a completely
empty stomach. Emptying of the contrast agent from
the stomach can also occur very rapidly if the stomach
was empty and the dog fasted when the contrast study
was started. Delayed gastric emptying can be noted in
normal animals secondary to sedation, anesthesia, and
anxiety. Delayed gastric emptying is frequently observed
in anxious cats. Delayed gastric emptying can be noted
in a wide range of diseases including gastritis, pancrea­
titis, neoplasia of the gastric or duodenum wall, and
foreign bodies, to name a few.
Double contrast studies of the stomach are usually per­
formed if a mucosal lesion (e.g., ulcer, gastritis, n
­ eoplasia)
or presence of a foreign body is suspected. As this proce­
dure can take more time than a simple gastrogram, sedation
should be considered. Placement of an orogastric tube
reduces the risk of aspiration of contrast agent and
allows administration of air into the stomach. For a
­double contrast gastrography study, 1.5–3 mL/kg body­
weight barium 30% volume to weight suspension is given

before 20 mL/kg air is added. Four radiographic views of
the abdomen should be obtained. It is often helpful to
gently roll the patient to achieve an even coating of the
gastric wall before the four views are obtained.

(a)

(c)

(b)

Gastric Dilation
In gastric dilation, the stomach is distended without
change in shape and position. This can be acute, secondary
to aerophagia, gastritis, outflow obstruction, medical
treatment, or chronic, secondary to a chronic obstruc­
tive process of the pylorus or proximal duodenum.
On a survey radiograph, a hugely dilated stomach with
fluid and gas is noted (Figure 48.12). If the stomach is
mainly fluid dilated, the radiographic diagnosis of gastric
dilation may be more difficult as the stomach may appear
as a soft tissue attenuating mass and can therefore not
easily be distinguished from the liver. In these cases, caudal
displacement of the colon and the location and shape of
the soft tissue opacity might help to establish that the
stomach is dilated. It is important to remember that not
all patients with a gastric dilation have a mechanical
obstruction. Additionally, gastric dilation may occur
secondary to a mechanical obstruction of the duode­
num, or secondary to pancreatitis.
The key to differentiation of gastric dilation from gas­
tric dilation volvulus is the position of the pylorus. This is
best determined by evaluating the right and left lateral
recumbent views of the abdomen. In gastric dilation, the
pylorus and duodenum in a right lateral recumbent view
should be predominantly fluid filled, and in a left lateral
recumbent view usually contain variable amounts of gas.
Gastric Dilation Volvulus
Gastric dilation volvulus is a frequently encountered,
acute life‐threatening disease in dogs. Gastric dilation
volvulus rarely occurs in cats.

Figure 48.12 Gastric dilation. Ventrodorsal (a), left lateral (b), and right lateral (c) radiographs of the abdomen of a dog. Gas and fluid
dilation of the stomach is noted. The stomach is in correct position. No compartmentalization is noted.

483

VetBooks.ir

484

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

In gastric dilation volvulus, the stomach is usually
abnormally distended, containing food, fluid and gas, and
has an unusual shape and position (Figure 48.13). Often a
rapid decision needs to be made on whether the stomach
is rotated and dilated or only dilated. On abdominal radio­
graphs, compartmentalization of the stomach is noted
(“Smurf’s head,” “Popeye’s arm”); if this happens, the stom­
ach can appear to consist of two cavities, resulting from
the dorsal and leftwards displacement of the gas‐filled
pylorus. The fundus tends to be ventrally and rightwards
positioned, if a 360° rotation is not present. The right lat­
eral radiographic view is often considered the most help­
ful view as it shows both abnormal gas filling and
displacement of the pylorus and cranial duodenum (see
Figure 48.13). In a normal right lateral view, the pylorus is
typically fluid filled. In gastric dilation volvulus, however,
gas is located in the pylorus and proximal duodenum.
(a)

(b)

The lack of gas distension of the stomach does not
preclude the presence of gastric volvulus. If a previous
gastric decompression has been performed, gastric
volvulus might be present for days to weeks or might be
seen at initial presentation. The radiographic principles
mentioned before remain, with the exception of a lack of
marked distension of the stomach.
The presence of gas in the gastric wall (pneumatosis)
or peritoneal cavity (pneumoperitoneum) is a very strong
indicator for gastric wall necrosis (Figure 48.14) if no
prior treatment, such as gastric decompression, has been
performed. However, it is important to remember that
radiographs are not very sensitive for evaluation of
gastric wall necrosis. Gas in the gastric wall might also
be noted during an ultrasound exam and if gas is present,
additional abdominal radiographs should be obtained, to
evaluate the position of the stomach.
Figure 48.13 Gastric dilation volvulus.
Right lateral (a) and VD (b) radiograph of
the abdomen demonstrating a moderate
gas distension of the stomach with
compartmentalization of the stomach
classic for gastric dilation volvulus. The
duodenum is dorsally and laterally
displaced (arrow).

Figure 48.14 Gastric pneumatosis in a
Doberman with gastric dilation volvulus.
Ventrodorsal and lateral radiographs
illustrating an abnormally positioned
stomach. The pylorus (P) is dorsally
displaced. Thin linear gas patterns are
noted in the gastric wall consistent with
gastric pneumatosis, which is highly
suspicious for gastric wall necrosis
secondary to the volvulus.

VetBooks.ir

48 Gastrointestinal Imaging

If gastric dilation volvulus is present, no further imaging
is necessary and emergency procedures should be per­
formed to decompress the stomach.
Chronic Gastric Outlet/Pyloric Obstruction
Chronic gastric outlet (pyloric) obstruction occurs rela­
tively frequently secondary to either congenital or acquired
pyloric stenosis or abnormal function of the pylorus.
Pyloric obstruction is more frequently encountered in
dogs than in cats. Radiographic recognition of gastric out­
let obstruction often depends on the degree of distension
and content of the stomach, and duration of the disease.
Furthermore, positioning of the patient during radiogra­
phy and frequency of vomiting affect the radiographic
appearance of pyloric obstruction. Most frequently, the
stomach is distended with gas and fluid, which can easily be
noted on radiographs (Figure 48.15). It is important to
remember that not all patients with a gastric dilation have
a mechanical obstruction of the pylorus.
Gastric dilation may also occur secondary to mechan­
ical obstruction of the duodenum or with concurrent
pancreatitis. Left recumbent lateral views can help to
decide if a duodenal obstructive lesion is present, as gas
in the duodenum may be able to outline the cause of the
obstruction. Additionally, in chronic obstructive gas­
tropathy a “gravel sign” indicating retention of small
mineral attenuating material particles in the stomach
can sometimes be seen.
Contrast studies of the stomach or an ultrasound
examination are often needed to establish the cause and
site of outflow obstruction of the stomach. Contrast radiog­
raphy of the stomach in cases of chronic obstructive
Figure 48.15 Ventrodorsal and left lateral
radiographs of the abdomen of a
vomiting dog. Moderate dilation of the
stomach with fluid and gas is noted
(arrows). The gastric wall appears
subjectively thickened. An abdominal
ultrasound exam revealed moderate
thickening of the pylorus wall (arrowhead)
with loss of wall layering.

gastropathy may reveal delayed gastric emptying, focal
­
intraluminal contrast sparing areas in the pyloric antrum
with incomplete filling and blunting of the pyloric canal. If
contrast medium remains in the stomach 3–4 hours after
administration, this usually indicates pyloric obstructive
disease. Intraluminal filling defects in the pyloric antrum
are often caused by thickened mucosal fold(s) extending
into the lumen. The shape and radiographic appearance of
the contrast agent filling of the pylorus have been described
with various signs including the “beak,” “tit,” and “string”
signs. Lack of filling or only partial filling of the pyloric
canal has been described as the “beak” sign, where only a
small amount of contrast agent extends in the form of a
beak into the pyloric canal. The “tit” sign has been used
when a small outpouching remains at the lesser curvature
secondary to peristaltic waves. The “string” sign has been
used when contrast agent extends through the pyloric
canal but is concentrically narrowed secondary to circum­
ferential thickening of the pylorus wall.
On an ultrasound exam, mucosal or muscular thicken­
ing of the pylorus wall may be noted and may help to
differentiate between various etiologies of chronic outlet
obstruction. In dogs with chronic pyloric hypertrophy,
the hypertrophic muscularis may appear as a thick,
hypoechoic layer (Figures 48.15 and 48.16). Sonogra­
phically, the measured thickness of the muscularis may
help to categorize disease severity. The muscularis thick­
ness in the pylorus is greater than 3 mm in mild to
moderate hypertrophy and greater than 8 mm in severe
chronic pyloric stenosis in dogs. Forceful, but ineffective,
peristaltic contractions that fail to propel contents into
the duodenum may be seen in some patients with gastric
outflow obstruction.

485

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

VetBooks.ir

486

Figure 48.16 Longitudinal ultrasound image of the stomach of a
dog with a history of chronic vomiting. Moderate thickening of
the pylorus wall (arrows) with narrowing and irregularity of the
luminal aspect is noted. D, duodenum.

Foreign Bodies
Gastrointestinal foreign bodies are a common diagnosis
in dogs and cats presenting for emergency veterinary
care (Figure 48.17). It can often be a challenge to diag­
nose gastrointestinal foreign bodies and decide if imme­
diate surgery is indicated. Preferably, before an imaging
study of the stomach is performed, the animal should be
fasted for 12 hours. Accumulation of a small amount of
fluid or gas in the stomach is normal even after fasting
for 12 hours. Mineral or metal attenuating material in
the stomach is easily recognized on survey radiographs.
Mineral attenuating material in the stomach could be
secondary to medical treatment of the patient, for
instance with medications containing bismuth or kaolin,
or this material could indicate delayed gastric emptying
secondary to a chronic obstructive process involving the
pylorus (“gravel sign”). Metal attenuating material in the
(a)

(b)

stomach might not always cause obstructive signs, but
might be toxic due to containing, for example, heavy
metals such as zinc. Therefore, in patients with intravas­
cular hemolysis, abdominal radiographs may be indi­
cated to evaluate for the presence of metallic foreign
objects. It is important to remember that aluminum is
relatively radiolucent, unlike a lot of other metals, and is
therefore difficult to detect on a survey radiograph.
Foreign bodies that are not mineral or metal attenu­
ating can be challenging to detect. If foreign body
ingestion is suspected, multiple views of the abdomen
should be obtained. The gravity dependence of the fluid
and gas in the stomach may help to outline a foreign
body. If no foreign body is identified, contrast
radiography, ultrasound or CT might provide more
­
information. On a contrast radiographic study, foreign
bodies are noted as a filling defect and this defect can
be mobile within the stomach. However, if the object is
large and/or the stomach is very empty, this object
might not move much when changing the position of
the stomach and might appear lodged in the stomach.
Additionally, porous foreign bodies, such as cloth mate­
rial or foam, may retain contrast agent and might be
seen at the end of a contrast study, when most of the
contrast agent has left the stomach.
On ultrasound, gastric foreign bodies are often hyper­
echoic with complete distal acoustic shadowing. If they
contain gas, areas of incomplete distal acoustic shadow­
ing can be noted. Additionally, they also may be
­recognized by their shape. Similar to radiography, foreign
bodies usually move when repositioning the patient, but
when the foreign body is large, it may show only minimal
mobility within the stomach.
Gastrointestinal perforation is less frequently seen
with foreign body ingestion, but has been reported when
sharp objects such as wood sticks, skewers, needles
(Figure 48.18) or multiple magnets are swallowed.
Figure 48.17 Multiple gastric foreign
bodies are noted in the ventrodorsal and
lateral radiograph of the abdomen of the
cat. The foreign bodies represented
multiple rubber hair bands (“scrunchies”).

48 Gastrointestinal Imaging

VetBooks.ir

Inflammatory Conditions of the Stomach
and Duodenum
Imaging Features of Gastritis

Figure 48.18 Longitudinal ultrasound image of a thin,
hyperechoic, linear foreign body perforating from the pylorus area
of the stomach (arrowheads) into the pancreas (P). The adjacent
mesenteric fat is hyperechoic suggestive of secondary focal
peritonitis. The foreign body was surgically removed and was a
sewing needle.

Gastrointestinal perforation is suspected when perito­
neal gas, with or without peritoneal fluid, is present
either radio‐ or sonographically. Additionally, on ultra­
sound an increased echogenicity of the mesenteric fat
can be noted. Occasionally gastrointestinal perforation
secondary to a foreign body may not occur acutely or
cause acute symptoms. Sometimes these foreign bodies
lead to distant chronic inflammatory processes, which
result in the occurrence of abscesses at unusual sites or
radiolucencies or mass effects on a radiograph months to
years later.
It should be remembered that more than one object
could have been ingested and the search for foreign
bodies should not be stopped at the stomach, but contin­
ued through the entire gastrointestinal tract.
Gastric Ulcers
Gastric ulcers might be seen on a contrast study of the
stomach or ultrasound examination. In a gastrographic
study, an outpouching of the gastric wall or defect with
adjacent increased thickness of the gastric wall might be
noted (“crater sign”). Additionally, the wall of the stom­
ach adjacent to the ulcer might be rigid, which is best
seen using fluoroscopy.
On an ultrasound exam, similar imaging features can
be noted, including focal thickening of the gastric wall
with a central area of decreased wall thickening (“crater”),
loss of normal wall layering, decreased motility of the
gastric wall, and retention of fluid in the stomach.
Additionally, small focal areas of hyperechogenicity with
reverberation artifacts suggesting microbubbles may be
present in the central aspect of the ulcer.

On survey radiographs, large rugae may be noted; this
may be most noticeable at the greater curvature of the
stomach. On a contrast radiographic study, large rugae
extending luminally and resulting in contrast‐sparing
areas are often present.
Sonographically, focal or circumferential wall thick­
ening, loss of wall layering and, especially in chronic
disease, a mass effect can be noted. Regional lymph
node involvement may be present. Inflammatory
­disease of the stomach may appear similar to neoplastic
or immune‐mediated disease or uremic gastropathy on
ultrasound (Figure 48.19).
Tumors of the Stomach
Primary gastric tumors are rare in the dog and cat and
account in the dog for less than 1% of all malignancies.
Benign (e.g., polyps, adenomas) and malignant (e.g.,
adenocarcinoma, lymphosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, leio­
myosarcoma, gastrointestinal stromal tumor) neoplasias
have been described. In the dog adenocarcinoma and in
the cat lymphoma are the most frequently diagnosed
gastric tumors. Most of the gastric tumors are epithelial
in origin and most frequently affect the distal two‐thirds
of the stomach. Benign masses such as polyps are more
commonly seen in the pyloric antrum and are often
unnoticed until an imaging exam or endoscopy is per­
formed. Gastric tumors can cause a pyloric outflow
obstruction or affect normal gastric motility. Gastric
adenocarcinomas in dogs can also present with ulcera­
tion of the gastric wall.
Radiographic Features of Gastric Tumors

Survey radiographs are often not sufficient to diagnose
gastric wall tumors, even when all four views of the
abdomen are obtained. On survey radiography, focal
areas of gastric wall thickening, loss of normal rugal
folds, and masses protruding into the lumen might be
noted. Pyloric outflow obstruction might be noted,
which can be characterized by a fluid‐distended stomach
and/or mass effect in the pyloric area. Usually survey
radiographs need to be followed by contrast radiography,
ultrasound or, when available, CT to further evaluate the
stomach and stage the disease.
On a contrast radiographic study, intraluminal masses
typically cause signs such as a filling defect in the con­
trast medium, abnormal appearance of the rugae, focal
unusual distension of the gastric wall, a lack of peristalsis
or delayed gastric emptying.

487

VetBooks.ir

488

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 48.19 Eosinophilic gastritis in a cat. Lateral radiograph (a) of the cranial abdomen is suggestive of a moderate thickening of the
gastric wall, which was confirmed on an ultrasound exam (b) of the stomach. On the longitudinal ultrasound image, moderate to severe
thickening of the gastric wall with loss of wall layering and reduced echogenicity is noted. Part of the fundus of the stomach shows a
normal wall architecture as illustrated in the ultrasound image (c).

Ultrasound Features of Gastric Tumors

An ultrasound examination of the stomach can be useful in
diagnostic assessment for gastric neoplasia. However,
ultrasound examination of the stomach may be limited by
the presence of gas. Repositioning of the patient and thus
moving the gas will improve evaluation of the gastric wall.
The sensitivity of detection of gastric wall masses using
ultrasound has been reported to range between approxi­
mately 50% and 80% and is dependent on the experience of
the operator. The presence of fluid in the stomach, which
also can be administered prior to the ultrasound examina­
tion, may reduce the presence of air artifacts and therefore
enhance the visualization of gastric wall pathology.
Ultrasound examinations of gastric wall tumors often
demonstrate a variety of features, including loss of ­gastric
wall layering, masses arising from certain wall layers, pres­
ence of cavitations, asymmetric or symmetric thickening of
the wall, and the presence of peritoneal fluid (Figure 48.20).
Extension of the mass through the serosal surface may be
noted, most commonly seen with carcinoma. Additionally,
the involvement of regional lymph nodes, liver, spleen, and
intestine can be evaluated for staging the disease. Ultrasound
has been used to attempt to differentiate between various
gastric neoplasms, but poor correlation with histology was
noted. Ultrasound‐guided fine needle aspirates may be
helpful to accurately diagnose a gastric neoplasm.

Figure 48.20 Longitudinal ultrasound image of the stomach of a
cat. A large, eccentric gastric wall thickening with loss of normal
wall architecture and distortion of the wall is noted. Peritoneal
fluid is present. This was most concerning for neoplasia. Fine
needle aspirates confirmed a gastric carcinoma.

Computed Tomographic Features of Gastric Tumors

Computed tomography and magnetic resonance tomogra­
phy are commonly used in human patients to stage gas­
tric tumors, but currently no similar studies are ­available
in veterinary patients. Computed tomography can be

VetBooks.ir

48 Gastrointestinal Imaging

helpful to evaluate the extent of the gastric lesion and
stage disease. On CT images, a thickened gastric wall,
loss of wall layering, and contrast enhancement of the
wall might be seen. Additionally, enlargement and con­
trast enhancement of regional lymph nodes can be noted.
However, the CT criteria for gastric neoplasia might also
be seen in other benign disease such as gastritis.
Gastrointestinal Bleeding
A variety of diseases can result in gastrointestinal bleeding.
If the bleeding is caused by an ulceration or mass, con­
trast radiography and ultrasound may identify the site
of the bleeding. However, if minimal wall alteration is
present, contrast radiography and ultrasound might not
identify the cause of bleeding.

­Small Intestine
The small intestine consists of three segments: the
duodenum, jejunum, and ileum. The segments of the
small intestine in the dog and cat do not have charac­
teristic mucosal folds. The long mesentery of the small
intestines provides only a limited fixation of the small
intestine.
Radiographic Examination of the Small Intestine
The descending duodenum shows the most consistent
positioning of the small intestinal segments and is
located in the right craniolateral abdomen, running
parallel to the abdominal wall from just ventral to the
right kidney to the level of the 4th–5th lumbar vertebrae,
where it turns medially. The ascending duodenum runs
from the caudal duodenal flexure cranially and towards
midline. The jejunum is the largest portion of the small
intestine and is relatively evenly distributed throughout
the abdomen, from caudal to the stomach to cranial to
the urinary bladder. If the dog is very deep chested and
the gastrointestinal tract very empty, loops of small
intestine might be noted adjacent to the dorsal aspect of
the diaphragm. In obese animals, the small intestine is
often located more centrally in the abdomen due to dis­
placement by peritoneal fat.
In the cat, a large falciform fat pad may lead to caudal
displacement of the small intestine. The aborad portion
of the ileum might be visualized at the ileocecocolic
junction, which lies in a VD view right of midline at the
level of the second lumbar vertebra and in a lateral view
ventral of the approximately fourth lumbar vertebra. The
jejunum and ileum are otherwise indistinguishable radi­
ographically. The duodenum can be minimally wider
than the jejunum and ileum.

Usually the small intestinal segments are of very
­similar width and little variation in diameter is present.
The normal small intestinal diameter in the dog is usu­
ally less than 1.4 times the height of the midportion of
the fifth lumbar vertebral body or less than twice the
width of the 12th rib. In the cat, the normal small intes­
tinal diameter should be less than 12 mm. In the cat, the
small intestinal tract might have a more “string of pearls”
appearance, when compared to the dog. It is critical to
differentiate the small intestine from the large intestine
when decisions about an increased small intestinal
diameter are made.
If an animal has not eaten, the small intestines contain
a mixture of fluid and gas. In the dog, typically up to two‐
thirds of the small intestinal loops are gas filled and in
the cat usually very little gas is present in the small intes­
tine. Gas usually redistributes through the intestinal
tract relative to the position of the animal. In the left lat­
eral view, gas is often present in the duodenum as it is
located dorsally and on the right. However, positional
radiographs are less valuable for the redistribution of
gas in the small intestine compared to the stomach. The
small intestine can also contain small mineral or metal
attenuation structures depending on the diet, or if an
animal is an indiscriminate eater or is receiving medi­
cation. The visualization of medications in the intestinal
tract is dependent on their size and attenuation. Some
medications contain mineral to metal opaque material;
examples include calcium carbonate, iodinated com­
pounds, iron‐containing preparations, potassium, and
aluminum.
Gentle compression techniques using a wooden spatula
or spoon while obtaining abdominal radiographs can be
helpful to further evaluate segments of small intestine,
by reducing the summation from other abdominal
structures.
Ultrasound Examination of the Small Intestine
Similar to radiography, the descending duodenum is
the most consistently positioned section of the small
intestine and can therefore easily be followed using
ultrasound. The duodenum can typically be visual­
ized extending from the pylorus along the medial
aspect of the right abdominal wall caudally. After the
caudal duodenal flexure, the ascending duodenum
can be followed medially, but its aborad aspect can­
not be differentiated from the jejunum. The jejunum
is usually relatively evenly distributed throughout the
abdomen.
Throughout the duodenum and jejunum, the mucosa
is normally the thickest layer (Figure 48.21). The other
layers of the small intestinal wall are similar in thickness
and thinner than the mucosa.

489

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

VetBooks.ir

490

Figure 48.21 Longitudinal ultrasound image of the descending
duodenum. The mucosa is the thickest layer of the duodenum
wall. A hyperechoic area extending towards the serosal surface of
the wall is noted. This is only noted on one side of the wall and
consistent with a Peyer’s patch and should not be confused with
an ulcer or perforation.

The total wall thickness is thinner in smaller dogs than
in large‐sized dogs, ranging from 2.9–4.7 mm in small
dogs, 3.0–5.5 mm in medium‐sized dogs to 3.1–5.7 mm
in large‐sized dogs, respectively. In cats, the small intes­
tinal wall usually ranges between 2 and 3 mm. Similar to
contrast radiography, care must be taken that, in the
descending duodenum, Peyer’s patches (see Figure 48.21)
are not misinterpreted as duodenal ulcers.
The mean number of peristaltic contractions noted in
the stomach and proximal duodenum is 4–5 contrac­
tions per minute. In the midabdominal small intestinal
tract, 1–3 contractions per minute are expected.
Contrast Radiography of the Small Intestine
Ultrasound has often replaced the need for contrast radi­
ographic studies as these studies of the small intestinal
tract are often laborious and time‐consuming. However,
if ultrasound is not available, contrast radiography is
helpful to evaluate luminal diameter, wall thickness,
mucosal surface, luminal content, and position of the
intestinal tract. This is especially helpful in patients in
which the abdominal serosal detail is decreased, due
to their young age, emaciation, or a disease process.
Furthermore, contrast radiography can provide addi­
tional information for evaluating intestinal transit times.
Before an upper gastrointestinal contrast study is per­
formed, orthogonal survey radiographs of the abdomen
should be done. If dilation of the intestine is present, sug­
gesting ileus, a contrast study might be contraindicated.
If the ileus is functional, the contrast agent will usually
move very slowly through the intestinal tract and if a
mechanical ileus (due to an obstructing foreign body, for

instance) is present, the time required to complete a
thorough contrast radiographic study may inappropri­
ately delay surgery. If, based on radiographs, an intestinal
perforation is suspected, the patient should be referred
to surgery. However, if an intestinal perforation is sus­
pected and on survey radiographs no signs of perforation
such as peritoneal gas are noted, a contrast radiographic
study may provide useful additional information. Usually
intestinal contrast studies are performed using barium
sulfate suspension; however, if a perforation is suspected,
an iodinated contrast agent may be preferred.
It is preferable that the patient is fasted before an
intestinal contrast imaging study is performed. Sedation
can affect the transit time of the contrast agent, and if
necessary the effect of sedation must be considered. In
dogs, acepromazine has shown minimal effects on
intestinal motility, while providing a reasonable level of
sedation. In cats, a combination of diazepam and keta­
mine shows a similarly low effect on intestinal motility
while providing an acceptable level of sedation, and is
preferable to acepromazine.
To perform a contrast study, the barium sulfate suspen­
sion or iodinated contrast agent is administered either
through an orogastric tube or orally using a syringe.
Orogastric tubing is preferred as it reduces the risk of aspi­
ration. It is important to remember that if an ionic iodi­
nated contrast agent is used, aspiration can lead to fatal
pulmonary edema and therefore great care should be taken
if these agents are used, especially in patients with a known
history of swallowing problems or being prone to aspira­
tion. The recommended volume of barium sulfate suspen­
sion is 8–12 mL/kg bodyweight for small or medium‐sized
dogs, 5–7 mL/kg for large‐sized dogs, and 12–20 mL/kg for
cats. Radiographs should be obtained at regular intervals.
As mentioned earlier, for the stomach all four views of the
abdomen should be obtained. However, for the small intes­
tinal tract, orthogonal views are often sufficient. Usually
radiographs at 0, 15, and 30 minutes and one, two, and
three hours post contrast agent administration are
obtained, until the contrast agent has reached the colon.
Barium sulfate contrast agent can usually be seen in the
duodenum within 15 minutes and in the jejunum within 30
minutes. After 90–120 minutes, it is common to see con­
trast at the level of the ileocecocolic junction. After 3–5
hours, it is common to see the contrast agent within the
ileum and colon. Usually, in the dog using barium, the tran­
sit time for the small intestine ranges from two to four
hours and emptying of the small intestine is typically noted
around five hours post administration. In the cat, the tran­
sit of barium is faster and ranges from one to two hours.
If an iodinated contrast agent is used, it is usually given
in a dose of 2–3 mL/kg bodyweight or approximately
700 mg iodine/kg bodyweight. Iodinated contrast agents
can be diluted 1:1. They have a faster transit time through

VetBooks.ir

48 Gastrointestinal Imaging

the intestinal tract, and reach the colon in approximately
half the time when compared with barium sulfate con­
trast agents. As the iodinated contrast agents transit
more rapidly through the gastrointestinal tract, radio­
graphic views should be obtained more frequently, usu­
ally every 10–30 minutes. As mentioned earlier, barium
sulfate is inert and not metabolized by the gastrointesti­
nal tract; however, iodinated contrast agents are absorbed
by the mucosa of the intestinal tract and therefore the
luminal contrast rapidly declines over time, making diag­
nosis of an intestinal lesion more difficult.
In the normal duodenum of the dog, small indenta­
tions of the contrast agent (“pseudoulceration”) might be
seen in the antimesenteric border of the wall. This is
normal, and results from the presence of Peyer’s patches.
In the cat, a strong beading of the small intestine (“string
of pearls” appearance) might be noted (Figure 48.22).
Barium‐impregnated polyethylene spheres (BIPS) have
been used in the past, but are now rarely used. Their
main indications are in the evaluation of transit time of
the gastrointestinal tract; however, their transit times
were variable and as no coating of the intestinal wall is
achieved, the indications for the use of BIPS are limited.

Figure 48.22 Upper gastrointestinal contrast radiographic study
of a cat. Strong beading of the small intestine is noted (“string of
pearls” appearance; white arrow). This is normal in the cat.

Inflammatory Disorders of the Small Intestine
Inflammatory bowel disease is a broad term encom­
passing all disease resulting in an inflammatory process
of the intestinal wall. On survey radiographs, usually no
abnormality is noted. It is important to remember that
on survey radiographs, an increase in thickness of the
small intestinal wall is difficult to impossible to assess
as the presence of fluid and mucus within the intestinal
tract can mimic intestinal wall thickening in loops of
intestine with normal wall thickness. On contrast radi­
ographic studies, a rapid transit of barium contrast
agent might be noted. Additionally, the mucosal surface
might be irregular and there might be a loss of normal
fimbriation of the mucosa. Enteritis may be generalized
or only involve segments of the small intestinal tract.
Usually no ileus is present.
Ultrasound Features of Inflammatory Disease
of the Small Intestine

The most common ultrasound finding noted in inflam­
matory disease is an increase in wall thickness with per­
sistently preserved normal wall architecture. It is
important to note that this is a nonspecific finding.
Additionally, in enteritis the intestinal wall can be
­normal. It is reported that in dogs, duodenum wall meas­
urements up to 6 mm and jejunum wall thickness meas­
urements up to 7 mm may be normal.
In inflammatory disease, thickening of the intestinal
wall can be local or generalized and as this is similarly
noted in patients with intestinal neoplasia, it can be
challenging to differentiate patients with neoplastic
from patients with inflammatory disease using imaging
alone. As an example, in feline patients with gastrointes­
tinal eosinophilic sclerosing fibroplasia, focal, mixed
echogenic masses with central hyperechoic areas and
loss of wall layering have been described. These central
hyperechoic areas within the masses were suspected to
correspond to the areas of fibrosis noted on histopathol­
ogy. These masses distort the normal intestinal wall
architecture, which is frequently described with neo­
plastic intestinal disease. Another inflammatory exam­
ple that can feature focal nonsymmetric thickening of
the intestinal wall with altered or loss of normal wall
layering is mast cell disease. In most animals with
inflammatory intestinal disease, when increased wall
thickness of the intestines is noted, the wall layering
remains preserved and the thickening tends to be sym­
metric and circumferential.
Sonographically, in some patients it can be noted that
only individual layers are affected and increased in thick­
ness or altered in echogenicity. In cats, an increase in
the muscularis layer thickness has been reported with
chronic enteritis, but again, this finding is nonspecific as

491

VetBooks.ir

492

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Table 48.1 Common imaging findings assessed using ultrasound,
contrast radiography or computed tomography in benign versus
malignant intestinal wall thickening
Benign

Malignant

Symmetric

Asymmetric

Circumferential

Eccentric

Mild to moderate

Moderate to severe

Usually segmental or diffuse

Usually focal
Frequently abrupt transition

Usually normal lumen width

Often focally narrowed
intestinal lumen

Preserved wall layering

Lost wall layering

No or mildly enlarged lymph
nodes

Moderately to severely
enlarged lymph nodes

it has also been seen in normal patients or patients with
neoplastic disease.
Hyperechoic lines within the mucosa which are per­
pendicular to the luminal surface have been associated
with lacteal dilation in patients with protein‐losing
enteropathy and lymphangiectasia. In most of these
patients, wall layering of the intestine is persistently pre­
served. Rarely, these hyperechoic lines have been noted
in patients with neoplasia.
In some patients with inflammatory bowel disease, a
mild increase in size of the jejunal lymph nodes might be
noted (up to 10 mm in diameter; normal up to 5 mm in
diameter). A more severe enlargement of jejunal lymph
nodes is more suggestive of a neoplastic than an inflam­
matory process (Table 48.1).
(a)

(b)

Small Intestinal Obstruction (Mechanical Ileus)
Radiographic findings in small intestinal obstruction
are dependent on the extent (incomplete or complete),
location, and duration of obstruction. Small intestinal
obstruction can occur secondary to foreign material,
intestinal neoplasia or a mass causing compression of the
intestinal lumen. Mineral or metal attenuating foreign
bodies are radiographically easily detected but non­
mineralized and nonmetallic foreign bodies within the
intestinal lumen or masses of the small intestinal tract
can be challenging to detect. Care should also be taken
that mineralizations in the mesenteric fat (mesenteric fat
necrosis, “Bates bodies”) summating with loops of intes­
tine are not confused with an intestinal foreign body
(Figure 48.23). Bates bodies are usually an incidental
finding and are more frequently seen in cats than in dogs.
Radiographic findings with mechanical intestinal
obstruction include intestinal distension, visible foreign
material, and stacking of small intestinal loops.
Ambiguous radiographs may require additional imaging
or repeat radiographs for optimum assessment. The most
common sign utilized to diagnose mechanical obstruc­
tion is the presence of variations in the appearance of seg­
ments of small intestine (Figure 48.24). Typically, more
orad loops are dilated and aborad to the obstruction there
is a normal‐sized population of small intestinal loops.
Various methods to assess the small intestinal diame­
ter have been suggested, including comparison of the
largest small intestinal diameter with the shortest height
of the fifth lumbar vertebral body. A ratio of less than
1.6 is considered the upper limit of normal small intesti­
nal diameter in dogs. If the values are below 1.6 an
obstructive process is very unlikely. The higher the ratio,
Figure 48.23 Focal calcified peritoneal
body (“Bates body”). Dorsoventral and
lateral radiograph of the cranial abdomen
in a cat, which underwent thoracic
radiographs for evaluation of the
cardiopulmonary structures. In the
midventral abdomen, a mineral
attenuating round structure is noted,
which is summating with loops of small
intestine and should not be confused with
an intraluminal foreign body. There is no
small intestinal dilation.

VetBooks.ir

48 Gastrointestinal Imaging

Figure 48.24 Small intestinal mechanical
ileus. Lateral and VD radiographs of the
abdomen post upper gastrointestinal
barium study illustrate a severe dilation of
a midabdominal segment of jejunum. On
one end of the dilated jejunum, a curved
radiolucent area is noted. In surgery, a
hoof foreign body and 30 cm of devitalized
jejunum were removed.

the more likely a mechanical obstruction is present.
Another evaluation technique compares the largest small
intestinal diameter with the width of the 12th rib, with
two times the width of the 12th rib considered the upper
normal limit. In the cat, the small intestinal diameter
should not be greater than 1.2 cm. Another measure­
ment technique described in cats calculates a ratio of the
maximum width of a loop of small intestine, measured
from outer to outer wall, divided by the dorsoventral
height of the cranial endplate of the second lumbar
vertebra with both measured on a lateral radiograph of
the abdomen. Ratios lower than 2.0 were more likely
associated with a nonobstructive intestinal process and
with ratios larger than 3.0, the increased small intestinal
diameter was more than 70% likely to be associated with
an obstructive intestinal process (Table 48.2).
Single measurements should not be used as the sole
criterion for diagnosis of mechanical obstruction; other
radiographic findings and the history of the patient
should be evaluated when considering the differential
diagnoses. If the radiographic findings are equivocal
and repeat radiographs are obtained, the presence of
radiopaque foreign material in a similar location over a
24–48‐hour period should increase the suspicion of
mechanical ileus.

Table 48.2 Useful guidelines for evaluating the normal small
intestinal diameter
Measurement

“Rule of thumb”

Compared to shortest height of the 2nd
or 5th lumbar vertebra

Less than 1.6 times

Compared to width of the 12th rib

Less than 2 times

Compared to other normal small
intestinal loops

Less than 2 times

Small intestinal diameter

In the cat less than
1.2 cm

Small Intestinal Foreign Body

Radiographically, radiopaque foreign bodies are the easi­
est to identify. Foreign bodies containing air, especially
when creating a characteristic pattern such as in peach
pits, walnuts, or corncobs, can easily be identified radio­
graphically. If the foreign body leads to a complete
obstruction of the small intestine, an orad dilation of the
small intestine with normal intestinal diameter distal to
the obstruction is typically noted. However, if the
obstruction is incomplete or long‐standing, minimal or
no small intestinal dilation might be present.

493

VetBooks.ir

494

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

In an ultrasound examination of the small intestine,
foreign material in the intestinal tract often appears
hyperechoic with strong distal complete acoustic shad­
owing. These shadowing structures often do not move
with peristalsis and fluid distension of the small intestine
orad to the lesion is often observed. Foreign bodies may
have a distinct shape and surface, which allows differen­
tiation of them from food material.
Linear Foreign Body

Linear foreign bodies cause plication of the small intes­
tine and are usually the result of swallowing a linear
object and fixation of part of the foreign material orally
or in the stomach. In the cat, linear foreign bodies are
often fixated around the caudal aspect of the tongue.
In the dog, most linear foreign bodies are restrained by
material in the stomach.
Classic radiographic features of linear foreign body
obstruction include plication or “bunching” of the small

intestine and the presence of intestinal intraluminal gas with
an abnormal angular or tear drop shape (Figure 48.25).
Perforation of the small intestine can occur, and in addition
to bunching of the small intestines, a reduced serosal detail
and free peritoneal gas may be seen (Figure 48.26).
Sonographically, an abnormal tortuous path of the
small intestine, often the duodenum, with a central hyper­
echoic, linear structure might be noted. Additionally, an
object with strong distal shadowing might be seen in the
pylorus of the stomach.
Intussusception

Intestinal intussusception can be gastroduondenal,
jejunojejunal (Figure 48.27), ileocolic, cecocolic, and
colonocolic.
Radiographically, severely dilated loops of intestine
might be noted. Sometimes a soft tissue attenuation
mass with orad gas in a convex shape is seen.
Figure 48.25 Linear foreign body.
Ventrodorsal and lateral radiographs of the
abdomen of a cat illustrating multiple
bunched‐up loops of small intestine. On
cross‐section, the luminal gas of the
bunched‐up small intestinal loops has an
abnormal tear drop shape. Both findings
are classic for linear foreign body.

(a)

(b)

Figure 48.26 Linear foreign body with
perforation. Ventrodorsal (a) and lateral (b)
radiographs of the abdomen post upper
gastrointestinal barium contrast study
demonstrate bunched‐up loops of small
intestine, some with a tear drop shape of
the luminal gas. The reduced serosal detail
and peritoneal gas (arrows) are consistent
with perforation.

VetBooks.ir

48 Gastrointestinal Imaging

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

(e)

Figure 48.27 Jejunojejunal intussusception. Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) radiographs of a thin dog. A reduced serosal detail is present.
Gas‐dilated loops of small intestine are noted in the cranial abdomen. In the caudal abdomen, a soft tissue attenuating mass effect with
very small, irregular shaped loops of small intestine is noted. Transverse (c,d) ultrasound images revealed a series of hypoechoic and
hyperechoic concentric rings with a small amount of central fluid and gas consistent with an intussusception. Additionally, in one
segment of jejunum, hyperechoic distal shadowing material (e) consistent with foreign material is present.

Ultrasound may reveal a series of hyperechoic and
hypoechoic concentric rings with a central hyperechoic
area on transverse images (“target” or “onion ring” sign).
On longitudinal ultrasound images, a similar pattern of
hyperechoic and hypoechoic lines may be noted, in addi­
tion to circumferential inward folding of the intestinal
wall at the site of the intussusception.
Tumors of the Small Intestine

Intestinal tumors account for approximately 3–10% of
the tumors in cats and dogs. Approximately 75% of feline
intestinal tumors are caused by lymphoma, compared
to approximately 30% of intestinal tumors in the dog.
In dogs, adenocarcinoma, lymphoma, and tumors of
smooth muscle origin are most frequently seen.
If the intestinal neoplasm is small in size and does not
cause obstructive disease, abdominal radiographs are
often normal. If the intestinal mass is large or causes
obstructive disease, radiographic signs consistent with
mechanical ileus are noted. On contrast radiographic

studies, circumferential narrowing of the lumen of the
small intestine might be present.
Ultrasonographic findings in intestinal tumors vary
widely and include focal or diffuse intestinal wall thick­
ening, loss of normal wall layering, increased thickness
of the wall layers, altered echogenicity (Figure 48.28),
and loss of peristalsis. However, minimal sonographic or
no sonographic changes of the intestinal wall have also
been noted in lymphoma. Involvement of regional lymph
nodes may be present, characterized by increased size,
altered shape, and echogenicity. These observations may
increase the suspicion for intestinal neoplasia, and help
stage disease.
Intestinal Adhesions

There is limited information about the imaging of adhe­
sions in veterinary patients. If intestinal adhesions lead
to mechanical ileus, dilated loops of small intestine may
be noted. Radiographically, stacking of loops of small
intestine, which do not change position with repositioning

495

VetBooks.ir

496

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 48.28 Intestinal lymphoma. Lateral radiograph (a) of the abdomen of a cat. In the midabdomen, a soft tissue attenuating mass
effect is noted and segments of small intestine are dorsally displaced. On longitudinal (b) and transverse (c) images of the jejunum, a focal,
eccentric wall thickening with loss of wall architecture and reduced echogenicity is noted. The jejunal lymph nodes (d) are severely
enlarged and heterogeneously hypoechoic. The severe lymphadenopathy in combination with the jejunal wall changes is highly
suspicious for neoplasia such as lymphoma, which was confirmed with cytologic samples obtained with ultrasound guidance.
Figure 48.29 Longitudinal ultrasound
images demonstrating severely
corrugated loops of jejunum with
peripheral hyperechoic tissue. A large
amount of echogenic peritoneal fluid is
present. The patient had a severe
peritonitis secondary to perforating
gunshot wound of the abdomen.

of the patient or repeat radiographs, may be present. In
human patients, the lack of peritoneal fat between
the loops of small intestine and abdominal wall has been
described as a potential indicator for adhesions.
On ultrasound, corrugation of small intestinal loops or
lack of mobility of loops in the abdomen may be noted
(Figure 48.29). Additionally, hyperechoic strands of
­tissue connecting segments of small intestine with each
other or the abdominal wall may be present.
Intestinal Herniation

Intestinal herniation can occur through a defect in the
mesentery, abdominal or body wall, perineum or

­diaphragm. The position of the small intestine is usually
easily assessed using orthogonal radiographs. If there is a
loss of serosal detail such as in young or emaciated
patients or when peritoneal fluid is present, contrast
radiography or ultrasound may be required to evaluate
the position of the small intestine.
Small Intestinal Volvulus and/or Torsion

Small intestinal volvulus and/or torsion are rare in dogs
and have seldom been described in cats. In cases of
intestinal volvulus, the intestines rotate around the
­mesenteric axis, causing vascular compromise. Rotation
along the long axis of the intestine is termed torsion.

VetBooks.ir

48 Gastrointestinal Imaging

Both intestinal volvulus and torsion can occur concur­
rently. The most commonly involved segment of small
intestine in an intestinal volvulus of the dog is the jeju­
num. Radiographic findings in the early phases of this
disease are vague and nonspecific. It is not uncommon
that radiographs are normal. In the later phases of dis­
ease, generalized dilation of the intestines (paralytic
ileus) may be noted; sometimes a circular position of
the intestines might be present.
Paralytic (Functional) Ileus
Paralytic or functional ileus is a dysfunction of the
musculature of the gastrointestinal tract resulting in dys­
motility due to a variety of causes (neurologic, meta­
bolic, vascular impairment, toxic).
Establishing a radiographic diagnosis of functional
intestinal ileus can be challenging. The most common
radiographic finding is a diffusely dilated small intestinal
tract. Focal dilation of the small intestinal tract is more
commonly noted with mechanical obstruction but there
is likely a commonality between these two diseases.
A barium contrast radiographic study can be per­
formed and a diffuse dilation of the intestinal tract may
be noted; however, the lack of motility might result in
incomplete transport of the barium through the intesti­
nal tract and therefore in an incomplete evaluation of the
intestinal tract, or leave the false impression of obstruc­
tion. Ultrasound might provide more information as it
allows evaluation for the presence of intestinal peristalsis
in addition to identifying intraluminal or intramural
lesions. Sonographically amotile and stiff intestinal walls
may be noted.
Intestinal Ulceration/Perforation
Survey radiographs can be normal in intestinal ulceration
and perforation. However, in perforation, frequently
either peritoneal free gas and/or fluid can be seen.
Ulcerative disease of the intestinal tract is most com­
monly seen in the duodenum. As the normal Peyer’s
patches present in the duodenum can appear as focal
areas of thickening (“pseudoulcers”) on ultrasono­
graphic and contrast radiographic studies, care must be
taken to not confuse this normal finding with disease. In
a contrast radiographic study in ulcerative disease, focal
thickening of the intestinal wall with variable outpouch­
ings can be noted. If perforation has occurred, contrast
leakage into the peritoneal cavity may be present.
On ultrasound examination of patients with ulceration,
regional thickening of the intestinal wall with small
hyperechoic speckles representing gas in the intestinal
wall may be present. If perforation of the intestinal wall is
present, these hyerechoic speckles can be traced through

the intestinal wall into the surrounding mesenteric fat
and peritoneal cavity. Additional ultrasonographic
­findings noted with intestinal perforation can include
adjacent hyperechoic (bright) mesenteric fat, peritoneal
fluid, reduced gastrointestinal motility, corrugation of the
intestinal tract, and regional lymphadenopathy.
Postoperative Appearance of the Stomach
and Small Intestine
The most common reasons for obtaining postoperative
radiographs include the evaluation of feeding tube
placement (gastric, gastrojejunal, etc.) or if the patient is
not improving as expected post surgery. Postoperative
imaging studies are also used to determine a baseline
appearance, which may result in easier detection of post­
operative complications. The evaluation of postopera­
tive imaging studies can be challenging and it is crucially
important to be familiar with the anatomic and physio­
logic changes that occur during as well as postoperatively
and be familiar with the surgical technique used.
Radiography is often used as a first technique to eval­
uate for the extent of peritoneal gas and fluid, position of
the stomach and intestines as well as the presence and
position of surgical devices including drains and tubes.
As noted previously, functional ileus of the stomach and
intestines occurs commonly post surgery and can result
in vomiting, diarrhea or constipation. Radiography,
ultrasound, and CT can all be used to evaluate for the
presence of free peritoneal gas. Radiography is currently
the most commonly used technique, but a small volume
of free abdominal gas can be difficult to recognize on
conventional radiographs made with a vertically directed
X‐ray beam because the gas bubbles are small and irreg­
ular in shape and may be misinterpreted as bowel gas
unless they are located in a region where gastrointestinal
structures are normally not located. Radiographs can be
obtained with a horizontal X‐ray beam, with the patient
either in dorsal recumbency, so that the gas accumulates
beneath the abdominal wall, or in lateral recumbency, so
that the gas rises to the highest aspect of the abdomen
and can usually be found under the abdominal wall in the
craniodorsal abdomen. Most of the peritoneal gas is
absorbed in 3–7 days, but it has been reported that
peritoneal gas might be noted on radiographs for up to
25 days post surgery. Ultrasound is a highly sensitive
technique to evaluate for the presence of peritoneal gas,
but in studies in human patients, it has been noted that
the ability to detect gas is highly operator dependent.
Peritoneal fluid can be noted on radiographs for up to
1–2 weeks, especially if the fluid is proteinaceous such
as serum, blood, and lymph, which are absorbed more
slowly. Solutions containing water and electrolytes are
absorbed more rapidly by the peritoneal membrane and

497

VetBooks.ir

498

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

might not be visualized after 24 hours on abdominal
radiographs.
Depending on the surgical intervention, radiographic
changes may or may not be present. Usually no changes
are noted if a partial gastrectomy or gastric biopsies
have been performed. Additionally, no displacement of
the stomach would be expected with these procedures.
If a gastropexy was performed to reduce the risk of a gas­
tric dilation volvulus in the future, or to inhibit ­cranial
movement of the stomach, it is expected that the pylorus
will be near the right lateroventral abdominal wall.
Commonly, the pyloric antrum will be displaced cau­
doventrally and will be noted caudal to the last rib. If an
enterotomy or intestinal biopsy has been performed,
usually no radiographic changes are expected.
Radiographic changes are only expected if the surgery
has led to adhesions or if an extensive intestinal resec­
tion has been performed.
Ultrasound can aid in visualizing the gastropexy or
enterotomy site to evaluate healing of the suture site and
for the presence of adhesions. The most common ultra­
sound features noted are alterations or loss of wall layer­
ing. An increase in wall thickness is commonly noted at
the site of the gastropexy or enterotomy. An increased
echogenicity of the mesenteric fat adjacent to the surgical
site and variable amounts of peritoneal fluid containing
hyperechoic particles may be noted. It is expected that
the increased echogenicity of the mesenteric fat and the
peritoneal fluid resolves in the majority of cases within
approximately 10 days post surgery.

Radiographic Examination of the Large Intestine
The cecum is located to the right of midline on ventro­
dorsal and centrally in the abdomen on lateral radio­
graphic views. In the dog, usually a characteristic gas
pattern of the cecum is noted (corkscrew‐ or C‐ or
S‐shaped appearance). In the cat, the cecum is not com­
monly seen. The colon is usually localized by its content.
The ascending colon can be identified when filled with
gas or fecal matter in the right cranial abdomen. The
transverse colon can be noted caudal to the stomach and
can be displaced caudally with enlargement of the stom­
ach or pancreas. The descending colon is usually located
left of midline, but if filled with a large amount of fecal
matter and the patient has been held in a right lateral
position, the descending colon may also be seen to the
right of midline in normal patients. The rectum is the
most caudal extension of the descending colon, starting
at the pelvic canal and ending at the anus.
Radiographic evaluation of the colon includes evalua­
tion of the content as well as the size of the colon. Most
of the feces should be seen in the colon with only a small
quantity present in the rectum. The normal diameter of
the colon can be quite variable and depends on defeca­
tion habits and time since last defecation. However, radi­
ographically, the normal colon diameter should be less
than the length of the fifth or seventh lumbar vertebral
body. The seventh lumbar vertebra is often more variable
in length than the fifth and therefore using the fifth lum­
bar vertebra might be a more reliable tool in the deci­
sion‐making process. Additionally, the colon diameter
should be less than three times the diameter of the small
intestine.

­Large Intestine
The large intestine consists of the cecum, colon, and
rectum. The cecum is a S‐shaped blind‐ending tube
located usually in the right cranial abdomen at the junc­
tion of the ileum and colon. The colon is divided into
three distinct anatomic areas: the ascending, trans­
verse, and descending colon. The colon is attached by a
short mesentery, which gives the colon a semifixed
position in the abdomen. The ascending colon contin­
ues from the ileum at the ileocecocolic junction and
runs in a cranial direction. The ascending colon is usu­
ally positioned caudal to the stomach and is frequently
noted to the right of midline; the ascending colon con­
tinues into the transverse colon. The transverse colon is
located caudal of the stomach and runs from right to
left in the abdomen. The descending colon continues
from the transverse colon and runs caudally along the
left lateral aspect of the abdomen. Once the descending
colon enters the pelvic canal, it is called the rectum,
which continues to the anus.

Ultrasound Examination of the Large Intestine
The ileocecocolic junction is usually noted in the right
cranial abdomen, but it can be quite mobile. Orad to the
ileocecocolic junction, the terminal portion of the ileum
can be noted, which can easily be followed orad. The
ileum has a distinct appearance, characterized by a
prominent submucosal layer and often folded appear­
ance of the luminal mucosa (see Figure 48.11). Adjacent
to the ileum, the cecum can be seen, which is a blind‐
ending sac on one side and can be followed to the ileoce­
cocolic junction on the other side. The cecum is often
difficult to examine using ultrasound, especially in the
dog, where the presence of gas in its lumen may limit its
evaluation. In the cat, the cecum usually does not con­
tain gas and therefore it is easier to evaluate. The cecal
wall tends to be more hypoechoic than the colon wall
and has an irregular luminal mucosal surface. From the
ileocecocolic junction, the ascending colon can be fol­
lowed cranially into the transverse colon, which then can

VetBooks.ir

48 Gastrointestinal Imaging

be followed caudally into the descending colon. The
descending colon can also be seen caudally in the abdo­
men, dorsal to the urinary bladder. Ultrasonographic
assessment of the rectum is limited due to its location
within the pelvic canal and therefore it is not accessible
with ultrasound. The cranial aspect of the rectum may be
visualized by tilting the ultrasound probe caudally from
cranioventral to the pelvic floor. Positioning the ultra­
sound probe from caudal in the anus area and tilting it
cranially can visualize the caudal aspect of the rectum.
Due to the typically hyperechoic content (fecal
material and gas) in the colon, the colon wall close to the
ultrasound probe may be the only aspect of the wall
that is easily seen. The colon wall has a characteristic
ultrasound appearance and is usually hyperechoic rela­
tive to the small intestine. All five layers of the colon wall
are of equal thickness and are thinner than in the small
intestine (see Figure 48.11). The colon wall in the dog
and cat is usually very thin and only measures 1–2 mm
in thickness, rarely exceeding 3 mm in normal dogs. If
the colon is very empty, luminal folding of the colon
wall can be noted and the wall might subjectively appear
thickened. It is a common finding that no peristalsis is
noted in the colon.
Barium Examination of the Large Intestine
Indications for performing a contrast study of the colon
include evaluation of the position and appearance of the
colon, the presence of strictures, suspected intussus­
ception, masses associated with the colon, congenital
abnormalities, or colitis. Patient preparation should
include fasting for 24 hours if no preexisting clinical con­
traindication is present. If only positional information of
the colon is needed, a pneumocolonography might pro­
vide sufficient information. It is important to remember
that an upper gastrointestinal contrast radiographic
study is often insufficient for evaluation of the colon
as the colon is incompletely distended with contrast
material and as fecal material often creates intraluminal
contrast filling defects, which can be misinterpreted as
mural or intraluminal lesions. Therefore, if a contrast
study is performed to evaluate the colon wall, a more
extensive preparation of the patient is required to ensure
that the colon is empty.
Patient preparation should include a laxative 24 hours
prior to cleansing enemas of the colon. For the contrast
radiographic procedure, sedation or anesthesia is pre­
ferred as it limits straining by the patient. Barium ene­
mas are best performed by placing a soft‐tipped catheter
with an inflatable cuff within the anal sphincter. The cuff
should be gently expanded to avoid overextension of the
rectum or anal sphincter. In unsedated patients, expan­
sion of the cuff or placement of a catheter into the ­rectum

might not be tolerated. Barium sulfate suspension
(5%) at 7–14 mL/kg bodyweight should be slowly infused
(over 5–7 min) to allow contrast to extend to the ile­
ocolic junction. If available, fluoroscopy can be used to
monitor the advancement of the contrast agent within
the colon and especially to ensure that contrast is not
infused beyond the ileocolic junction. Once the con­
trast agent is infused, the catheter should be closed off
and the patient should be gently rolled to allow for uni­
form coating of the colon. Ventrodorsal and right lateral
radiographic views should be obtained and additional
views should be added as needed to fully evaluate the
colon.
Double contrast radiography of the colon (double
contrast colonogram) can be performed by slowly and
carefully insufflating air into the colon after a barium
enema has been performed. Double contrast colonogra­
phy can improve evaluation of colon wall lesions, help
identify strictures, and improve evaluation of the ileoce­
cocolic junction.
The mucosal surface of the colon should be smooth,
continuous, and well defined when the colon is filled
with barium contrast agent. In the colon of the dog,
small lymph follicles can be found and this might present
radiographically as small focal areas of thickening of the
colon wall or spicules similar to very small ulcers. These
areas should become less apparent once the large intes­
tine is distended. In the cat, the largest aggregate of
lymph follicles can be noted in the ileal area and apex of
the cecum; however, this is usually not discernible on
radiographs.
Pneumocolonography
The most common reason pneumocolonography is per­
formed is to gain positional information about the colon,
allowing differentiation between small and large intes­
tines. Pneumocolonography provides a quick, safe, and
easy way to outline the entire colon but provides only
limited information about involvement of the mucosa,
wall thickness and areas of the colon which cannot
be distended. In cases where a wall lesion is suspected,
a barium enema should be performed. Pneumoco­
lonography is most easily performed by using either a
soft‐tipped catheter or catheter‐tipped syringe placed
within the anal sphincter. In general, 1–3 mL of air/kg
bodyweight should result in sufficient filling of the colon.
It is important to ensure that the entire colon, including
the cecum, is filled and distended with air. It is important
to close off the catheter or syringe once the colon is
insufflated to ensure that the air does not escape.
Ventrodorsal and right lateral radiographic views should
be obtained and additional views should be added as
needed to fully evaluate the colon.

499

VetBooks.ir

500

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Computed Tomography of the Large Intestine
Computed tomography can be an excellent technique for
evaluating the large intestine. Similarly to radiography,
contrast is often needed to distend the colon and evalu­
ate all aspects of the intestinal wall. When the colon is
empty and the intestinal walls are collapsed, intestinal
wall lesions are very difficult or impossible to identify.
Additionally, if large amounts of fecal matter are present
in the colon, artifacts created by this might limit visuali­
zation of the colon wall. Therefore, similar to radiogra­
phy, optimal patient preparation, including cleansing
enemas, should be performed before a contrast CT study
of the abdomen is performed to evaluate the colon. The
normal anatomy of the colon and regional lymph nodes
is easily evaluated using CT and the ability to perform
dorsal and sagittal reconstructions of the CT images
helps to gain a better three‐dimensional understanding
of normal anatomy or pathologies. The colon wall is thin
and measures 1–2 mm in thickness.
Virtual endoscopy using CT images can be performed.
However, currently its use and clinical value are limited
as CT does not allow assessment of the color of the colon
wall or to obtain biopsies at the same time and evalua­
tion of the wall is limited (Figure 48.30).
Inflammatory Disorders of the Large Intestine
In the acute phase of colitis there may be no abnormality
present on survey or contrast radiographic studies.
Infrequently, in cases of mild colitis, contrast radio­
graphic studies show a mild thickening of the intestinal
wall. Small areas of focal thickening, consistent with
ulceration, may be noted. In more severe forms of colitis,
more extensive thickening of the colon wall with larger
areas of ulceration may be noted on contrast radiographic
studies. With increasing disease severity, spasm of the
colon might be present. With chronic colitis, decreased
width, shortening and enlargement of the colon have all
been described.

Figure 48.30 Virtual colonoscopy. Three‐dimensional
reconstruction virtual colonoscopy image of a normal colon.
Several colonic folds are visible.

On ultrasound examination, increased thickness of
the colon wall with loss of wall layering and decrease of
echogenicity of the colon wall may be noted. Mild
regional lymph node enlargement may be present.
Typhlitis can be challenging to diagnose clinically as
well as via imaging techniques. In mild to moderate
typhlitis, no radiographic changes are often noted; in
severe typhlitis on contrast radiographic studies, similar
changes as seen in colitis can be noted. On ultrasound,
thickening of the cecum wall with a decrease of echo­
genicity of the wall layers might be noted (Figure 48.31).
Tumors of the Large Intestine
Tumors of the large intestine account in dogs for more
than 60% of the gastrointestinal tumors diagnosed; how­
ever, it is important to remember that the prevalence of
gastrointestinal neoplasms in dogs is still only 3–10% of
all tumors diagnosed. Some benign tumors, especially
when polypoid, might not require extensive imaging.
Survey radiographs are often negative and do not pro­
vide additional information. Contrast radiography using
a barium enema or double contrast colonography may
allow localization of the colon wall thickening. However,
colonography only allows limited evaluation of regional
lymph nodes and other abdominal organs, such as the
liver. Therefore, if a malignant lesion is suspected,
­contrast‐enhanced CT or ultrasound (Figure 48.32) are
preferred. These techniques allow not only visualization
of the colon wall mass, but also staging of regional lymph
nodes, the peritoneum, and parenchymatous organs.
If a colon wall mass is suspected, CT may be preferred
over ultrasound, as lesions within the pelvic canal show
only limited accessibility using ultrasound due to the
lack of penetration of the ultrasound wave through the
osseous structures of the pelvic canal.
Megacolon
Megacolon is a broad descriptive term indicating
enlargement of the colon, which can be due to lack of
innervation or abnormal innervation of the colon wall,
mechanical obstruction (e.g. malunited pelvic fractures,
neoplasia, rectal stricture) or dietary or psychogenic
causes. Idiopathic megacolon is the most common rea­
son reported in the cat for enlargement of the colon.
Patients with megacolon often have a history of consti­
pation, painful or difficult defecation or tenesmus.
Classic radiographic findings in dogs and cats include
a marked increase in the diameter of the colon
(Figure 48.33). If the colon measures more than 1.5 times
the length of the fifth or seventh lumbar vertebra, or
more than three times the diameter of the small intes­
tine, this is suggestive of a megacolon.

VetBooks.ir

48 Gastrointestinal Imaging

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 48.31 Cecal perforation secondary to typhlitis. Right lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) radiographs of the abdomen demonstrated
a loss of serosal detail and a small amount of peritoneal free gas. The origin of the gas was not identified on radiographs; however,
an intestinal perforation was suspected. A urinary bladder stone was noted. Longitudinal ultrasound images of the cecum (c) and
ileocecocolic area (d) illustrating thickening of the cecum wall with loss of wall layering and decrease in echogenicity. A small amount of
peritoneal fluid with hyperechoic specular reflectors, characteristic of gas, is noted adjacent to the cecum. In surgery, a perforation of the
cecum was noted. The cecum was removed and histopathology confirmed typhlitis.

(a)

(b)

Figure 48.32 Lymphoma of the colon wall in a cat. Transverse (a) and longitudinal (b) ultrasound images of the descending colon. The
colon wall is severely thickened (arrowheads) with a loss of wall layering and a decrease in echogenicity.

Megacolon Secondary to Abnormal Innervation or
Smooth Muscle Function

Several diseases such as cauda equina syndrome, sacral
spinal cord deformity in Manx cats (sacrococcygeal
agenesis), aganglionosis or hypoganglionosis of the
colon wall can lead to megacolon.

Radiographically, patients with abnormal innervation
or smooth muscle functional abnormality of the colon
wall may present with various degrees of enlargement of
the colon (Figure 48.34). With aganglionosis or hypo­
ganglionosis of the colon, a severe dilation of the colon is
noted. This dilation often abruptly narrows towards the

501

VetBooks.ir

502

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

(a)

(a)

(b)

(b)

rectum and anus, as these segments of the intestinal tract
are frequently not involved in the disease process
(Figure 48.35).
Large Intestinal Mechanical Obstruction

Large intestinal mechanical obstruction can lead to meg­
acolon. Radiographically, in contrast to patients who
have a lack of nerve or muscle function of the colon wall,
dilation of the colon and rectum can be noted. In these
cases, the osseous and soft tissue structures of the pelvis

Figure 48.33 Megacolon in an obstipated
cat. Right lateral (a) and ventrodorsal
(b) radiographs illustrating a severely
enlarged colon. The fecal material is
mineral attenuating and large desiccated
fecal balls, which cannot be emptied, are
noted in the descending colon to rectum.

Figure 48.34 Lumbosacral malformation
in a Manx cat with secondary megacolon.
Ventrodorsal (a) and lateral (b) radiographs
of the abdomen illustrating a fusion of the
last lumbar vertebra and sacrum. The colon
is filled with fecal matter and dilated. A
reduced serosal detail is noted in the
abdomen. The cat is emaciated.

and lumbosacral spine should be carefully evaluated for
the presence of pathologies causing obstruction of the
large intestine. Radiopaque foreign material such as
stones (Figure 48.36) or metallic objects can easily be
identified on survey radiographs. Once a foreign object
has made it through the small intestinal tract into the
colon, it is usually expected that it will pass unhindered
through the colon.
In dogs with prostatic enlargement or neoplasia, with
or without secondary sublumbar lymphadenopathy, a

VetBooks.ir

48 Gastrointestinal Imaging

Figure 48.35 Severe megacolon in a Manx
cat. Ventrodorsal (a) and lateral (b)
radiographs of the abdomen illustrating
severe distension of the colon with fecal
matter. The colon narrows abruptly
towards the rectum. A small amount of
urinary bladder sediment is noted. A small
amount of subcutaneous emphysema
from a subcutaneous fluid injection is
present.

(a)

Figure 48.36 Stone in colon. Ventrodorsal (a)
and left lateral (b) radiographs of the abdomen
of a dog. A mineral attenuating structure (stone)
is noted summating with a gas‐filled loop of
intestine on the lateral radiograph. On the VD
radiograph, the stone is summating with the
descending colon. The small intestines are in part
fluid filled and in part gas dilated, which was
concerning for a mechanical ileus. Transverse
ultrasound image (c) illustrating a hyperechoic,
distally shadowing structure representing the
stone within the colon. No small intestinal
obstructive disease was noted.

Figure 48.37 Severe sublumbar
lymphadenopathy secondary to prostate
neoplasia. Right lateral radiograph of the
abdomen illustrating ventral displacement
and compression of the descending colon
(arrowheads) secondary to severe
sublumbar lymph node enlargement due
to prostate neoplasia and metastases to
the lymph nodes.

(a)

(b)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(b)

503

VetBooks.ir

504

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

(a)

(c)

Figure 48.38 Colonocolic intussusception.
On survey radiographs (a), a soft tissue
attenuating mass with rounded borders is
noted in the cranial aspect of the
descending colon. After a barium enema
was performed (b,c), a contrast‐sparing
filling defect is noted in the colon. This
study was followed by an upper
gastrointestinal contrast study to evaluate
the position of the ileum. A colonocolic
intussusception was confirmed at surgery.

(b)

dorsal displacement and compression of the colon is
commonly noted. Additionally, if sublumbar lymphade­
nopathy is present, the descending colon ventral to the
caudal lumbar to cranial sacral spine is ventrally d
­ isplaced
(Figure 48.37).
Cecal or Colonic Intussusception
The most common intussusceptions seen in the colon
are ileocolic, cecocolic, and colonocolic. The intussus­
ception might be seen as a soft tissue attenuating
mass with round borders within the colon on survey
radiographs, especially when the colon is gas filled
(Figure 48.38).
In ileocolic intussusception, the cecum and ascending
colon are not filled with gas, whereas in normal dogs
some degree of gas filling is normally seen in the cecum.
In cecocolic intussusception, the cecum can be seen as a
radiolucent filling defect in the colon on a barium
enema. The ileocolic junction and ileum are persistently
normally seen (Figure 48.39).
Colonic Torsion and Volvulus
Colonic torsion and volvulus is a rare disease that has
a high mortality, similar to gastric and small intestinal
torsion and volvulus. A moderately to severely dis­
tended colon can be noted and the colon can be
abnormally positioned. Frequently the colon is dis­
placed cranially (Figure 48.40). However, radiographic
findings in colonic torsion or volvulus may also be
nonspecific and early exploration might be necessary
to correctly diagnose and correct a colonic torsion
or volvulus.

Figure 48.39 Cecocolic intussusception (cecal inversion) in a dog.
Ventrodorsal radiograph post barium enema demonstrating an
irregular‐shaped radiolucent filling defect in the ascending colon,
which is representing the cecum intussuscepted into the colon.
The ileum and ileocolic junction are normal and contrast filled.
No normal positioned cecum is identified.

Congenital Abnormalities of the Colon
A variety of congenital abnormalities have been described
for the colon in the dog and cat including a short colon,
atresia ani or rectum, double colon, diverticula, and fistula.

VetBooks.ir

48 Gastrointestinal Imaging

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 48.40 Colon torsion. Left lateral (a), right lateral (b), and ventrodorsal (c) radiographs of the abdomen of a dog. The colon is
severely gas distended and cranially displaced. The cecum is dorsally and left laterally displaced (arrows). Most of the small intestinal
segments are gas filled.

In patients with a short colon, the ileocecocolic junction
is often positioned left lateral of midline at the cranial
aspect of the descending colon. The clinical importance of
this finding is unclear. Most congenital colon abnormali­
ties require a contrast‐enhanced study, either using radiog­
raphy or CT, to fully evaluate the extent of the lesion.
Especially when fistulae are present, a combination of an
iodine enema and the use of intravenous iodinated con­
trast agents using CT might provide the best anatomic
information. In diverticulae, a herniation of the mucosal
layer through the muscular wall occurs. If a diverticulum is
present in the rectum, it might be confused with ­sacculation
on physical examination. Rarely, a diverticulum can rup­
ture, which can lead to a significant retroperitonitis and
peritonitis, which can be ­recognized radiographically by
free peritoneal and retroperitoneal gas.

Displacement of the Colon
The most common displacement of the colon and/or
rectum is into the perianal area, which occurs sec­
ondary to weakening or rupture of the pelvic dia­
phragm (perineal hernia). In addition to the
displacement of the colon and/or rectum, retroflex­
ion of the urinary bladder can occur, which causes
obstruction of the urethra. On radiographs, usually a
soft tissue attenuating mass can be seen in the peria­
nal area usually ventral and lateral to the tail. This is
often best seen on lateral radiographs. On ventrodor­
sal radiographs, lateral or caudal deviation of fecal
matter in the colon and rectum may be noted.
Sometimes a sigmoid shape of the colon and rectum
can be seen.

­Further Reading
Buchanan JW. Tracheal Signs and Associated Vascular
Anomalies in Dogs with Persistent Right Aortic Arch.
Journal of VeterinaryInternal Medicine 2004; 18(4): 510.
Finck, C., D’Anjou, M.A., Alexander, K., Specchi, S., and
Beauchamp, G. Radiographic diagnosis of mechanical
obstruction in dogs based on relative small intestinal
external diameters. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2014; 55(5),
472–479.
Graham JP, Lord PF, Harrison JM. Quantitative estimation
of intestinal dilation as a predictor of obstruction in the
dog. J Small Anim Pract 1998; 39(11): 521–4.

Shanaman MM, Schwarz T, Gal A, et. al. Comparison
between survey radiography, B-mode ultrasonography,
contrast-enhanced ultrasonography and contrastenhanced multi-detector computed tomography
findings in dogs with acute abdominal signs. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound. 2013; 54(6):591–604.
Sharma, A, Thompson, M, Scrivani, PV, et al. Comparison
of radiography and ultrasonography for diagnosing
small-intestinal mechanical obstruction in vomiting
dogs. VetRadiol Ultrasound 2011; 52(3), 248–255.

505

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

507

49
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
Craig Ruaux, BVSc (Hons), PhD, MACVSc, DACVIM (SAIM)
School of Veterinary Science, Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand

Gastrointestinal endoscopy is an attractive diagnostic
tool for many gastrointestinal disease cases presenting to
companion animal practitioners. This technique can
allow direct visualization of the gastrointestinal mucosa
in the esophagus, stomach, upper part of the small intestine, colon, and distal ileum. While some of these procedures are straightforward, entry into the upper part of
the small intestine and the distal ileum can be quite challenging in some patients.
Endoscopy is often viewed as a much less invasive
method of obtaining gastrointestinal mucosal biopsy
samples than can be achieved with either exploratory
laparotomy/celiotomy or laparoscopy‐assisted full‐
thickness biopsies. While endoscopic biopsy has an
advantage of lower risk and less perioperative morbidity,
the quality of endoscopic biopsy samples is often found
wanting. This is particularly the case with the use of
smaller endoscopes with very narrow biopsy channels
that limit the size of the biopsy instruments that can be
passed.
With refurbished flexible endoscopy systems becoming more readily available on the market, and at reasonable prices, there is increasing utilization of these
instruments and procedures in generalist practices.
Competence in flexible gastrointestinal endoscopy
requires meaningful amounts of hands‐on practice, and
guidance from an experienced operator in a hands-on
training environment is the best way to achieve competence in a short period of time. The purpose of this chapter is to provide an overview of flexible endoscopic
equipment types, correct handling and manipulation of
the endoscope, methods for obtaining biopsies, a general
overview of the steps for several endoscopic procedures,
and the use of flexible endoscopy for some minimally
invasive therapeutic procedures such as feeding tube
placement and foreign body retrieval.

­Endoscopy Equipment Options
All visual light endoscopes operate by channeling light
from an external source, via fiberoptic light guides, to the
area of interest. This light then illuminates the area being
examined, and an image is formed. The actual mechanism leading to image formation is typically from one of
two options: either the use of additional fiberoptic elements to return the light via an objective lens at the operating end of the scope (these are commonly called
fiberscopes), or via direct capture of a digital image using
an imaging chip at the distal, patient end of the instrument (videoendoscopes) (Figure 49.1). Fiberscopes represent an older technology, and are usually cheaper than
equivalent‐sized videoendoscopes, but they do have significant shortcomings. Fiberscopes are more affected by
fiber breakage, as the image depends on light successfully
traveling in both directions. The image is often quite dim,
as there are more light losses involved with transit along
the length of the scope and back. The generation of medical records with these endoscopes is also more difficult,
requiring an accessory camera attached to the eyepiece,
representing another potential point of failure. While fiberscopes were long the mainstay of flexible endoscopy in
veterinary medicine, videoendoscopes are preferable due
to superior image quality, greater ease of use, and greater
ease of generation for permanent medical records.
Endoscopes used for gastrointestinal procedures
should feature four‐way tip deflection, allowing the deviation of the tip left or right of center and up or down. Tip
deviation is defined relative to the midline of the control
handle, with the control cluster in the operating hand.
Some smaller scopes, designed for airway examination
rather than gastrointestinal endoscopy, have only up and
down deflection controls while left to right turns are
made by turning the entire endoscope.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

practices. This length may be limiting, however, for full
upper gastrointestinal examinations or colonoscopy in
very large‐breed dogs.
Bronchoscopes are not recommended for gastrointestinal endoscopy, as simultaneous up/down and left/right
tip deflections are important for successful navigation of
the upper gastrointestinal tract; it is almost impossible to
achieve this when the endoscope has already made several turns to reach the gastric antrum and pylorus.
Most operators hold the control cluster in the left hand
while holding and advancing the body of the endoscope
with the right hand. Operators with large hands may be
able to manipulate the control wheels using the fingers
and thumb of the left hand, while operators with small
hands will need to operate the control wheels with the
right hand while supporting the control cluster with the
left hand. The tension control levers (Figure 49.2) are
very useful for operators who must alternate between
right hand control manipulations and endoscope
advancement. With very long endoscopes, longer than
those typically used in companion animal practice, two
operators may be necessary to control endoscope
advancement and tip deflection separately.

VetBooks.ir

508

­Record Keeping for Endoscopy
Procedures

Figure 49.1 A typical flexible videoendoscopy “tower” as used for
most gastrointestinal endoscopic procedures in companion
animal medicine. In this particular system, the light generator and
image processor are in the same unit, with separate vacuum
pump and image printer. In other systems the light source and
image‐processing functions may be separate components. Note
the large monitor and scope rack at the top of the tower. While
the scope rack is a safe place to rest the scope during the
procedure, it is not recommended to transport the scope
(particularly longer and heavier colonoscopes) on this rack when
moving the tower.

Flexible endoscopes are available in a variety of sizes,
with variations in both diameter and length. Greater
diameter endoscopes will typically have larger working
channels, allowing the use of larger biopsy instruments,
snares or foreign body retrieval devices. Larger diameter
endoscopes also have greater intrinsic stiffness, which
can be both beneficial (passing through restrictions such
as the antrum and pylorus is easier with a stiffer endoscope) and a complicating factor (it is difficult to make
very tight turns in very small animals). Generally, a flexible endoscope of around 7–9 mm diameter overall, and
working length of 120–150 cm, will be adequate for gastrointestinal procedures in most companion animal

Endoscopic examination findings are a critical part of the
medical record in patients undergoing these procedures.
Generation of a report will typically involve image capture from the endoscope and a written report detailing
findings and observations. Image captures should contain sufficient information to identify the patient, along
with the date of examination.
The actual content of the written component of the
report will obviously vary depending upon the area being
examined. The World Small Animal Veterinary
Association (WSAVA) has produced template documents encapsulating the essentials for endoscopy reports
for upper and lower gastrointestinal tract endoscopy
procedures; these files are available to download from
www.wsava.org/guidelines/gastrointestinal‐guidelines.
These forms include a section for recording the other
documentation modalities used, but the guidelines do
not make any particular recommendations regarding the
best choice of image capture modality.
Image capture systems are very variable, and all have
strengths and weaknesses. For quite some time, the use
of video printers, which capture images from the processing unit and print to photographic paper, was the
standard method. While some systems and practices
continue to use these printers, the specific printer
technology used (dye sublimation) is rarely used in
­

VetBooks.ir

49 Gastrointestinal Endoscopy

(a)

(b)

Figure 49.2 Control cluster of a typical flexible videoendoscope, in this case a gastroduodenoscope. (a) The control wheels, labeled U^
D^ and L^ R^, control tip deflection up/down and left/right, respectively. The direction of tip deflection is in reference to the center line
and upper surface of the control cluster. Outside the U‐D wheel, and in the center of the L‐R wheel are a lever and wheel, respectively,
marked F>; these are tension controls (labeling indicates the direction to give greater freedom of movement) that can be used to reduce
tip deviation freedom. (b) A selection of buttons on this particular endoscope pause video capture and trigger still image capture; these
are not present in this position in all endoscopes of this type. Below the two image capture buttons, a press button with a red outer rim
operates suction. The bottom button, with a blue rim and small hole in the center, is a combined air/water insufflation control. Placing the
operator’s finger over the central hole without depressing the button will cause air insufflation, while pressing down the button causes
water to be delivered from the end of the scope, washing across the distal lens. While other endoscopes from other manufacturers may
have different colored or shaped buttons, the positioning of vacuum above air/water insufflation is standard across all manufacturers.
Below the control buttons, a black rubber cuff is apparent; this is the seal for the working channel.

commercially available printers, thus these printers and
their disposables (ink ribbons, specific papers) are
expensive and increasingly difficult to source. These
printer systems are hard to recommend for integration
into modern veterinary practice workflows.
At the opposite extreme from the traditional dye sublimation printer, some modern endoscopy systems are
able to record digital video or digital still image captures
from the endoscope in real time, and then export the
resulting files to either a hospital‐wide DICOM system
or directly into a hospital electronic record system.
These capabilities are very useful for streamlining record
management in busy practices, and also provide the ability to show captures to clients and generate multiple copies that can be saved to removable media or transferred
digitally via email. The specific hospital management
systems and DICOM products that endoscopy systems
can interface with vary by manufacturer, and should be
considered if a practice is planning to purchase a newer
system. Aftermarket image capture and DICOM export
hardware are also available from some vendors, again

these systems can require significant configuration and
software support, which should be clarified during the
purchasing process.
A final option that is commonly used with refurbished
but older endoscopy systems is to attach some form of
recording device (commonly a CD or DVD recorder) to a
video output from the endoscope processor. In some
cases, it is possible to configure these systems to trigger
capture using either a foot pedal or the capture button on
the endoscope, but again as technology progresses and
changes, this is becoming increasingly difficult. The simplest, but most risky, option is to simply collect and
record all video from the video output and record it as a
continuous stream. If doing this, it is important to consider the length and size of the recording, as many upper
and lower gastrointestinal tract endoscopy procedures
will last for 1.5 hours or more. Use of CD/DVD recorder
systems also requires the endoscope operator or assisting technical staff to remember to start and stop recording, and finalize the recording to allow burning the final
disk. The disks themselves have variable, and often short,

509

VetBooks.ir

510

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

useful lives after burning, and may not survive for the
duration necessary to meet legal requirements for record
keeping in some localities.
Given the combination of workflow advantages,
archivability, and integration with other hospital systems, systems that can achieve digital capture and archiving are generally the best option currently available, and
will have the greatest future proofing.

­Endoscope Handling
General Manipulations
The endoscope is a fragile instrument and needs to be
handled carefully and appropriately to avoid damage
to the scope and minimize risk to the patient.
Gastrointestinal endoscopy requires an adequate plane
of anesthesia. Mouth blocks or gags should be used to
keep the mouth open while carrying out upper gastrointestinal tract endoscopy. These both make entry of the
endoscope into the upper gastrointestinal tract easier,
and provide a degree of protection against the endoscope
body being bitten if patient anesthesia is inadequate.
Operation of the endoscope relies on fine control wires
that extend from the control cluster to the tip of the
scope, while light transmission and image formation rely
on the fine fiberoptic strands within the scope body.
Both of these components can be damaged if placed
under excess stress. To minimize stress on the endoscope
components, it is best to make fine adjustments of the
operating tip that allow general visualization of a target
area, while larger deviations and turns are made by turning the whole endoscope body rather than applying significant strain to the endoscope tip. A fine adjustment is
made using the control wheels, the scope is advanced
and turned using the entire scope body, then additional
adjustments are made to gradually bring the endoscope
into the desired position.
Visualization of some areas of the gastrointestinal
tract, particularly the gastric cardia and aboral surface of
the esophageal sphincter, requires more stressful maneuvers. Visualization of the cardia and lower oesophageal
sphincter usually requires a “J‐maneuver” where the tip
of the endoscope is placed into maximal upwards deflection (Figure 49.3). This position is particularly stressful
on the mechanical components of the endoscope, and
should only be used for as long as needed to adequately
visualize the anatomy in this region.
Passage of the endoscope through the pylorus into the
proximal duodenum is mildly stressful on the endoscope,
as in many dogs it requires a simultaneous downwards
and right tip deflection while pushing against some
resistance. Once the pylorus has been traversed,

Figure 49.3 Maximal upwards flexion of a flexible
videoendoscope, necessary for visualization of the gastric cardia,
aboral surface of the lower esophageal sphincter, and distal rectal
lumen. This position is highly stressful on the endoscope control
structures and fiberoptic elements, and should be held for as
short a period as possible. Do not introduce the endoscope into a
lumen (for instance, in an attempt to visualize the distal palate or
rectum) while holding the endoscope in this position, as the
additional compression on the distal end of the endoscope can
cause severe damage.

however, there is little to no stress applied to the endoscope as it is advanced along the duodenum.
The endoscope tip and body should be lubricated with
a water‐based lubricant before introduction into the gastrointestinal tract. In the initial stages of the upper gastrointestinal examination, particularly with smaller dogs
and cats, there is a risk that the endoscope may slip out
of the esophagus and, if not being held by the operator,
the tip may fall and hit the floor or other hard surfaces,
risking damage to the imaging system or the fiberoptics.
This can be particularly problematic for operators with
smaller hands who need to take their right hand off the
endoscope body to make tip deflections. Having an assistant hold and advance the endoscope body independently from the main operator can minimize the risk of
scope dislodgment and damage.
Biopsy Instruments and Working Channel Use
The biopsy and vacuum channel of the endoscope are
lined with a thin, rubberized material to allow adequate
flexibility while keeping the fiberoptics, control wires,
and imaging electronics sealed against water ingress.
Damage to the inner lining of the biopsy/vacuum channel can result in scope flooding and costly repairs, as the
entire endoscope must be disassembled to repair and
replace these parts.

VetBooks.ir

49 Gastrointestinal Endoscopy

It is imperative that biopsy instruments and retrieval
snares/baskets are held closed or within their protective
outer sheath when passing through the endoscope. Open
biopsy jaws or exteriorized retrieval instruments can
puncture or otherwise damage the internal lining of the
endoscope.
Occasionally, it is necessary to biopsy lesions that
require significant tip deflection for adequate visualization. A mass on the aboral surface of the esophageal
sphincter, for instance, will require a J‐maneuver for adequate visualization (see earlier). Attempting to pass a
biopsy instrument through the endoscope while it is in
this position is risky as the instrument is directly pushing
against the channel lining. It is less risky to retract the
endoscope slightly to allow the tip to relax, pass the
instrument until it is visualized leaving the endoscope
and within the gastric lumen, then return to the maximally flexed position to obtain the biopsy. Obtaining an
adequate biopsy from masses in this region can be quite
difficult, as the severe turns of the endoscope restrict the
ability of the biopsy instrument to move within the
channel.
After a biopsy is obtained, the biopsy instrument
should be kept completely closed until it has been
entirely removed from the biopsy channel. Foreign bodies are retracted with the retrieval instrument until they
are close to the operating end of the endoscope, then
removed by retracting the entire endoscope.

water‐moistened wet gauze or toweling to remove
grossly contaminating material.
Complete cleaning of the endoscope requires several
steps and use of different cleaning products to achieve
both physical cleaning and sterilization.
The first step of cleaning is typically achieved with an
enzymatic detergent solution. The endoscope is soaked
in this solution, then the outer surfaces gently wiped
down. The detergent solution is also pumped through
the biopsy and air/water channels using a manifold
(Figure 49.4) that attaches in place of the removable buttons. If manually cleaning the endoscope, these channels
are then further cleaned by passing specific cleaning
brushes.
After lower level cleaning with the enzymatic/detergent solution, higher level sterilization can be achieved
using specific sterilization fluids. These fluids are often
corrosive and toxic, and can produce toxic fumes. The
operator cleaning and sterilizing the endoscope must
wear adequate personal protective equipment, including
facemask and eye protection. After exposure to the sterilization solution is complete, the endoscope is thoroughly rinsed with sterile water, both externally and
through the internal channels. The sterilization solutions

Endoscope Cleaning and Maintenance
Care and maintenance of endoscopes require attention
to detail, care with handling of the instrument, and the
use of appropriate cleaning products and equipment.
These are expensive and fragile pieces of equipment, and
repair costs are high. Generally speaking, it will be best
for only one or two specific individuals (practitioner or
technician) to be tasked with cleaning and maintenance
of flexible endoscopes to ensure consistency of handling
and adequate knowledge of the necessary steps. While
some general observations are given here, manufacturer’s guidelines should be followed. This is particularly
important with respect to cleaning fluid selection, as different manufacturers use differing materials in their
endoscopes that may be damaged by inappropriate
cleaning solution use.
Endoscopes must be thoroughly and effectively
cleaned, on both external surfaces and within the biopsy/
vacuum and air/water channels, after use and before
storage. On completion of an examination, it is good
practice to suction plain or distilled water (not saline)
through the endoscope to clear material that may have
lodged within the working channel. The exterior body
of the endoscope should be wiped down with

Figure 49.4 Attachment of a specialized manifold in place of the
air/water and vacuum buttons allows administration of cleaning
and sterilizing solutions to the inner working channels of the
endoscope.

511

VetBooks.ir

512

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

are irritating to mucosal tissue, so it is important to
ensure that residues of the cleaning solution have been
removed before use on a patient.
Endoscopes should be stored dry, following effective
cleaning (Figure 49.5). If space is available, they can be
stored in specially constructed rack systems in a dedicated cabinet. Other items unrelated to endoscopy
should not be stored in the same cabinet to minimize the
risk of endoscope damage. If a dedicated cabinet is not
used, the cleaned and dried endoscope should be stored
in the original shipping/packing case to provide adequate
protection. Obviously, if transporting endoscopes in the
field or between hospital sites, they are best carried in
their specific transport case.
Effective complete cleaning and sterilization of an
endoscope can be quite time‐consuming. In practices
that carry out several procedures in a day, investment in
an automated scope cleaning and reprocessing system
can be cost‐effective, freeing up technician resources for
other tasks. These systems can automatically carry out
both the low‐and high‐level cleaning steps, final rinsing
of the endoscope and pressure testing without further

manual input, typically in less than one hour. These systems may also generate a record for each endoscope of
cleaning solution exposure times and pressure test
results, and monitor the age and use of the cleaning solutions. An additional advantage is that the operator is protected from the cleaning and sterilization fluids during
endoscope reprocessing.

­Endoscopic Terminology
Endoscopic evaluation of the gastrointestinal tract provides an opportunity to assess the gross appearance of
the gastrointestinal mucosa. Findings with gastrointestinal endoscopy therefore are usually descriptions of the
mucosa and attempt to define the ways, if any, in which
the mucosa differs from normal. Standardization of the
language used to describe endoscopy findings is useful to
maintain consistency in interpretations and comparison
across patients. The terms recommended for the description of the mucosa, most of which are also incorporated
into the WSAVA recommended reporting forms for gastrointestinal endoscopy procedures, are summarized in
Table 49.1 and discussed in greater detail below.
Friability
Friability refers to the susceptibility of the mucosa to
superficial damage and hemorrhage on contact with
either the endoscope tip/body or biopsy instruments.
Table 49.1 Terminology used for the description
of endoscopically visualizable abnormalities of the gastrointestinal
mucosa

Figure 49.5 Clean and dry flexible endoscopes stored in a
dedicated storage cabinet. An effective and sturdy retention
system should be used to minimize the risk of endoscopes being
dropped and damaged.

Parameter

Definition

Normal
mucosa

No macroscopic lesions are observed

Friability

Occurrence and degree of bleeding on contact
of the endoscope or biopsy instrument with the
mucosal surface

Granularity

Perceptible alterations in the visible texture of
the mucosa

Erosion(s)

The presence of superficial linear to patchy
mucosal defects, usually with bleeding present

Hyperemia

Subjective perception of the redness (pale to
markedly reddened) of the mucosa

Lymphatic
dilation*

The presence and degree of white foci
(punctate to diffuse) within the mucosa

Mass present

Detection of abnormal tissue protruding into
the intestinal lumen

Source: Modified from Slovak et al. (2015). Reproduced with
permission of Elsevier.
* Lymphatic dilation is assessed and scored only in the small intestine.

VetBooks.ir

49 Gastrointestinal Endoscopy

Figure 49.6 Increased friability and iatrogenic mucosal
compromise of the small intestinal mucosa. There is noticeable
“stripping” of the superficial mucosa visible to the right of the
image; the stripped mucosa is visible piled close to the right side
of the endoscopic biopsy forceps. This degree of mucosal damage
from contact with the endoscope is abnormal, even within the
small intestine.

Figure 49.7 Increased mucosal granularity in the small intestine.
The endoscope is approaching the end of the descending
duodenum, the caudal duodenal flexure is visible in the distance.
Note also the sporadic areas of lymphatic blebbing, particularly in
the lower right quadrant of the mucosa. This patient was
diagnosed with mild to moderate lymphoplasmacytic duodenal
inflammatory disease.

The natural friability of the mucosa varies with the anatomy of the gastrointestinal tract, and this must be considered in the context of the examination findings. The
esophageal and gastric mucosae, for instance, are robust
and the normal mucosa should show little to no change
or damage from contact with the endoscope. This is particularly true of the esophagus, antral mucosa, and
pylorus. Compared to the stomach, the small intestinal
mucosa is more fragile, and even normal patients will
show some degree of superficial mucosal damage following contact with the endoscope, but there should not be
grossly visible “stripping” of the mucosa from the submucosa, and any bleeding following contact should be
minor (Figure 49.6). The large intestinal mucosa is more
robust than the small intestine, but is not as resistant to
impact damage as the gastric mucosa, thus contact with
a colonoscope will usually produce some visible change
in the mucosa, but this is less pronounced than in the
small intestine.

infiltration or lymphatic drainage disorders can lead to
an increase in granularity and a perceptible “piling” of
mucosa into more prominent folds that do not dissipate
with insufflation (Figure 49.7).

Granularity
Granularity refers to the visual texture of the mucosa.
Again, the normal texture of the mucosa varies across
the gastrointestinal tract. In the small intestine, both
increased and decreased granularity may be observed,
while villus blunting due to infiltration or mucosal denudation may result in an abnormally smooth appearance
of the small intestinal wall, or a “cobble stone” appearance caused by a patchy distribution of blunted villi.
Mucosal thickening and swelling secondary to cellular

Erosion(s)
Erosion(s) are preexisting, generally superficial, linear to
irregularly shaped mucosal defects, often marked by
mild intra‐ or submucosal hemorrhage. These must be
distinguished from lesions due to abnormalities in friability. Erosions represent an area of change in the gastrointestinal mucosa, but there should still be mucosa
present (Figure 49.8). Visible loss of the mucosa with crater formation and visible submucosa is more consistent
with ulceration than erosion. Erosions likely progress to
ulceration in some individuals; animals with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug (NSAID)‐induced gastritis,
for instance, commonly show numerous erosions. Many
erosions are linear or elongated oval shapes, oriented
along the longitudinal axis of the intestinal tract, likely
due to damage resulting from the passage of ingesta over
the diseased mucosa.
Lymphatic Dilation
Lymphatic vessels are usually only visible in the small
intestinal mucosa, and become more prominent in
deeper parts of the small intestine, such as the jejunum.
Lymphatic visibility is greater in the small intestine due
to the role of the intestinal lymphatics in fat absorption,

513

VetBooks.ir

514

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

(a)

(b)

Figure 49.8 Erosions in the gastric mucosa. In the lower left of
image (a), a larger erosive lesion is visible; just above this the
mucosa is hyperemic and shows very superficial erosion. Note
that the erosions follow the longitudinal direction of the rugae. In
(b) several superficial erosions without hemorrhage are visible
surrounding the lower esophageal sphincter and in the gastric
cardia. This patient’s histologic diagnosis was of multifocal,
chronic erosive gastritis, likely secondary to chronic NSAID usage.

resulting in the presence of milky white lymph within the
lacteals. Visible lymphatics within the villi are not necessarily abnormal, particularly when the lymphatics are
obviously consistent in appearance and form well‐circumscribed linear structures within each villus. This is a
normal finding, and is more readily visible in animals
that have had shorter fasting periods before the procedure. The use of milk or ice cream mixed with polyethylene glycol solutions for colonoscopy preparation (see
later) is often associated with a dramatic increase in visibility of the lacteals, even in normal dogs. This should
not be overinterpreted in patients having both upper and
lower gastrointestinal (GI) tract procedures.

Figure 49.9 Diffuse lymphatic drainage abnormality in a dog with
marked protein‐losing enteropathy. Note the presence of
markedly engorged lacteals within the villi in the upper left
quadrant of the image, and scattered throughout.

Figure 49.10 Luminal mass effect, a benign rectal polyp in a dog.
The mucosa shows a “cauliflower” appearance but is not ulcerated.
Histopathology was consistent with a chronic inflammatory
process.

Abnormal lymphatic drainage is associated with
­“blebbing” and diffuse spread of lymph into the villi
and the submucosa. There may be solitary punctate
lesions spread diffusely throughout the small intestine,
or larger areas of contiguous leakage may be perceived
(Figure 49.9).
Mass Effects
Abnormal tissue entering the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract may arise from the mucosa or the submucosal
layers. Mucosal masses are usually readily identified due
to the obviously dysplastic appearance of the epithelium
(Figure 49.10). In some cases, the mucosa will be eroded

VetBooks.ir

49 Gastrointestinal Endoscopy

and ulcerated, and will bleed easily (i.e., highly friable) on
contact with the endoscope. Submucosal masses are recognized in areas where the lumen shows obvious architectural distortion that does not resolve with insufflation.
Submucosal masses are relatively easy to recognize
endoscopically, but the diagnostic yield from endoscopic
biopsy of these lesions is poor. Full‐thickness biopsy is
usually required for accurate diagnostic assessment of
submucosal or mural masses.
Hyperemia
The color of the intestinal mucosa can be assessed, and
perceptible alterations from normal (again, bearing in
mind that the mucosal coloration varies along the gastrointestinal tract) may be noticeable during an examination. While superficially attractive as a readily perceivable
abnormality, hyperemia is actually a poor indicator of
abnormalities within the mucosa. Many variables influence mucosal redness, including the hemodynamic state
of the patient, circulating red blood cell mass, local
changes in perfusion, and the overall color balance of the
imaging system being used. Some, but by no means all,
endoscopy imaging systems can have their color balance
(white balance) calibrated against a white background
material, which will improve the ability of the operator to
define changes in redness on that specific system, but not
all systems are readily calibrated, and calibration must be
carried out regularly. Due to these shortcomings, diffuse
hyperemia and other changes in mucosal coloration are
not usually considered useful diagnostic findings during
gastrointestinal endoscopy.

­Upper Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
Procedures
Esophagoscopy
Indications

Common indications for esophagoscopy in companion
animals include assessment of patients with dysphagia,
regurgitation, poor appetite, and hematemesis.
Esophagoscopy is also frequently useful in the diagnosis
and management of esophageal foreign bodies, strictures, and diverticulae. The esophagus is also, obviously,
traversed in the process of all other upper gastrointestinal examinations and should be thoroughly examined
during these procedures.
Patient Positioning

As esophagoscopy is commonly performed during
other upper gastrointestinal tract procedures, the
patient is typically placed in left lateral recumbence (the

positioning of choice for gastroduodenoscopy). If the
planned procedure is only involving the esophagus (foreign body removal or stricture ballooning, for example),
sternal or right lateral positioning can be used, but there
are no specific advantages of these positions over left lateral recumbence.
Equipment Choice

Both flexible and rigid endoscopes may have some utility
in examination of the esophagus, but in most patients
there is insufficient working length with rigid endoscopes to examine the entire esophagus. Flexible endoscopes with four‐way tip deflection and a working
channel are preferable, particularly if removal of a foreign body using flexible retrieval instruments is anticipated. Four‐way tip deflection gives the operator a
greater ability to manipulate the positions of grasping
forceps or basket snares. Air and water insufflation is
important, particularly for adequate examination of the
cranial esophagus.
General Technique and Landmarks

The neck is extended dorsally, and the endoscope passed
dorsally over the endotracheal tube to the retropharynx.
Gentle pressure against the retropharynx will result in
the passage of the endoscope through the upper esophageal sphincter and into the cervical esophagus.
The cervical esophagus is usually flacid and collapsed.
After passage through the upper esophageal sphincter,
air is insufflated to visualize the esophageal lumen. Once
fully insufflated, passage of the endoscope is usually
straightforward. Landmarks during the examination are
the thoracic inlet (where the esophagus changes direction slightly), heart base (where there is a slight narrowing of the esophageal lumen; usually the wall will show
motion due to cardiac movement), and the lower esophageal sphincter. The three landmark locations also represent areas of esophageal narrowing, and are the most
common sites to encounter obstructing foreign bodies.
Ideally, as much of the esophageal lumen as possible
should be visualized before advancing the endoscope
over large distances. In regurgitating patients, look
closely for wall defects or outpouchings that may represent esophageal diverticula, or areas of esophageal
lumen that do not insufflate fully (indicating possible
strictures).
Normal Findings

The cervical esophagus is normally flacid and collapsed
on entry. Insufflation reveals longitudinal mucosal folds,
which are flattened by air insufflation. Within the thoracic cavity, the esophagus is usually flaccid and shows a
patent lumen without need for further insufflation. The
normal esophagus will drape over the large vessels in a

515

VetBooks.ir

516

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

normal animal; visualization of a strong pulsatile motion
from these vessels is not necessarily suggestive of a
megaesophagus.
The esophageal wall in dogs is usually smooth, or very
slightly corrugated, on full insufflation. The cat has a
series of mucosal folds in the distal third of the esophagus that give the normal esophageal lumen a “herring
bone” appearance in this species.
The lower esophageal sphincter is readily visualized in
most animals, assuming that there are no impeding foreign bodies. The lower esophageal sphincter is usually
closed on examination, but a relaxed and open sphincter
is not necessarily abnormal. Often, a small amount of
stable white foam (aerated saliva) is adherent on the distal esophageal mucosa, which is also normal.
Potential Abnormalities Observed
in Esophagoscopy Procedures
Esophagitis

Esophageal inflammation is a common finding in dogs
with gastrointestinal disease, particularly if there is gastroesophageal reflux or chronic vomiting. Changes in
the esophageal mucosa with esophagitis are highly variable, and often do not correlate closely with the perceived clinical severity of signs. The most common
changes seen with esophagitis are increased granularity
of the esophageal mucosa, hyperemia or erythema, and
mucosal erosions. Often, these changes are most pronounced in the distal esophagus, particularly if they are
secondary to gastroesophageal reflux (Figure 49.11).

In humans, chronic gastroesophageal reflux can lead
to squamous differentiation of the distal esophageal
mucosa, which is considered a preneoplastic change.
Similar changes are occasionally seen in dogs with
chronic gastroesophageal reflux, but the potential for
neoplastic transformation is unknown.
While a relaxed, partially dilated lower esophageal
sphincter is not necessarily an abnormal finding in dogs
and cats, the prolapse of gastric mucosa into the esophageal lumen is abnormal. This may occur as a result of
severe, chronic reflux esophagitis, hiatal hernias, or be
due to the presence of mass lesions on or just below the
lower esophageal sphincter (see Gastric Tumors, later).
Esophageal Foreign Bodies

Esophageal foreign bodies are a significant medical
emergency, and delays in detection and definitive treatment should be avoided as much as possible. Large
obstructing foreign bodies, such as bones, swallowed
chew toys, etc., are readily visualized. Common locations
for foreign body entrapment are at the thoracic inlet, cranial to the heart base, and cranial to the lower esophageal
sphincter, with the lower esophageal location being the
most common. Sharp, more linear objects such as needles, fish hooks, etc. may lodge at any point in the esophageal lumen, but again are most commonly encountered
at the thoracic inlet and cranial to the lower esophageal
sphincter. Sharp linear foreign bodies often accumulate
additional material such as hair, grass, and food fragments that can complicate assessment and removal.
Before endoscopy to assess and possibly attempt
removal of an esophageal foreign body, it is important to
have recent (ideally same day) thoracic radiographs with
at least two orthogonal views. These should be carefully
assessed for evidence of preexisting esophageal perforation (pneumomediastinum, mediastinitis, pneumo‐ or
pyothorax), as these indicate a need for earlier surgical
intervention. In addition, it is important to document
that the foreign body is still present, and apparently
within the lumen, before proceeding to esophagoscopy.
Strategies for foreign body removal are discussed
­further later.
Esophageal Diverticulae

Figure 49.11 Esophagitis, likely due to recurrent
gastroesophageal reflux, in a canine patient. There is increased
granularity and hyperemia of the distal esophageal mucosa, and
the lower esophageal sphincter is dilated. Some mild erosions are
also visible in the more proximal aspect of the esophageal
mucosa, particularly to the left of the image.

Esophageal diverticulae are outpouchings of the esophageal mucosa through defects in the mural musculature.
On endoscopic examination, these lesions may appear as
obvious outpouchings of the mucosa, they may look like
an additional lumen, or they may appear to be large
accumulations of hair and/or fermenting food material
entrapped within the diverticulum. Large diverticulae
are usually detected on plain radiographic examination
of the thorax as part of the work‐up for esophageal
disease.

VetBooks.ir

49 Gastrointestinal Endoscopy

Esophageal Neoplasia

Primary esophageal neoplasia is uncommon to rare in
both dogs and cats, with cats most frequently diagnosed.
Squamous cell carcinoma is occasionally diagnosed
within the thoracic esophagus, visualized as an eroded,
proliferative mass in the distal esophagus. This diagnosis
is most commonly made in elderly cats, and carries a
poor to grave prognosis. Preendoscopy work‐up including plain and contrast‐enhanced esophograms will often
reveal the soft tissue mass, which may initially be mistaken for a foreign body.
Gastroscopy
Indications

Common indications for gastroscopy include assessment
of recurrent vomiting, poor appetite, weight loss (assuming other significant co‐morbidities have been ruled
out), hematemesis (particularly if “coffee ground” vomiting is present), and attempts at removal of gastric foreign
bodies. Gastroscopic technique is also used for some
minimally invasive feeding tube placements (percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy [PEG] and percutaneous
endoscopic gastrostomy‐jejunostomy [PEG‐J]; see later).
The stomach must be traversed as part of the approach
to the small intestine for duodenoscopy, and should be
assessed thoroughly, including the collection of biopsies
from each area of the stomach, in any patient being
worked up for possible inflammatory disease of the gastrointestinal tract.
Patient Positioning

For most procedures involving gastroscopy, the patient
should be placed in left lateral recumbence. As the
pylorus is in the right side of the abdominal cavity in
both dogs and cats, left lateral recumbence will position
the antrum and pylorus dorsally, thus allowing gas to fill
these parts of the stomach. This is important for clear
visualization of a number of significant landmarks, and
greatly simplifies the process of transiting the antrum,
through the pylorus to the small intestine. Left lateral
recumbence will also typically cause foreign bodies that
are obstructing the pylorus to fall into the gastric body
under the influence of gravity. There is much greater
room to maneuver and less complex scope deviations
necessary to retrieve foreign bodies from the gastric
body than from within the antrum
One exception from the typical left lateral placement
for gastroscopy is made when the patient is having a
minimally invasive feeding assistance device placed, such
as a PEG or PEG‐J tube. These devices are placed through
the greater curvature of the stomach, exiting at the left
paranephric fossa, and thus placing the patient in right
lateral recumbence is necessary to improve visualization

of this region of the gastric wall. If the sole reason for the
gastroscopic procedure is PEG/PEG‐J tube placement,
the entire process is carried out in right lateral recumbence. If the feeding device is to be placed at the end of a
diagnostic upper gastrointestinal examination, it is best
to start in left lateral recumbence and then reposition the
patient after completion of the examination.
Equipment Choice

Gastroscopy requires the use of a flexible endoscope
with four‐way tip deflection. If the primary reason for
the procedure is foreign body retrieval from the stomach, a relatively large endoscope (7–9 mm diameter) can
be useful even in cats and very small dogs. For full visualization of all areas of the stomach and potential entry
into the duodenum via the pylorus, a smaller endoscope
might be advantageous with very small patients (for
instance, a 5–6 mm pediatric gastroscope), but with care
even a 7–9 mm endoscope can be advanced through the
pylorus of many smaller dogs and larger cats.
General Technique and Landmarks

Landmarks for visualization during gastroscopy include
the greater and lesser curvatures of the stomach, the cardia and aboral surface of the lower esophageal sphincter,
the incisura angularis, antrum, and pyloric sphincter. All
these areas and structures are readily accessible to examination in the majority of veterinary patients, assuming
careful and thorough technique is applied.
The stomach is entered via the lower esophageal
sphincter, which is straightforward with gentle application of pressure in the vast majority of veterinary
patients. One notable exception to this would be dogs
with severe megaesophagus, for any reason, where the
dilated and flaccid esophagus drapes into the thoracic
cavity, resulting in outpouchings that tend to capture the
endoscope, and significant elevation changes are necessary to reach the lower esophageal sphincter.
After entering the stomach via the lower esophageal
sphincter, a reduction in resistance to passage is felt. At
this point, with the working end of the endoscope just
entering into the cardia of the stomach, air insufflation is
started to moderately inflate the gastric lumen. During
insufflation, the gastric rugae should be closely observed
for areas that are not flattening out or show marked
apparent changes in rugal fold directions, as these can
indicate areas of wall infiltration and pathology. Directly
ahead of the endoscope from this position will be the
greater curvature of the stomach and the gastric body.
From this position, left and right deviations of the endoscope can be used to get a general overview of the gastric
lumen.
Rightwards deviation of the endoscope tip will provide
a view of the greater curvature descending to the antral

517

VetBooks.ir

518

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

wall. Usually, the pyloric sphincter and inner antral
lumen are not visible from the lower esophageal sphincter, but the incisura angularis is easily identified and is an
important landmark for further manipulations.
Leftwards deviation of the endoscope tip from the lower
esophageal sphincter reveals the oral aspect of the fundus and greater curvature, but the cardia is not visible
from this position.
The endoscope tip is advanced into the gastric lumen
following insufflation, and the endoscope placed into a J
shape by maximal upwards deviation using the control
wheels. This will typically provide a view back towards
the face of the incisura and into the antrum, and should
allow visualization of the pyloric area. Applying rotational
torque to the endoscope will provide a view of the cardia
and the lower esophageal sphincter. The visualization of
the endoscope body entering via the lower esophageal
sphincter provides obvious confirmation that the cardia
and lower esophageal sphincter are being visualized.
Relaxing the strain on the upwards deviation control
and gently pushing the endoscope forwards will typically
result in the body of the endoscope contacting the greater
curvature of the stomach, and minor torqueing of the
endoscope towards the right (relative to the control cluster) will usually result in a view along the greater curvature into the antral lumen towards the pylorus. Gentle
forwards pressure is then applied to enter the antrum
and approach the pyloric sphincter.
Entry into the antrum and visualization of the pyloric
sphincter can become very difficult if the gastric body is
aggressively insufflated. Introducing more and more air is
tempting as it allows a larger field of view, but the resulting compression of the antrum, and greater distance of
greater curvature wall that must be traversed, make entry
to the antrum much more challenging. This is particularly true with very large dogs, where the entire 120–
150 cm working length of the endoscopes commonly
used in veterinary practice will be taken up by transit of
the esophagus and around the greater curvature.
After visualization of all areas of the stomach, the endoscope may then be advanced to and through the pylorus
to enter the duodenum if duodenoscopy is planned. This
technique is discussed in greater depth later.
Normal Findings

The mucosa of the gastric body is generally light pink to
red, and prominent rugal folds are apparent on first entry
to the stomach and early in the insufflation process. The
majority of the rugae run longitudinally around the
greater curvature of the stomach, which can be a useful
guide for orientation. Rugae should disappear as the
stomach becomes distended during insufflation, but
prolonged periods of aggressive insufflation should be
avoided due to the risk of respiratory and circulatory

compromise, and the greater difficulty of continued
examination. The mucosa should be smooth in appearance. The mucosa within the antrum is a lighter color
than in the main gastric body, and rugae are either absent
or greatly reduced. Patchy erythematous regions, particularly on the greater curvature, are normal. The
pylorus is usually not directly visible on first entry to the
antrum, but instead is surrounded by a number of
mucosal folds in the distal antrum. Careful observation
will usually allow visualization of small amounts of bile
reflux or transient opening of the pylorus.
Fluid, residual food particles, and foreign bodies will
tend to pool in the left fundus when the patient is in left
lateral recumbence. In normal animals, there will be
scant fluid or mucus present, while those with gastrointestinal disease can exhibit large pools of fluid, mucus,
and food particles. Excessive fluid will obscure visualization of the gastric mucosa in this region, and may camouflage foreign bodies. Ideally, as much fluid as possible
should be suctioned from the fundus during the examination. This will improve visualization, and also
decreases the risk of vomiting or regurgitation and aspiration on recovery.
Potential Abnormalities Observed
in Gastroscopy Procedures
Gastritis

Gastritis is commonly encountered during gastroscopy.
Gross changes that may be visible include marked reddening of the mucosa, thickening of the mucosa,
increased prominence and extent of mucosal erythema,
and thickening of the rugae resulting in slower and less
complete flattening of the rugae during insufflation.
While any or all of these changes should increase suspicion for the presence of gastritis, it is important to
remember that some patients may show histologic evidence of gastric inflammation with relatively mild to
nonexistent grossly visible changes. Biopsy collection is
crucial to allow accurate assessment. In many animals
with gastritis, the gastric mucosa is perceptibly “easier”
to biopsy, requiring less avulsion force to remove tissue.
Biopsy sites from animals with gastritis will often bleed
more freely. As greater volumes of bleeding can be seen
in animals with gastric inflammation, it is wise to biopsy
the stomach at the end of the gastroduodenoscopy procedure otherwise bleeding can result in obstruction of
the view.
Gastric Ulceration

Common causes of gastric ulceration include inappropriate or prolonged NSAID use and local neoplastic processes (particularly gastric carcinoma). Ulceration can
also be seen due to paraneoplastic effects from mast cell

49 Gastrointestinal Endoscopy

VetBooks.ir

regional prevalence of fungal or oomycete‐induced disease, these infections may also result in intraluminal
granuloma formation. Leiomyoma and leiomyosarcoma
are rare in the gastrointestinal tract but when seen, are
most commonly associated with the lower esophageal
sphincter, and are most frequently identified in older,
female dogs.
As mural mass lesions may primarily affect the deeper
layers of the gastric wall, endoscopic biopsy samples are
often nondiagnostic. Obtaining multiple biopsy “bites”
from the same site, to allow sampling of the submucosa
and muscularis layers, increases the utility of endoscopic
biopsy samples for mural masses.
Gastric Parasites
Figure 49.12 Severe ulceration on the wall of the gastric lesser
curvature in a canine patient presenting with severe recurrent
vomiting. In the lower left quadrant of the image, close to the
endoscope, the upper edge of the incisura angularis is visible and
is also dramatically abnormal. This patient was diagnosed with
mucinous gastric carcinoma via endoscopic biopsy.

neoplasms and gastrinomas. Paraneoplastic ulceration
secondary to severe and persistent gastric hyperacidity is
often profound and severe.
Ulceration is usually seen in the secretory compartment of the stomach. The incisura angularis is also very
commonly affected, and is a particularly common site to
encounter NSAID‐induced ulcers. Large ulcers are typically visible as dark, depressed areas of necrotic tissue,
surrounded by an elevated rim of markedly reddened
and thickened mucosa (Figure 49.12). Biopsy of the
center of an ulcerated lesion is usually of little diagnostic
value as the tissues are necrotic; this is also associated
with risk for perforation of the ulcer. Biopsies for assessment should be taken from the rim at the periphery of
the ulcer, as well as several biopsies from nearby apparently normal tissue to screen for infiltrative processes.
Gastric ulceration due to NSAIDs cannot be differentiated from ulceration due to neoplasia, and as both
NSAID and neoplastic processes are more common in
older dogs, biopsy to rule out neoplasia is mandatory
even in patients receiving NSAIDs.
Mural Masses

Mass lesions affecting the gastric wall may be visualized
in any part of the stomach. Some potential causes
of gastric mural lesions include chronic inflammatory
change (polyps), lymphosarcoma, granulomatous
lesions due to foreign body penetration, and tumors
arising from smooth muscle (leiomyoma, leiomyosarcoma) or mesenchymal cells (gastrointestinal stromal
tumor [GIST], fibrosarcomas). In areas with high

Occasionally, gastric parasites, such as Physaloptera
spp., are observed during gastroscopy, typically in
patients being assessed for chronic vomiting. These
are small parasites, being around 3–4 cm long and very
slender. If the clinician does not suspect that they may be
present, it is easy to overlook them. As these worms are
susceptible to both pyrantel pamoate and most of the
macrocylic lactone parasiticides (ivermectin, selamectin,
etc.), this has become an uncommon diagnosis in client‐
owned animals.
Gastric Foreign Bodies

Gastric foreign body removal is a common indication
for gastroscopy in companion animals. Foreign bodies
may lodge in the antrum/pylorus or remain freely
mobile within the gastric lumen. Freely mobile foreign
bodies will usually be found in the left gastric body
when the patient is in left lateral recumbence, due to the
effect of gravity. Often, foreign bodies are associated
with or surrounded by large aggregations of hair, grass,
and other consumed materials, which can complicate
assessment and accurate deployment of foreign body
snares.
Foreign bodies lodged within the antrum/pylorus will
be visualized during the approach along the greater curvature. Patients with foreign bodies in this location, particularly if they are thought to be fabric based (carpet,
bedding material, wool, etc.), should be carefully assessed
for evidence of linear foreign body entrapment in the
small intestine before proceeding to gastroscopy, as
patients with linear entrapment within the small intestine are best assessed at exploratory surgery.
Assuming successful removal of a foreign body from
the stomach via endoscopy, it is strongly recommended
to obtain biopsies of the gastric (and, if possible, small
intestinal) mucosa before recovering the patient from
anesthesia. Particularly in middle‐aged to older animals,
pica may be the only sign of significant inflammatory
disease of the gastrointestinal tract.

519

VetBooks.ir

520

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Duodenoscopy
Indications

Duodenoscopy is commonly indicated for the assessment of small intestinal disease in companion animals.
Mucosal assessment and biopsy are of value in cases with
unexplained weight loss, poor appetite, vomiting, and
diarrhea. Duodenoscopy may also yield useful information in patients with hematemesis or hematochezia, but
this is less commonly the case and these clinical signs are
not a primary indication for duodenoscopy. It is important to consider that the actual area of small intestine
accessible via endoscopy is limited in most patients. It is
unusual to be able to reach the jejunum in most veterinary patients, and thus large areas of the small intestine
are inaccessible for routine endoscopy. Consequently,
endoscopy is a poor choice for attempted assessment of
small intestinal diseases that are discrete in nature, such
as solitary ulcerative lesions or mural mass lesions.
Patient Positioning

Duodenoscopy procedures are almost invariably conducted with the patient in left lateral recumbence, as this
places the pyloric sphincter and gastric wall in the optimum position for passage into the duodenum.
Equipment Choice

Standard 7–9 mm diameter, 125–150 cm flexible endoscopes with four‐way tip deflection, air and water insufflation and an adequate working channel are useful in the
vast majority of veterinary patients. Remanufactured/
refurbished pediatric gastroscopes work well for cats
and smaller dogs. In larger dogs (30 kg+), 9–11 mm
160 cm+ colonoscopes tend to have better reach into the
duodenum.
General Technique and Landmarks

Navigation of the antrum and pylorus to enter the duodenum is one of the more challenging procedures in
companion animal gastroduodenoscopy. Traversal of the
stomach to the greater curvature, around to the entry to
the antrum and the approach to the pylorus will often
consume a large proportion of the working length of the
endoscope, and multiple turns can result in the endoscope tip moving in directions that are counterintuitive
relative to the control cluster and the operator’s hands.
Excessive insufflation of the stomach tends to increase
the difficulty of this procedure, as it changes the anatomy
of the antral opening, increases the distance of gastric
wall that will be traversed, and tends to increase pyloric
sphincter tone. If difficulty is experienced with this procedure, particularly if the endoscope is unable to pass the
incisura angularis, gas should be removed from the
stomach via suctioning.

The typical approach to the pylorus occurs by directing the endoscope towards the greater curvature, then
deflecting the endoscope tip using a J‐maneuver and
torquing the endoscope to allow visualization of the
incisura angularis. The endoscope is then advanced
slightly (sliding along the greater curvature) and the
upwards deflection is relaxed, allowing the end of the
endoscope to relax onto the antral wall. Once the tip of
the endoscope has entered the antrum, gentle forwards
pressure on the body of the endoscope will usually result
in forward motion of the working end of the endoscope
into the antral lumen towards the pylorus. If the endoscope is repeatedly “flipping” out of the antrum, or shows
paradoxical motion (the pylorus moving away as forwards pressure is applied), it is likely that there is excessive length of endoscope body within the gastric lumen
due to excess insufflation. The endoscope is retracted
into the gastric body, air is removed until the stomach is
perceptibly deflating (rugae should be readily visible, at a
minimum), and then the approach to the antrum can be
repeated.
The pylorus is identified by careful examination of the
center of the distal antral wall. In most animals, the circumferential muscle structure of the sphincter is easy to
appreciate, in others there may be mucosal folds or more
complex sphincter anatomy present, but most animals
will show at least one fold or sulcus of the mucosa that is
obviously deeper and more motile; this is the most likely
point to find the pyloric sphincter. Entry to the sphincter
typically involves incremental advancement of the endoscope body, while using progressive subtle tip deflections
with the control wheels to maintain the pyloric sphincter
within the center of view. As the endoscope tip impacts
the mucosa, it is normal to have a complete loss of vision;
gentle pressure is continually applied and the tip of the
endoscope deviated slightly to the right and downwards.
The endoscope operator should feel a forward motion
and the mucosa “glides by” the end of the scope, the
operator watches for a change in color of the mucosa
from a light red (antral mucosa) to a darker red to yellow
tinged color (duodenal mucosa and bile). When the
mucosal color changes, the endoscope is advanced for
several centimeters, then air is insufflated and the tip of
the scope gently diverted in several directions to obtain a
view of the lumen. Once the lumen is visible, the endoscope can be slowly retracted to allow examination of the
very cranial aspect of the duodenum.
If the endoscope is carefully positioned in the very cranial duodenum, it is usually possible to identify the duodenal papillae. There are two papillae in dogs; the more
cranial, larger papilla is the major duodenal papilla and
drains both biliary and pancreatic secretions, while the
smaller minor papilla drains only pancreatic secretions.
In the cat, only one papilla is visualized, and drains both

VetBooks.ir

49 Gastrointestinal Endoscopy

Figure 49.13 View of a normal descending duodenum from just
distal to the pylorus, on initial entry to the duodenal lumen. The
major duodenal papilla is visible to the upper left as a blunted
protrusion into the lumen; this is a useful landmark for the upper
duodenum.

biliary and pancreatic secretions. The papilla(e) are a
useful landmark indicating that the working tip of the
endoscope is placed very close to the pyloric sphincter
(Figure 49.13).
As the endoscope is advanced along the duodenum, a
clear lumen is readily appreciated; this is the descending
duodenum. As the end of this lumen is approached, the
mucosa can be seen deviating to the left (assuming routine patient and endoscope orientation); this is the caudal duodenal flexure. If the endoscope can be coaxed
around this corner (which depends heavily on the working length available and the size of the patient), it is possible to enter the transverse duodenum, and after a short
distance another turn marks the beginning of the jejunum. It is relatively uncommon that this depth is reached
in veterinary patients.
The leftward deviating mucosa at the caudal duodenal
flexure is typically an easy site to biopsy. Biopsies are
obtained from this wall, and then the endoscope is slowly
withdrawn, 1–2 cm at a time, to allow biopsy of the
descending duodenal mucosa. Biopsy samples are collected progressively as the endoscope retracts, until the
working end falls back through the pylorus into the gastric antrum. At this point, the biopsy sample container
should be changed and a new container used for gastric
biopsy samples.
Normal Findings

As indicated above, observation of the duodenal
papilla(e) is a normal finding, particularly in dogs. The
duodenal mucosa should be pink to red, and show a fine
granular to almost velvety appearance (representing the
tips of the villi). Small amounts of bile and bile‐stained

Figure 49.14 Normal villi in the distal descending duodenum.
This is the same patient as shown in Figure 49.13. Note that the
villi are easily appreciated due to the clearly defined narrow
lymph vessels circumscribing each villus. This is a normal finding
(compare to Figures 49.9 and 49.15), but is usually only readily
appreciated with high‐resolution videoendoscopy equipment.

mucus may also be observed and are normal. The duodenal mucosa is relatively delicate, and becomes more fragile in the presence of inflammatory disease, thus minor
erosions and abrasions are commonly seen in areas
where the endoscope has impacted the mucosa. These
can be quite prominent, but are not a significant complication and require no further action. Occasionally,
depending on the fasting state of the patient, the lacteals
within the villi are apparent. Well‐circumscribed, clean‐
edged lacteals visibly curving at the ends of the villus tips
are not abnormal (Figure 49.14); visible lacteals in normal villi will often give the duodenal mucosa a “reptile
skin,” apparently scaly appearance.
Peyer’s patches may be observed on the antimesenteric
border of the duodenal mucosa. Peyer’s patches are
lighter than the surrounding mucosa, and are slightly
depressed relative to the local mucosa. These represent
aggregations of lymphoid tissue and are not abnormal.
Potential Abnormalities Observed
in Duodenoscopy Procedures

Most of the abnormalities noted in endoscopic examinations of the duodenum relate to changes in the appearance or character of the mucosal surface. These changes
are not specific to any particular disease process, but
generally reflect changes in the cellularity and cellular
makeup of the mucosa.
The characters most commonly assessed for evidence
of abnormalities in the duodenum are granularity,
friability, presence of erosions, and abnormalities in
­
l­ ymphatic drainage.

521

VetBooks.ir

522

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Increasing granularity results in a “heaped” appearance of the mucosa; with severe change, there may be
apparent folds in the duodenal mucosa that do not
­dissipate with insufflation, while more subtle changes
lead to a “cobble stone” appearance of the mucosa (see
Figure 49.7).
Increasing friability is noted when impact with the
endoscope leads to excessive mucosal stripping and
bleeding from contact points. The mucosa is inherently
somewhat friable, but contact of the endoscope with a
normal mucosa should result in very minor to no loss of
mucosal surface (see Figure 49.8).
Erosions are preexisting areas of loss or compromise of
the mucosal surface. As some degree of mucosal contact
is inevitable as the endoscope proceeds along the duodenal lumen, it is important to assess for the presence of
erosions as the endoscope is advanced, not on withdrawal. Dramatic mucosal damage visible on withdrawal
of the endoscope is more compatible with a change in
friability than a diagnosis of erosions, as it represents
greater iatrogenic damage rather than preexisting
mucosal pathology.
Lymphatic drainage of the villi occurs via the lacteals,
which normally contain milky white lymph due to the
presence of fat micelles. This makes visualization of lacteals remarkably easy in many patients. Simply observing
lacteals within the villi, even in animals that have had an
overnight fast, is not evidence of a lymph drainage abnormality. Mucosal blebbing, representing rupture of the
lacteals and infiltration of lymph into the interstitium, is
an important finding. In patients with lymphangiectasia,

Figure 49.15 Severe lymphangiectasia in the very cranial aspect
of the jejunum in a dog with severe protein‐losing enteropathy.
This is a more distal view of the small intestine of the same patient
as in Figure 49.9. The great majority of the villi are dramatically
engorged with milky white lymph. On histologic examination,
>80% of the villus diameter was occupied by dilated lymph
vessels.

the lymphatics become dramatically engorged and
may occupy >80% of the volume of the villi. This degree
of change is usually seen in patients with marked
protein‐losing enteropathies (Figure 49.15), either
­secondary to significant mucosal inflammatory ­disease
or due to the presence of a primary lymphatic vessel
abnormality.
None of the mucosal changes described above can be
reliably detected in all cases of small intestinal disease,
and the agreement between observation of these abnormalities and the presence of histologically important
mucosal changes is poor at best. Small intestinal mucosal
biopsy samples should always be obtained during duodenoscopy procedures.

­Large Intestinal and Distal Small
Intestinal Procedures
Patient Preparation
Adequate patient preparation is critical before colonoscopy and ileoscopy procedures. The esophagus, stomach, and upper small intestine will usually be emptied of
ingesta with a 12–18‐hour fast. The large intestine, however, normally contains a large amount of fecal material,
mucus, and fluid that is not removed or resolved with
fasting alone. Other procedures, including oral preparation solutions and enema treatments in concert with
fasting, are necessary to allow adequate preparation for
this procedure.
Failure to remove fecal material adequately is a major
cause of incomplete or diagnostically misleading colonoscopy procedures. Visualization of the mucosa is often
severely hampered (potentially resulting in failure to
observe discrete lesions), and the time taken to complete
the examination is markedly extended.
A number of different approaches to colonoscopy
preparation have been described. Some practitioners use
only warm water enemas (along with 24–48 hours of
preprocedure fasting), or warm soapy water enemas.
Care must be taken with enema solutions that they are
not irritating (as can be the case with some solutions
marketed mainly for relief of constipation in humans)
and do not cause severe fluid or electrolyte shifts (phosphate‐based enemas are notorious for this effect in cats).
The author’s preferred approach is to use a combination of fasting with polyethylene glycol‐based oral preparation solutions (GoLYTELY® or similar) combined with
periprocedural enemas. The oral preparation solutions
produce dramatic osmotic diarrhea, so it is often beneficial to hospitalize the patient for easier maintenance and
cleaning. The solution is administered at a dose of
approximately 20–25 mL/kg via orogastric intubation,

VetBooks.ir

49 Gastrointestinal Endoscopy

starting the evening before the procedure is planned.
The solution is dosed three times (each at 20–25 mL/kg)
at 2–3‐hour intervals, starting approximately 18 hours
before the procedure is planned (early afternoon the day
before a planned morning procedure). The solution is
administered via either intermittent orogastric intubation or by mixing it with plain vanilla ice‐cream (one part
ice‐cream to two parts solution) and allowing the patient
to drink it. Many dogs will readily consume the resulting
solution. If oral intubation is used, the author considers
nasogastric intubation and trickle infusion to be strongly
contraindicated, as this is associated with increased risk
of aspiration pneumonia, which can be severe and life
threatening.
As the last of the evening doses of oral preparation
solution is given, a warm water enema (also 20–30 mL/
kg) is administered. The warm water enema is repeated
early in the morning on the day of the planned procedure
(around 7am for a 9am procedure), which should result
in passage of clear fluid with little to no fecal material or
mucus. If the morning enema continues to produce solid
fecal material, ideally the procedure will be delayed by
1–2 hours to allow a second morning enema, followed by
at least an hour of resting time to allow fluid absorption
and resolution of transient irritation of the colonic
mucosa.
An adequately prepared colon will allow easy and relatively unimpeded observation of the colonic mucosa
over the length of the large intestine. Minor adherent
material and mucus can usually be lavaged and flushed
from the colon using endoscope suction. Specific colonoscope irrigation and washing pump systems are available and routinely used in human patients, and may be
worth consideration in veterinary practices that carry
out a large number of large intestinal procedures. While
these pumps and washing systems can assist with final
cleaning and visualization of the colonic mucosa, they
are not a replacement for adequate preprocedural
preparation.
Proctoscopy
Indications

Proctoscopy is a useful technique for the assessment of
patients with predominantly or exclusively large intestinal symptoms, such as tenesmus, excess fecal mucus,
fecal urge incontinence, hematochezia, dyschezia, and
visible or palpable anorectal masses. As many of the
mucosal diseases affecting the large intestine tend to be
diffuse throughout the large intestinal lumen, and anorectal diseases are by definition limited to the distal large
intestine and anal canal, proctoscopy may be all that is
necessary to establish a useful working diagnosis in a
large intestinal disease case.

Patient Positioning

Typically, the patient is placed in right lateral recumbence for isolated proctoscopy procedures without
assessment of the transverse or descending colon and
ileocolic junction. Right lateral recumbence causes any
residual fluid from patient preparation to pool into the
transverse colon (which is oriented vertically when the
animal is in lateral recumbence), aiding in mucosal
visualization.
Equipment Choice

Proctoscopy can be achieved with either flexible or rigid
endoscopes. Refurbished human flexible colonoscopes,
up to 11 mm diameter, can be effectively used in most
dogs and cats, although some endoscope manipulations
such a J‐maneuvers (necessary for effective visualization
of some very distal rectoanal lesions) can be challenging
or impossible with this size endoscope in smaller dogs
and most cats.
Rigid proctoscopes can be very valuable for these procedures, as they usually feature large endoscope lumens
that allow passage of larger instruments, biopsy and cautery snares, and rigid forceps.
General Technique and Landmarks

The rigid proctoscope is lubricated well and introduced
through the anal sphincter gently, while an obturator is
in place. When resistance to passage of the proctoscope
reduces, marking entry of the proctoscope into the rectum, the obturator device is removed and the lighting
and visualization system (typically a rigid fiberoptic telescope and accessory camera) are attached. The proctoscope is then gently introduced into the colon lumen,
while the operator closely observes the mucosa. Air
insufflation is used as necessary to inflate and maintain
the colonic lumen. Rigid proctoscopes should not be
advanced if the lumen is not visible, as this increases the
risk of colon wall perforation, which is a major and
potentially life‐threatening complication.
With the larger lumen of the proctoscope, there is the
potential to use larger, rigid biopsy forceps and instruments to collect more substantial pieces of tissue than
with typical biopsy instruments used in flexible endoscopes. Some rigid biopsy instruments feature angled
biopsy cups, which make the process of sampling the
mucosa through the rigid lumen somewhat easier. Rigid
instruments with straight biopsy cups are still useful, but
may require removal of a small amount of insufflated air
to allow the mucosa to “drape” over the front of the endoscope lumen.
Normal Findings and Potential Abnormalities

Normal findings and potential abnormalities encountered during proctoscopy are identical to those seen

523

VetBooks.ir

524

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

during flexible colonoscopy procedures, and are
described in the flexible colonoscopy section below.
Colonoscopy
Indications

Colonoscopy is commonly indicated for the assessment
of patients with predominantly or exclusively large intestinal symptoms, such as tenesmus, excess fecal mucus,
fecal urge incontinence, hematochezia, dyschezia, and
visible or palpable masses. Colonoscopy is also increasingly viewed as an important part of the overall approach
to any chronic gastrointestinal disease case, a means of
both assessing large intestinal involvement and collecting distal small intestinal biopsy samples via ileoscopy.
Patient Positioning

For most colonoscopy procedures, the patient should be
placed in left lateral recumbence. As well as being convenient for combination upper and lower gastrointestinal tract procedures performed sequentially under the
one anesthetic procedure, left lateral recumbence results
in residual fluid pooling in the descending colon; this
fluid is more readily suctioned from this position than if
in the transverse or ascending arms of the colon.
Colonoscopy procedures can also be carried out in sternal recumbence, which has the advantage that the anatomy of the colon is oriented in a “normal” position
relative to the endoscope operator. However, scrupulous
preparation is necessary to obtain optimum visualization
if this position is used.
Equipment Choice

Navigation of the entire large intestine to the ileocolic
junction requires the use of a flexible endoscope with
four‐way tip deflection, water and air insufflation, and a
good sized working channel. Refurbished human colonoscopes with working lengths of 150–175 cm and
9–11 mm diameter are appropriate for many small animal patients and usually feature 2.8 mm working channels, allowing the use of larger biopsy instruments. In
very small dogs and some cats, the use of these endoscopes may be more difficult, primarily due to the minimum turning radius of the endoscope tip rather than the
endoscope diameter. In these smaller patients, a pediatric gastroscope may be a better choice.
General Technique and Landmarks

The lubricated endoscope tip is gently introduced via the
anal sphincter. When a reduction in insertion pressure is
noted, indicating that the tip of the endoscope has traversed the anal sphincter and is sitting within the distal
rectum, the endoscopist should stop and insufflate while
moving the tip controls gently in order to visualize a

lumen. Unlike in the small intestine, where mucosal “fly
by” procedures are common, in the large intestine it is
generally best only to proceed forwards when there is a
visible lumen. As air insufflation proceeds, the pressure
of the accumulating gas may lead to leakage around the
endoscope at the anal sphincter. This can be overcome
by having an assistant apply gentle circumferential pressure around the anus; the same assistant can also advance
the main endoscope body while the main operator utilizes the tip deflection controls and air/water insufflation
to maintain visualization.
The distal rectum is assessed as soon as the lumen is
insufflated, examining for preexisting erosions and the
presence of mucosal masses. To obtain complete visualization of the distal rectum and the oral surface of the
anal sphincter requires a maximally flexed J‐maneuver,
which may not be feasible in smaller patients.
As the endoscope is advanced, the descending colon
wall is examined for changes in mucosal friability, granularity, and the presence of masses. If the patient is in left
lateral recumbence, some fluid pooling is to be expected
along the lumen of the descending colon; this fluid
should be aspirated as much as possible to optimize
mucosal visibility.
At the end of the descending colon, the lumen will
make a marked deviation into the transverse colon.
Ideally, this turn should be made with a target lumen visible, although this is not always feasible. Carefully assess
what mucosa is visible from the descending colon before
proceeding into the transverse colon; if severe ulceration
or erosions are present, it may be more prudent to limit
the examination to reduce the risk of perforation.
The transverse colon crosses the abdomen to reveal
the short ascending colon and the ileocolic junction.
This region is readily identified by the presence of a
proud, intraluminal button of mucosa surrounding the
ileocolic sphincter, while the nearby cecum is usually visible as a blind pouch close to the ileocolic sphincter. The
cecal mucosa is usually arrayed in longitudinal folds similar to the rugae of the stomach. Lymphatic follicles can
be quite prominent within the cecal mucosa.
Normal Findings

The normal colonic mucosa is smooth, a light pink in
color and readily distensible with air insufflation. The
ileocolic junction can be quite variable in appearance
(Figure 49.16). Depending upon the trajectory of the
endoscope approaching this region, the ileocolic sphincter may be visualized to the left or right, and the opening
of the cecum is also quite variable, in some cases showing a prominent “ridge” of tissue around the opening,
while in others the cecal opening is hard to distinguish
from the colon lumen and is appreciated only as a blind
sac near to the ileocolic sphincter.

49 Gastrointestinal Endoscopy

VetBooks.ir

mucosal defects are best assessed by collecting biopsies
from the adjacent, more normal‐appearing mucosa
rather than the center of the mass, as biopsies from this
region are usually of poor diagnostic quality due to tissue
necrosis, and the risk of perforation is increased
substantially.
Ileoscopy
Indications

Figure 49.16 Colonic view of the normal ileocolic junction in a
dog. The ileocolic sphincter, visible as a mushroom‐like protrusion
into the colonic lumen, occupies the lower half of the image.
Above the ileocolic sphincter, the entry to the cecum is visible,
surrounded by a “ridge” of normal colonic mucosa. The anatomy of
this region, particularly the transition from colonic to cecal lumen,
is highly variable in normal dogs.

Ileoscopy, while technically more challenging than many
other gastrointestinal endoscopy procedures, is strongly
recommended when endoscopic examination is being
conducted as part of the approach to patients with gastrointestinal disease, regardless of whether the primary
complaint is predominantly arising from upper or lower
gastrointestinal tract signs. It is not unusual to document
substantial histological disagreement between duodenal
and ileal mucosal biopsy specimens, with the ileal
mucosa often presenting with more severe changes. This
holds true with both dogs and cats.
Patient Positioning and Preparation

Figure 49.17 A large, severely ulcerated mass lesion in the
descending colon of a canine patient. A marked increase in
colonic mucosal granularity is also visible. Endoscopic biopsy of
this lesion and the granular regions of colonic mucosa revealed
lymphosarcoma.

Potential Abnormalities Observed during
Colonoscopy Procedures

After careful assessment of the mucosa for consistency
in appearance, texture, the presence of masses or erosions and ulcerations as the endoscope is advanced,
biopsy samples should be obtained from areas of interest
and several areas that are apparently normal as the endoscope is withdrawn. Mass lesions may also be biopsied
but care must be taken to minimize the risk of colonic
wall perforation. Mass lesions or ulcerative lesions with
severe mucosal distortions (Figure 49.17) or deep

As ileoscopy requires a transcolonic approach, ideally
the patient will be placed in left lateral recumbence. This
is consistent with the positioning for upper gastrointestinal procedures. Ideally, the patient will receive preprocedural preparation for colonoscopy. If there is no plan to
fully assess the colonic mucosa and the sole reason for
the procedure is to attempt to biopsy the ileal mucosa, a
more abbreviated preparation protocol can be used,
essentially several warm water enemas administered the
evening before and once on the morning of the procedure (assuming a morning procedure time). This may
provide sufficient space and visualization to allow traversal of the colon to the ileocolic junction, but there is a
greater risk that the lower intensity preparation will
result in inadequate visualization and failure of the
procedure.
Equipment Choice

Ileoscopy requires a flexible colonoscope with four‐way
tip deflection, air/water insufflation and a large working
channel, as used for colonoscopy procedures. Extra
length will be necessary to allow navigation into and
along the ileum, which may become limiting with larger
canine patients.
General Technique and Landmarks

The ileocolic junction is approached at the end of the
routine colonoscopy procedure, as described earlier. The
endoscope tip is brought into contact with the center of
the ileocolic sphincter, similarly to the antral approach to
the pylorus. As with the pyloric approach, excessive air

525

VetBooks.ir

526

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

insufflation can compromise attempts to traverse the
sphincter. As there is little in the way of colonic wall close
to the sphincter, due to the disparity in ileal versus
colonic lumen diameters, full insufflation deprives the
endoscopist of support from the colon walls.
If the endoscope can be successfully maneuvered into
contact with the sphincter, gentle forwards pressure will
usually result in entry to the ileum. If the ileum cannot be
entered in this manner due to ileocolic anatomy, a flexible biopsy instrument can be threaded through the
working channel and ileocolic sphincter to act as a guide
wire. The instrument is advanced, cups closed, until it
has penetrated the ileal lumen for 2–3 cm. The biopsy
instrument is then held in place and the endoscope
advanced over it. It is not recommended to simply follow
the biopsy instrument with the endoscope, as this may
result in significant trauma to the ileal mucosa (which
has not been visualized).
Normal Findings

The normal ileal mucosa is grossly similar in appearance
to the duodenal and jejunal mucosa. The normal villus
structure results in a “velvet” appearance. The mucosa is
more friable than the duodenum, even in normal individuals. Villus lymphatics are not readily appreciated.
Potential Abnormalities Observed during
Ileoscopy Procedures

The ileal mucosa is assessed for changes in granularity,
friability, the existence of preexisting erosions or ulcerative lesions and mass effects, and these changes documented if seen. Mucosal biopsy specimens should always
be obtained from the ileum. If the endoscopist is unable
to traverse the ileocolic sphincter, it is possible to obtain
mucosal biopsy samples blindly by advancing a biopsy
instrument through the sphincter, although this should
be approached with caution as the risk of perforation is
higher without the ability to visualize preexisting lesions.

­Endoscopic Biopsy Technique
Endoscopic biopsies are an attractive option for more
complete diagnostic assessment of the gastrointestinal
tract, but are not without significant potential pitfalls.
Correct biopsy technique, careful sample handling, and
the collection of adequate sample numbers are all
­important to obtain the best diagnostic yield from these
samples.
Flexible endoscopic biopsy instruments are available
in several different types, including serrated or smooth
jaws, and with or without central needles. Theoretically
the central needle types are easier to lodge in the mucosa
but in practice there seems to be little advantage to these

types, and removal of the sample from the central needle
can be difficult. The biopsies are inherently fragile and
repeated “scraping” to remove the sample from the central needle can result in severe crush artifact distortion.
Endoscopic biopsy samples obtained using flexible
instruments are unavoidably small. Even the largest of
the flexible biopsy instruments that will fit in the endoscopes used most commonly in companion animal practice will typically only yield a 2.5–3 mm3 tissue sample
under most conditions. Most samples obtained endoscopically will have relatively little submucosal tissue
present, and in many cases small intestinal biopsies may
only yield villus tips. Correct technique is necessary to
avoid excessive crush artifacts or villus degloving.
Because of the extreme wide‐angle view and deep
depth of focus of the endoscope lens, and lack of depth
cues due to monocular vision, the distance between the
end of the endoscope, the biopsy instrument, and the
lesion to be biopsied can be difficult to judge. Once a site
for biopsy is identified, the biopsy instrument is carefully
deployed through the working channel until it is visible
to the operator. Fine tip adjustments can then be made to
align the instrument with the area to be biopsied, and
then the instrument is advanced to make contact with
the tissue. The flexible shaft of the biopsy instrument will
start to bend slightly as the instrument is pushed up
against the tissue. This bending is a good indicator that
an appropriate amount of pressure is being applied to the
tissue to provide the best chance of an adequate biopsy.
The biopsy instrument emerges from the distal face of
the endoscope (Figure 49.18), which will usually result in
the instrument running parallel to the gastrointestinal
lumen. If the endoscope is maneuvered close to a naturally occurring fold or corner in the lumen, it is possible
to directly sample tissue perpendicular to the distal
scope face. For biopsies from the wall in an area that does
not have a naturally occurring fold or local corner (such
as in the descending duodenum), a number of strategies
are available. Gently suctioning some of the insufflating
gas may result in formation of rugal folds. After minor
suction is applied, the endoscope tip is diverted towards
the mural surface using the tip deflection controls, then
the biopsy instrument is advanced out until just in view
and close to, but not touching, the mucosa. The biopsy
jaws should be open at this point. Full suction is then
applied, which will cause the lumen to collapse and the
mucosa to “drape” over the end of the scope. The biopsy
instrument is advanced very slightly and then the jaws
are closed. The biopsy is then collected.
The necessary action to collect an endoscopic biopsy is
with a sharp “snapping” pull on the instrument at the
control end of the scope. The aim is to avulse the mucosal
sample by breaking the submucosal tissue. If the tissue is
collected with a slower “drag” motion, it is not

VetBooks.ir

49 Gastrointestinal Endoscopy

Figure 49.18 A hemispherical jaw biopsy instrument exits the
distal end of a videoendoscope perpendicular to the imaging
components and parallel to the long axis of the gastrointestinal
tract. Manipulation of the tip of the endoscope is typically
necessary to bring the biopsy instrument into correct apposition
against the mucosa to obtain adequate biopsies.

uncommon to yield only mucus, or to deglove the villi
and retrieve only mucosal fragments. These samples are
usually not of diagnostic quality, as the loss of architectural context limits the ability of the pathologist to accurately assess the mucosa.
After collection, the biopsy instrument is removed
while leaving the endoscope in place. The instrument
should be kept closed until the instrument has been fully
removed from the endoscope and an assistant has
restrained the end of the instrument. The instrument is
then opened, and the tissue sample retrieved from within
the biopsy cups. Often, the tissue will be adherent to the
biopsy cups, and the tissue may need to be removed by
gentle manipulation with a fine hypodermic needle (typically 25 ga). “Stickiness” of the biopsy to the instrument
is more pronounced with smaller biopsy instruments
and in samples from the small intestinal mucosa.

Given that each individual sample is very small, and
may not be representative of the total of the pathologic
changes present in the patient, it is important to obtain
multiple biopsy samples from each organ sampled.
Assuming adequate biopsy technique and handling, at
least seven samples per site (i.e., seven each from upper
and lower small intestine, stomach) in dogs and 10 in
cats are necessary to achieve acceptable correlation with
full‐thickness biopsy results. If inadequate technique is
used, particularly in cats, there is a very real chance that
samples will have no diagnostic utility.
Biopsy of the gastric mucosa is somewhat more
straightforward than in the small intestine as the stomach is more readily distensible and the greater space
within the organ allows easier manipulation of the endoscope to a position perpendicular to the mucosa. The
gastric mucosa is more robust than the small intestinal
mucosa, and good‐quality biopsies are easier to obtain
from most areas of the stomach.
The esophageal mucosa is predominantly squamous
epithelium, and difficult to adequately biopsy unless
severe pathology is present.
Tissues from different sources (small intestine vs large
intestine vs stomach) should be handled and submitted
separately.
Postbiopsy handling of the tissues is also important
for maximum diagnostic utility. Different pathology services may have differing requirements for sample submission but generally speaking, it is best to organize
biopsy samples in a manner that will maintain consistent orientation as the samples are paraffin embedded
and sectioned. If feasible, samples can be directly placed
into sample handling cassettes, oriented with the
mucosa perpendicular to the base of the cassette. It is
important to use cassettes that are compatible with the
sample handling systems of the pathology laboratory.
The whole cassette can then be submerged in buffered
formalin for histologic assessment. This will result in
samples that are as close to parallel to the microtome
blade as possible, yielding a greater proportion of longitudinal sections of the villi. This is important to allow
the pathologist to assess characters such as villus blunting and the presence of inflammatory infiltrates within
the crypts.

­Endoscopic Interventions
PEG Tube Placement
Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tubes are useful
for providing long‐term nutritional support to veterinary
patients with severe esophageal or oral pathology, and
also for those with poor appetite due other co‐morbid

527

VetBooks.ir

528

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

conditions. Placement of these devices is relatively
­simple, but care must be taken to minimize the risk of
complications.
Indications and Patient Choice

Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube placement
should be considered in patients with significant dysphagia, anorexia, esophageal or oral pathology with an anticipated need for nutritional support beyond 3–5 days.
PEG tubes may be placed in both canine and feline
patients, but are of particular use in dogs (particularly
larger breeds) where the placement of esophagostomy
tubes is more difficult due to the anatomy of the neck
and cervical esophagus. PEG tubes have the advantage of
larger lumens than are typically used in nasoesophageal
or esophageal feeding, and are generally well tolerated
such that they can be maintained for weeks to months.
After formation of a stable adhesion of the gastric wall to
the peritoneum and abdominal wall (generally after
10–14 days), it is feasible to convert PEG tubes to lower
profile gastrostomy tubes that are somewhat easier for
clients to maintain and do not feature extraabdominal
tubing that must be restrained and maintained.
Placement of PEG tubes is straightforward in most
patients. Difficulty can be encountered in patients with
megaesophagus, due primarily to negotiating the lower
esophageal sphincter in these patients. Large, deep‐
chested dogs can also be more difficult as the normal
gastric position in these patients is high under the thoracic cage, these patients can require substantial insufflation of the stomach to allow access, and the resulting
ostium and adhesions are under tension after the stomach is deflated. Larger breed, debilitated dogs have a
greater risk of tube failure and peritonitis so in these
patients it may be more prudent to place gastrostomy
tubes surgically.
While the procedure is relatively easy to describe, and
manufactured kits designed to make tube insertion simple are available, it is still prudent to have at least some
guidance from an experienced endoscopist when first
learning to place these tubes.
General Procedure

Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tubes are placed
exiting the flank on the left side, so the patient should be
placed in right lateral recumbence. The left paracostal
region is clipped and surgically prepared. The endoscope
is passed into the stomach, and air insufflated to distend
the stomach against the abdominal wall. While the endoscope operator is visualizing the gastric wall, an assistant
wearing sterile gloves palpates and presses on the region
of maximum distension, to allow the endoscopist to
establish where the tube will eventually be placed. The
endoscope is then manipulated to the point of

compression and the gastric wall transilluminated to
ensure that there are no major structures (particularly the
spleen) present between the gastric and abdominal walls.
The description given below assumes that a manufactured PEG tube kit is being used, which are provided
with the tube mechanically bonded to a loop of wire at
the proximal end, and a guide wire that features a loop at
the distal end. Techniques for the assembly of PEG tubes
using sterile pipette tips and standard suture materials
have been described, but with the ready availability of
commercial PEG kits in the veterinary market, the manufacture of tubes from a miscellany of materials is no
longer recommended.
Once the point of insertion is established, the sterile‐
gloved assistant passes a large hypodermic needle (typically 18–16 ga, 2+ inches) through the skin and gastric
wall, typically placed just ventral and slightly caudal to
rib 13. The endoscope operator monitors the hypodermic needle entry. Once the hypodermic needle is placed,
a guide wire with a terminal loop is threaded through the
lumen of the needle by the assistant, and captured by the
endoscopist using either flexible alligator or cup biopsy
forceps. Once the guide wire loop is captured, it is carefully pulled through the stomach, esophagus, and oral
cavity by withdrawing the endoscope. The assistant
should feed the guide wire via the needle, while monitoring closely to ensure that the full length of the guide wire
is not pulled into the stomach lumen.
After the loop of guide wire is withdrawn via the
mouth, it is attached to the proximal end of the tube by
passing the tube mushroom tip through the guide wire
loop, then through the tube’s own bonded wire loop,
resulting in the tube proximal end being attached to the
guide wire via linked loops.
The guide wire and linked tube, bonded tip first, are
withdrawn into the oral cavity, through the esophagus
and into the stomach lumen by the sterile‐gloved assistant. As the guide wire and linked proximal tube end
encounter the gastric wall, the wall is pulled up against
the flank. The bonded sharp tip of the tube is drawn
through the abdominal wall by continuous gentle traction. A small stab incision will usually be necessary at the
point of tube exit.
As the tube is withdrawn through the abdominal wall,
the endoscopist replaces the endoscope into the gastric
lumen and monitors the positioning of the distal mushroom tip against the gastric wall. The mushroom tip
should be placed with sufficient tension to hold the gastric wall against the abdominal wall, but excessive tension should be avoided as this may lead to gastric wall
necrosis below the mushroom tip and failure of the gastrostomy site. The mushroom tip should gently flatten
the gastric mucosa, but blanching of the mucosa should
not be visible on examination. If the mucosa is blanched,

VetBooks.ir

49 Gastrointestinal Endoscopy

the distracting tension on the tube must be loosened to
reduce the risk of gastric wall compromise.
When the operator is satisfied that the tube is correctly
positioned, the bonded sharp end is removed with heavy
bandage scissors and the tube retained against the external flank using a retaining anchor system. The gastrostomy site is bandaged and the tube trimmed to length
before assembly of a catheter tip closure to allow administration of food. The remaining tube should be loosely
restrained against the body using stockinet tubing and/or
an old t‐shirt, and an Elizabethan collar applied for at least
the first 4–5 days while a stable adhesion is being formed.
Assuming no complications in placement of the PEG
tube, administration of fluids (water initially) and then
liquid or blenderized diets can commence approximately
eight hours after the patient recovers from anesthesia.
PEG‐J Tube Placement
Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy‐jejunostomy
tubes are a refinement and addition to the PEG tube systems described above, with additional placement of a
tube into the jejunum. A PEG tube is placed as described
above, then a narrow feeding tube with a loop of suture
material at the distal end is threaded into the gastric
lumen via the gastrostomy tube. This second tube is captured at the loop of suture material, then the tube is carried through the pylorus and into the duodenum by the
endoscope. The second tube is carried as far as possible
distally by the endoscope, then gently threaded further to
reach the jejunum. The PEG and J‐tubes are then trimmed
and retained as previously described. The addition of the
J‐tube allows the delivery of liquid diets into the jejunum,
completely bypassing the duodenum. While nutrition is
being delivered to the jejunum, gastric secretions and
fluid can be suctioned via the PEG tube, which may help
to control vomiting in patients with severe gastric or pancreatic inflammation. As the patient recovers and the
stomach is more amenable to diet input, the J‐tube can be
removed and use of the PEG tube instituted.
While there are some theoretical benefits to the use of
PEG‐J tubes in animals with very severe pancreatic disease, the author rarely uses these tubes in these patients.
Instead, a multimodal antiemetic protocol is used along
with gastric tube or esophagostomy tube feeding. There is
no evidence to support the contention that “pancreatic
rest” is important for patients with pancreatitis, which is
the main imperative behind J‐tube feeding in most patients.
Foreign Body Removal
The use of endoscopy, either rigid (within the esophagus) or flexible (esophagus and stomach), is an attractive
first‐line option for management of this problem. The

potential for removal without surgery allows more rapid
recovery of the patient and reduces the risk of gastrointestinal perforation and/or wound dehiscence. This
potential must be tempered by the reality that often the
endoscopic removal of foreign bodies, particularly “slippery” gastric foreign bodies that can be quite fragile, can
take long periods of time and may not be feasible. It is
good practice to define an upper time limit for the endoscopic procedure before transitioning to surgical
management.
A variety of retrieval devices is available, with varying
strengths and indications (Figure 49.19). For esophageal
foreign bodies, it is often possible to use long, rigid forceps to grasp the foreign body. This is particularly helpful if using a rigid endoscope for the esophagoscopy, but
can also be carried out with flexible endoscopy equipment by carefully introducing the retrieval instrument
beside or above the endoscope that is viewing the foreign
body. Other retrieval instrument options include flexible
alligator forceps, deployable wire cages, three‐pronged
graspers, Foley catheters, wire loops and snares, and old
endoscopy biopsy forceps. The use of biopsy forceps for
foreign body retrieval will usually result in dulling of the
edges and loss of effective biopsy function so older forceps should be used.
There is no one technique or device that reliably succeeds in grasping and removal of all foreign bodies of any
specific type. While some general observations can be
made, such as alligator forceps have no utility with
rounded, smooth‐surfaced objects, most foreign body
retrievals will require the use of several different types of
instrument. For instance, flexible alligator or old biopsy
forceps may be used to reposition an object within the
gastric lumen, allowing application of a wire basket for
the actual retrieval process. Some foreign bodies will
require reorientation several times to allow a graspable
surface to be visualized. As wide a selection of retrieval
instruments as possible should be available to the
endoscopist. Foley catheters can be used to manipulate
and reposition some objects by threading them past the
obstruction, then inflating the balloon before applying
gentle distracting pressure.
It is particularly attractive to attempt esophageal foreign body removal endoscopically wherever possible,
as removal of foreign bodies from the thoracic esophagus via thoracotomy and esophagotomy is technically
difficult and has a high risk of wound dehiscence and
subsequent development of pneumomediastinum, pneumothorax, and pyothorax. As a general observation,
endoscopic removal of esophageal foreign bodies
becomes increasingly difficult as the time since obstruction increases. Esophageal mucosal swelling and erosion/ulceration can occur rapidly, and these changes
result in the foreign body becoming more and more

529

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Figure 49.19 A selection of manipulating
and retrieval instruments, which may be
useful in retrieval of foreign bodies within
the esophagus and/or gastric lumen. The
rightmost two instruments are repurposed
laparoscopic surgery graspers. From left to
right, a four‐wire basket forceps, a netting
loop snare, and flexible alligator forceps.
The flexible instruments are appropriate
for use through the working channel of a
larger endoscope, and can be utilized in
the esophagus and stomach, but lack
significant grasping power. The
repurposed laparoscopic instruments
have much larger working graspers and
better grasping power. These rigid
instruments are introduced to the
esophagus either through a large rigid
endoscope or along the side of a flexible
endoscope. They are not appropriate for
use in the gastric lumen.

VetBooks.ir

530

firmly wedged. If the foreign body can be solidly grasped,
a number of attempts to remove it via the oral cavity can
be made, but if the object is not mobilized by moderate
traction and the esophageal mucosa is showing increasing evidence of trauma/hemorrhage, a new strategy
should be followed. If the foreign body can be pushed
aborally into the stomach, this is often a preferable
option. Many bone foreign bodies or impacted dog
chews will dissipate once within the gastric lumen, while
indigestible foreign bodies can be removed via celiotomy
and gastrotomy with much lower risk of complications
than arise from a transthoracic route.
When attempting to retrieve foreign bodies, great
care should be taken that the gastrointestinal tract
wall is not compromised, either by excessive force
application or inadvertent perforation by sharp objects
(bone fragments, needles, etc.) as they are withdrawn.
It is also critical to assess the site of impaction after
withdrawal for evidence of mucosal ulceration and
abrasion. Within the gastric lumen, it is usually possible
to visualize the site of impaction after initial grasping of
the object, but with esophageal foreign bodies it will be
necessary to reintroduce the endoscope to assess the
mucosa. Severe circumferential mucosal damage, particularly if there is exposure of the submucosa, leaves
the patient with a high risk for esophageal stricture formation. It is also recommended to obtain thoracic
­radiographs following removal of esophageal foreign

bodies to assess for early signs of esophageal perforation such as pneumomediastinum or pneumothorax.
If the patient has evidence of severe esophagitis
and mucosal ulceration/abrasion, placement of a PEG
tube for postoperative nutritional support is strongly
recommended.
Esophageal Stricture Management
Esophageal stricture recognition and management via
either bougienage or balloon dilation are discussed in
detail in Chapter 52.

­Future Directions of Gastrointestinal
Endoscopy
After the unavoidably small size of biopsies achievable
using flexible endoscopy, probably the greatest
limitation of endoscopy in the gastrointestinal tract
­
of veterinary patients is the lack of ability to assess the
entire gastrointestinal tract. While many diseases
that affect the gastrointestinal tract are diffuse, and
thus duodenoscopy and distal ileoscopy will commonly
result in meaningful diagnostic findings, solitary lesions
in the deeper jejunum and proximal ileum are not
unknown.

VetBooks.ir

49 Gastrointestinal Endoscopy

(a)

(b)

Flash storage
Microprocessor
LEDs

Cameras

LEDs

Batteries

Figure 49.20 Composite image showing relative size and internal structure of a capsule endoscope system suitable for use in dogs.
Source: Image courtesy of Infiniti Medical, LLC. www.Infinitimedical.com

Figure 49.21 Composite image showing several captures from a capsule endoscopy system as it transits the small intestine of a canine
patient. Marked mucosal erosion and ulceration are apparent. Source: Image courtesy of Infiniti Medical, LLC. www.Infinitimedical.com

A number of newer systems and strategies have been
described that have the potential to allow direct visualization of much larger proportions of the gastrointestinal
tract. The two most promising are double balloon push
and pull enteroscopy and the use of capsule endoscopy
systems.

Double Balloon Enteroscopy
Double balloon push and pull enteroscopy is carried out
using an endoscope with an inflatable balloon, similar to
a Foley catheter balloon, incorporated into the distal
endoscope tip, and an additional balloon on a mobile

531

VetBooks.ir

532

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

cuff that surrounds the distal endoscope. These balloons
are sequentially inflated and deflated, and the endoscope
advanced, as the small intestinal loops fold up behind the
outer cuff. This technique has been described in a limited number of canine patients at the time of writing, and
has some limitations due to the overall diameter of the
specific endoscope/cuff combination (13.2 mm) and the
increased stiffness and turning radius of the endoscope.
The full exploration of the gastrointestinal tract using
this endoscope is also a longer procedure than is typical
for upper gastrointestinal endoscopy. An advantage of
this approach is that biopsy samples can be obtained
from a greater proportion of the gastrointestinal tract,
and discrete lesions within the jejunum may be able to be
sampled.
Capsule Endoscopy
Complete assessment of the entire gastrointestinal tract
of dogs can be obtained in a minimally invasive manner
through use of self‐contained capsule endoscopes. These
devices include cameras with 360° field of view, light
sources, and digital storage space within a plastic

enclosure that is similar in size and shape to a large capsule (Figure 49.20). The capsule is administered to the
patient orally, and after transit through the entire gastrointestinal tract is recovered to allow downloading of digital image files. These systems have advantages in avoiding
the need for anesthesia and postprocedural recovery, and
arguably allow assessment of the gastrointestinal tract in
a more natural state as the vascular changes induced by
patient preparation and anesthesia are avoided.
An obvious limitation of the capsule endoscopy systems is that they are unable to retrieve biopsies, and the
actual location where a lesion is observed cannot be
determined with great accuracy as the images are typically not accessible until after complete transit through
the gastrointestinal tract. This approach is very useful,
however, for a complete assessment of the gastrointestinal tract for focal lesions, bleeding ulcers, discrete
mucosal pathology changes, etc. (Figure 49.21).
Anatomic landmarks, such as the pylorus, major duodenal flexure, and ileocolic junction, are usually easily
identified, allowing some degree of certainty of the
­specific section of the gastrointestinal tract that can be
observed.

­Further Reading
Evans SE, Bonczynski JJ, Broussard JD, Han E, Baer KE.
Comparison of endoscopic and full‐thickness biopsy
specimens for diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease
and alimentary tract lymphoma in cats. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2006; 229(9): 1447–50.
Goutal‐Landry CM, Mansell J, Ryan KA. Effect of
endoscopic forceps on quality of duodenal mucosal
biopsy in healthy dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2013; 27(3):
456–61.
Hayes G. Gastrointestinal foreign bodies in dogs and cats:
a retrospective study of 208 cases. J Small Anim Pract
2009; 50(11): 576–83.
Jergens AE, Willard MD, Mansell J, et al. Effect of sample
quality on the sensitivity of endoscopic biopsy for
detecting gastric and duodenal lesions in dogs and cats.
J Vet Intern Med 2008; 22(5): 1084–9.

Larson RN, Ginn JA, Bell CM, Davis MJ, Foy DS. Duodenal
endoscopic findings and histopathologic confirmation of
intestinal lymphangiectasia in dogs. J Vet Intern Med
2012; 26(5): 1087–92.
Slovak JE, Wang C, Morrison JA, et al. Endoscopic
assessment of the duodenum in dogs with
inflammatory bowel disease. J Vet Intern Med 2014;
28(5): 1442–6.
Slovak JE, Wang C, Sun Y, et al. Development and
validation of an endoscopic activity score for canine
inflammatory bowel disease. Vet J 2015; 203(3): 290–5.
WSAVA International Gastrointestinal Standardization
Group, Washabau RJ, Day MJ, et al. Endoscopic, biopsy,
and histopathologic guidelines for the evaluation of
gastrointestinal inflammation in companion animals.
J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24(1): 10–26.

VetBooks.ir

533

50
Diseases of the Oral Cavity and Salivary Glands
Maria M. Soltero‐Rivera, DVM, DAVDC1 and Alexander M. Reiter, Dipl.Tzt., Dr.Med. Vet., DAVDC, DEVDC2
1
2

VCA San Francisco Veterinary Specialists, San Francisco, CA, USA
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA

A history of ptyalism or drooling saliva, perioral +/− ocu­
lonasal discharge, anorexia, weight loss, unkempt hair
coat, vocalizing when eating, pawing at the mouth,
­rubbing the face on the furniture or carpeting, bruxism,
chattering, and/or hesitation to have the head or face
touched should prompt the clinician to perform a thor­
ough intraoral and extraoral examination. Oral and sali­
vary gland diseases can have various presentations, and
often the duration of clinical signs along with the distri­
bution of the lesions can aid in determining the etiology
of the condition (Table 50.1). Histologically, oral lesions
can range in appearance from areas of ulceration to vesi­
cles to even proliferation of tissues, whether it is through
hyperplasia, neoplasia or granulation tissue formation,
to areas of necrosis. Salivary gland enlargement follows a
spectrum, with the noninflamed form, known as
sialadenosis, followed by sialadenitis and finally necrotiz­
ing sialometaplasia. Neoplasia can also occur in the
­salivary glands. It is important to keep in mind that some
systemic diseases can manifest with oral lesions.
Additionally, some systemic diseases that lead to immu­
nosuppression can predispose patients to oral disease.

­Healthy Oral Tissues
and Salivary Glands
The masticatory and lining mucosa are the primary tis­
sues affected by oral inflammation. The epithelium of
the masticatory mucosa is moderately thick and fre­
quently ortho‐keratinized. It is inextensible and well
adapted to withstanding abrasion. The epithelium of the
lining mucosa is thicker than that of masticatory mucosa
and is nonkeratinized. The surface is flexible and the
submucosa is elastic, allowing it to stretch. Taste buds,
gingival crevicular fluid, and normal bacterial flora play
a role in protecting the oral cavity from insults. Taste

buds reject potentially toxic materials. The gingival cre­
vicular fluid is believed to cleanse the gingival sulcus,
improve adhesion of the epithelium to the tooth via
plasma proteins, possess antimicrobial properties, and
exert antibody activity to protect the gingiva. The nor­
mal bacterial flora of the oral cavity plays a role in the
innate resistance by preventing colonization and growth
of foreign microbes.
There are four major pairs of salivary glands: mandib­
ular, sublingual, parotid, and zygomatic. Minor salivary
glands can be found on the palate, alveolar, labial and
buccal mucosa, tongue, and along some of the ducts of
the major salivary glands. Cats have an additional pair of
mixed salivary glands found on the lingual aspect of the
mandibular first molar tooth, known as the linguomolar
gland. Secretory cells can be predominantly serous, pre­
dominantly mucous, or mixed. The secretory cells of the
salivary glands form acini, surrounding a central drain­
ing space that empties into the intercalated, striated, and
excretory ducts, successively. These ducts play a major
role in determining the composition of saliva. Saliva
cleanses the mouth, maintains tooth integrity, dilutes
noxious materials, contains antibodies and antimicrobi­
als, maintains the pH in the oral cavity, and plays a role in
the formation of the bolus of food and initial digestion,
depending on the species. The ducts and acini are
­surrounded by connective tissue carrying blood vessels
and nerves.

­Gingivitis and Periodontitis
Periodontal disease is commonly seen in dogs and cats
characterized by inflammation of the supporting struc­
tures of the tooth. Ninety‐six percent of 109 adult cats,
with a mean age of 6.2 +/− 5.2 years, showed evidence
of gingival inflammation in one study. A recent study

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

534

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Table 50.1 Nomenclature of oral and oropharyngeal inflammation according to the American Veterinary Dental College (AVDC)
Location

Term

Definition

Gingiva

Gingivitis

Inflammation of gingiva

Periodontal ligament,
alveolar bone and
cementum

Periodontitis

Inflammation of nongingival periodontal tissues

Bone and bone
marrow

Osteomyelitis

Inflammation of the bone and bone marrow

Alveolar mucosa

Alveolar
mucositis

Inflammation of alveolar mucosa (i.e., mucosa overlying the alveolar process
and extending from the mucogingival junction without obvious demarcation
to the vestibular sulcus and to the floor of the mouth)

Sublingual mucosa

Sublingual
mucositis

Inflammation of mucosa on the floor of the mouth

Labial/buccal mucosa

Labial/buccal
mucositis

Inflammation of the lip/cheek mucosa

Mucosa of the caudal
oral cavity

Caudal mucositis

Inflammation of mucosa of the caudal oral cavity, bordered medially by the
palatoglossal folds and fauces, dorsally by the hard and soft palate, and
rostrally by alveolar and buccal mucosa

Palatal mucosa

Palatitis

Inflammation of mucosa covering the hard and/or soft palate

Lingual mucosa

Glossitis

Inflammation of mucosa of the dorsal, lateral and/or ventral tongue surface

Lip

Cheilitis

Inflammation of the lip (including the mucocutaneous junction area and skin
of the lip)

Mouth

Stomatitis

Inflammation of the mucous lining of any of the structures in the mouth; in
clinical use the term should be reserved to describe widespread oral
inflammation (beyond gingivitis and periodontitis) that may also extend into
submucosal tissues (e.g., marked caudal mucositis extending into submucosal
tissues may be termed caudal stomatitis)

Palatine tonsil

Tonsillitis

Inflammation of the palatine tonsil

Pharynx

Pharyngitis

Inflammation of the pharynx

looking at the prevalence of disorders recorded in dogs
in attending primary care veterinary practices in England
revealed periodontal disease to be the second most fre­
quently identified disorder. Gingivitis is inflammation of
the gingiva, which may remain stable throughout the life
of the animal. However, with the aid of additional factors
and in a cyclical fashion, it may progress to periodontitis.
Periodontitis is inflammation of the periodontal liga­
ment, cementum and alveolar bone, resulting in pocket
formation, gingival recession, and alveolar bone loss
(Figure 50.1).
Histologically, the pulp tissue of teeth with advanced
periodontitis may undergo changes including acute and
chronic pulpitis, vascular congestion, and pulp necrosis.
These changes may be the result of occlusion of the vas­
cular channel by secondary or tertiary dentinal deposi­
tion, increased mobility of teeth with severe attachment
loss, or, less likely, the centripetal spread of infection or
inflammation into the pulp.
Up to 13% of cats suffering from periodontal disease
may have evidence of aggressive periodontitis. There is
also a strong association between periodontal disease

and type I tooth resorption. In one study, up to 72% of
teeth with type I resorption showed periodontitis, as
opposed to approximately 16% of teeth with type II
resorption. Tooth resorption has also been reported in
dogs but not necessarily in association to periodontitis.
It can occur in association to endodontic disease or with
oral neoplasia at tumor sites and at sites distant from
tumors.
A strong suspicion for a genetic predisposition towards
dental disease exists in cats and dogs. Pure‐bred cats are
said to develop dental calculus more commonly than
domestic shorthair cats. Additionally, rapidly progres­
sive and refractory periodontitis has been reported to
occur more commonly in young Somali and Abyssinian
cats exhibiting stomatitis or feline immunodeficiency
virus (FIV) involvement. A condition known as juvenile
hyperplastic gingivitis has been described in cats younger
than 2 years of age (Figure 50.2).
In dogs, a familial predisposition to gingival hyperpla­
sia has been found in the boxer. Smaller breeds and
brachycephalic pets can have crowding of their teeth and
malocclusion that can predispose them to periodontal

VetBooks.ir

50 Diseases of the Oral Cavity and Salivary Glands

(a)

(b)

Figure 50.1 (a) Photograph of a 15‐year‐old Pomeranian, showing severe calculus and plaque accumulation along with multiple missing
teeth. (b) Intraoral radiographs of the same patient showing severe alveolar bone loss with extension into the endodontic system as
evidenced by the formation of periapical lucencies (arrows). Copyright 2015 Alexander M. Reiter.

(a)

(b)

Figure 50.2 (a) Photograph of a 2‐year‐old Abyssinian, showing severe gingivitis and gingival enlargement along with multiple missing
incisors. (b) Intraoral radiographs of the same patient showing moderate alveolar bone loss (†) and type I tooth resorption (*). Copyright
2015 Alexander M. Reiter.

disease. Miniature schnauzers and greyhounds have a
propensity to localized juvenile periodontitis and refrac­
tory rapidly progressing periodontitis.
In humans, periodontitis has been associated with
abnormal phagocytic activity as well as immunosup­
pressive states. Hypoplasia of root cementum has also
been implicated as a cause specifically in human cases of

juvenile periodontitis. Single amino acid variations
because of mutation in interleukin (IL)‐6, IL‐10, and
lactoferrin genes may result in a change in their func­
tionality which could play a role in the development of
disease. However, this has yet to be confirmed in pets.
Periodontal disease treatment has the goal of cleaning
and eliminating deep pockets with closed or open

535

VetBooks.ir

536

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

­techniques, restoring a normal gingival contour via care­
ful gingivectomy and gingivoplasty, extracting teeth with
severe attachment loss, and instituting rigorous home
oral hygiene until elimination of potential causes of the
disease.
Medical management with antibiotic treatment may
occasionally be considered as an adjunct to definitive
treatment, in preparation for the procedure or in
patients where anesthesia is not an option. Amoxicillin‐
clavulanic acid (Clavamox®, Pfizer) has the highest in
vitro susceptibility against all isolates and all anaerobes
isolated from the subgingival spaces of cats. Additionally,
enrofloxacin (Baytril®, Bayer) shows high in vitro sus­
ceptibility for the anaerobes ­isolated in cats. In dogs,
amoxicillin‐clavulanic acid has the highest in vitro sus­
ceptibility against all isolates, all ­aerobes, and all anaer­
obes. For dogs, enrofloxacin showed the highest in vitro
susceptibility for gram‐­
negative aerobes. Anaerobic
bacteria oral bacteria in dogs appear to be susceptible to
amoxicillin‐clavulanic acid, doxycycline, and erythro­
mycin, while aerobic bacteria are often also susceptible
to sulfa‐trimethoprim.
Despite the slight differences in susceptibility, no
major differences are found between the subgingival flo­
ras of dogs and cats with gingivitis. Evaluation of the
effects of systemic doxycycline use in dogs has shown a
significant improvement in gingival attachment and
bleeding with oral subantimicrobial doses of 2 mg/kg per
day. A short‐term (42 days) study evaluating the efficacy
of control of gingivitis with use of cefovecin sodium
(Convenia®, Pfizer) after a professional dental cleaning
showed no significant difference when compared to oral
administration of clindamycin.
In feline cases where professional dental cleaning and
extraction of severely affected teeth do not resolve peri­
odontal inflammation, patients should be tested
for feline immunodeficiency virus ( FIV)/feline leukemia
virus (FeLV) seropositivity. A greater prevalence and
increased severity of oral inflammation were noted in
cats infected with FIV. The disease was worse in those
with co‐infection of FIV with feline calicivirus (FCV), or
with FCV and FeLV.
When evaluating the systemic effects of periodontal
disease in dogs, a strong association has been found
between increasing severity of attachment loss with
changes in systemic inflammatory variables and renal
indices. Additionally, in dogs with advanced periodontal
disease, increases in systemic nitric oxide levels two
weeks after periodontal treatment have been reported,
but the response is idiosyncratic. In cats, the severity of
periodontitis has been associated with increases in glob­
ulins, alanine aminotransferase, and IgG blood l­evels,
suggesting that periodontal disease is not simply a local­
ized disease but may also affect patients systemically.

­Stomatitis
Stomatitis is a complex, chronic, and destructive inflam­
matory process affecting the epithelium and lamina
­propria, with frequent extension into the submucosal tis­
sues. This more widespread inflammation of the oral
mucosa is estimated to affect 0.7% of cats presented to
veterinary practices.
The etiology of stomatitis is not fully understood, but
it is suspected to be multifactorial and a response to
chronic stimulation by a still unidentified antigen. This
contrasts with the contact stomatitis or contact mucosal
ulceration that results from mucosal contact with an irri­
tant, allergen or antigen most often in areas of heavy
plaque burden. This condition is known as canine
chronic ulcerative stomatitis and chronic ulcerative
paradental stomatitis. However, the lesions are com­
monly referred to as “kissing ulcers” or “contact ulcers.”
Two cases of concurrent osteomyelitis and paradental
stomatitis have been reported. Epitheliotropic T cell
lymphoma and erythema multiforme have also been
reported as causes of an ulcerative stomatitis with minor
to no significant abnormalities in complete blood counts
and blood biochemical profiles of affected dogs. Whereas
cats are likely affected by the idiopathic form of this dis­
ease, in dogs the oral inflammation is often associated
with a systemic disease. Vesiculobullous autoimmune
disease, although sometimes confined to dermal tissues,
can present as oral lesions in up to 90% of patients with
pemphigus vulgaris and 50% of those with bullous
pemphigoid.
A similar type of lesion, called pyogenic granuloma,
that is proliferative rather than ulcerative in nature devel­
ops in the alveolar or buccal mucosa distobuccal to the
mandibular first molar tooth in cats (Figure 50.3). The
lesions may result from continued trauma secondary to a
tight caudal occlusion between the maxillary fourth pre­
molar and the mandibular first molar, or due to contin­
ued trauma from the maxillary fourth premolar on an
area of inflammation on the distobuccal aspect of the
mandibular first molar. Surgical excision of the mass and
blunting or extraction of the involved tooth or teeth have
been reported to be 100% effective.
Some of the common bacterial isolates in cats with sto­
matitis include Pasteurella pneumotropica, Pasteurella
multocida, and Capnocytophaga canimorsus. Prior expo­
sure to viral diseases such as FCV, feline herpesvirus
(FHV), FeLV, and FIV is thought to be a risk factor for
developing stomatitis. This is likely due to the progres­
sive decline in immune functions caused by infection
with FIV and FeLV. On the other hand, FCV does seem
to play a more direct role as shown by persistent s­ hedding
of this virus in all cats with chronic ulceroproliferative
stomatitis compared to only about 20% in normal cats.

VetBooks.ir

50 Diseases of the Oral Cavity and Salivary Glands

Figure 50.3 Photograph of a pyogenic granuloma in a 5‐year‐old
domestic shorthair. Copyright 2015 Alexander M. Reiter.

Ulcers on the tongue, philtrum, and palate can be seen in
cases of FHV, but they are infrequent compared to FCV
infection. Infection with FIV, FeLV, and FCV may also
influence disease severity. The role of infection with
Bartonella remains controversial. Infection with feline
panleukopenia virus, feline syncytium‐forming virus,
feline infectious peritonitis, and Candida albicans have
also been implicated as causes of stomatitis.
In cats with stomatitis, immunohistochemistry (IHC)
has shown that the number of CD79a+ cells, L1+ cells
and CD3+ T cells and the level of MHC class II expres­
sion tend to correlate with disease severity. Additionally,
CD8+ T cells are more numerous than CD4+ T cells, and
most of the plasma cells are of the IgG isotype. The num­
ber of cells labeled for CD3, CD4, CD8, CD79a, IgG, IgA
or L1 and the number of mast cells within the lamina
propria and submucosa are significantly increased in
affected patients. The epithelial compartment also has
more CD3+ T cells compared to healthy cats. Mast cell
density is also significantly increased in gingival tissues
adjacent to areas affected by stomatitis. IHC has proven
value in reaching a definitive diagnosis in dogs with
­stomatitis due to erythema multiforme and epithelio­
trophic T cell lymphoma. Immunohistochemistry, clon­
ality ­testing, repeated biopsies, and close follow‐up are
recommended in such difficult cases.
Animals affected by stomatitis will often show signs of
oral discomfort when eating, grooming, or when manip­
ulating their mouths. In addition to the often symmetric,
bright, ulcerated or proliferative lesions of the area lat­
eral to the palatoglossal folds, multiple areas can be
affected by inflammation including the gingiva, alveolar

mucosa, labial and buccal mucosa, the lateral margins of
the tongue and the areas of the hard palate that are in
contact with the teeth (Figure 50.4).
Physical examination findings may include a poor hair
coat and decreased body condition. Of cats with stoma­
titis, 49–61% show radiographic evidence of resorption
of multiple teeth. Periodontal disease is seen in all cases,
and retained tooth roots can be found in 56% of cases.
Differentiation into squamous cell carcinoma has been
reported in some cats.
Acutely, treatment for cats consists of controlling the
inflammation via immunosuppression or immune modu­
lation along with symptomatic control. In dogs, treat­
ment of the underlying cause is extremely important.
Glucocorticoids such as prednisone or prednisolone are
typically used at a dose of 0.5–1 mg/kg by mouth once
daily and can be effective in 73–86% of cases. Antibiotics
may also be used. However, only 30% of cases respond,
and the response is only transient. Amoxicillin‐clavulanic
acid (13.75 mg/kg q12h, PO) or clindamycin (5–11 mg/kg
q12h, PO) are most commonly used. Nutritional support
is sometimes necessary, especially in chronic cases with
severe weight loss and evidence of dehydration.
Otherwise, the patient should only be offered soft food. If
symptoms resolve or the patient improves significantly,
plaque control measures, namely daily tooth brushing,
should be instituted. However, many pets are too painful
to allow this. Pain control with sublingual buprenorphine
(0.01 mg/kg q8–12h, PO) or a transdermal fentanyl patch
should also be considered.
Chronically, treatment with glucocorticoids is not rec­
ommended due to the undesirable long‐term side‐effects
that may develop, including diabetes mellitus, polyuria,
and polydipsia. Full‐mouth extraction is recommended
in cats which has achieved a nearly 80% success rate with
either a complete cure in 60% of cases or a clinical cure in
20% of cases. In severe cases, transient treatment with
glucocorticoids (0.5–1 mg/kg q24h, PO) immediately
after full‐mouth extraction may be necessary. A recent
study comparing full‐mouth versus partial‐mouth
extraction in cats showed the extent of extractions not to
be associated with the overall response of treatment.
Additionally, the 68.8% of symptomatically or clinically
cured cats required extended medical management for a
finite period to achieve a positive outcome. In dogs, a
staged approach by removing severely diseased teeth is
recommended, and extraction of teeth directly in con­
tact with the areas of inflammation can be considered. A
professional dental cleaning should also be performed
until the underlying disease process is controlled.
When cases are refractory, treatment with interferon
omega may be considered. Daily use of this medication
(0.1 mU q24h, PO) in cats has resulted in significant
improvement of pain scores at 60 and 90 days post

537

VetBooks.ir

538

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

(e)

Figure 50.4 Photographs of multiple patients showing varying presentations of feline stomatitis. (a) Sublingual. (b) Diffuse alveolar.
(c) Ulcerative, caudal and lateral to the palatoglossal folds. (d) Focal alveolar. (e) Proliferative, caudal and involving the palatoglossal
folds. Note that the hard and soft palate are usually not involved in this classic type of stomatitis. Copyright 2015 Alexander M. Reiter.

­treatment. Intralesional injections with interferon omega
can be considered prior to oral administration. Finally,
ablation of inflamed tissues in cats using CO2 laser has
been reported to promote fibrosis after repeated treat­
ments in a refractory case. When treating with interferon
omega or CO2 laser, the owners need to understand that
repeated treatments are often necessary before even slight
improvements are seen.
Autologous mesenchymal stem cell therapy has also
been used for treatment of refractory stomatitis, with
success being seen in five out of seven cats that com­
pleted the study. Cats that responded to treatment also
exhibited systemic immunomodulation demonstrated
by decreased numbers of circulating CD8+ T cells, a nor­
malization of the CD4:CD8 ratio, decreased neutrophil
counts, and interferon gamma and IL‐1‐beta concentra­
tion, and a temporary increase in serum IL‐6 and tumor
necrosis factor‐alpha concentration.
Stomatitis can be a frustrating condition for the pet,
the owner, and the veterinarian. Retroviral status should
be assessed prior to therapy, as this may affect prognosis.
In dogs, prognosis is largely dependent on the underly­
ing systemic disease process.

­Odontogenic Tumors and Cysts
Odontogenic tumors are more common in dogs than
cats. Acanthomatous ameloblastomas are more com­
monly seen, followed closely by peripheral odontogenic
fibromas and focal fibrous hyperplasia. Acanthomatous
ameloblastoma commonly arises in the rostral lower jaw
whereas peripheral odontogenic fibromas and focal
fibrous hyperplasia tend to be more commonly seen in
the rostral upper jaw. A breed predisposition for devel­
opment of acanthomatous ameloblastoma has been
suggested, with golden retrievers, Akitas, Shetland
­
sheepdogs, and cocker spaniels being more commonly
reported. Peripheral odontogenic fibromas may also
have a predilection for castrated male dogs.
Azithromycin in systemic and toothpaste forms has
been used in the management of gingival hyperplasia
secondary to ciclosporin treatment in dogs. In this
report, there was a significant decrease in gingival sulcus
depth for the capsule group at week 8 and for the tooth­
paste group at weeks 2, 4, and 8. Gastrointestinal adverse
events occurred in all groups, but more frequently in the
patients treated systemically. Gingival recontouring to

VetBooks.ir

50 Diseases of the Oral Cavity and Salivary Glands

reduce the pseudopockets created by hyperplastic
­gingiva along with periodontal treatment can also be
recommended.
Extent of resection required to prevent tumor recur­
rence depends on the tumor type. A study describing the
clinical behavior of acanthomatous ameloblastoma
revealed 0% of patients had incomplete histopathologic
margins when 2 cm intended surgical margins were uti­
lized compared to 33% when 1 cm intended surgical
margins were utilized. However, it was found that regard­
less of postsurgical neoplasia‐free margin, no gross local
recurrence was noted in the oral cavity for a minimum
follow‐up of 12 months after surgery.
Odontogenic cysts are also commonly seen, with more
than half arising from unerupted teeth, mainly the man­
dibular first premolar teeth. This type of cyst is known as
a dentigerous (or tooth‐containing) cyst, and brachyce­
phalic dogs appear to have a predisposition to develop­
ment of these lesions. Dentigerous cysts are thought to
arise from the proliferation of basal cells in the lining
epithelium or the epithelium of the tooth crown but may
also arise from cell rests of Malassez. If the tooth fails to
erupt, the follicle remains and produces the sac lined by
stratified mucus or cutaneous epithelium. Cysts can be
very expansile, causing weakening of the bone involved
and root resorption of neighboring teeth. A potential for
pathologic fractures and tooth loss arises if these cysts
are not treated. Even though radiographic findings are
virtually pathognomonic, biopsy is always recommended
to confirm the clinical diagnosis and rule out any malig­
nancies that have been reported to arise in long‐standing
cases. In a survey of epithelial odontogenic tumors and
cysts in dogs and cats, six cystic lesions gave rise to basi‐
squamous cell carcinoma. This is thought to be associ­
ated with the deregulation of cell death in the lining
epithelium derived from odontogenic origin as shown by
immunoreaction for amelogenin and ssDNA.
Four other types of cysts have been described includ­
ing the lateral periodontal, radicular, gingival inclusion,
and odontogenic keratocyst. Thorough removal of the
cyst lining, extraction of the unerupted tooth, and extrac­
tion of teeth affected by cyst expansion should be
­performed. In cases of extensive lesions and those in
which complete removal of the cyst lining is challenging,
­sclerotherapy with tetracyclines can be considered.

­Malignant Melanoma
Melanoma is the most common malignant neoplasia in
the canine oral cavity. In a retrospective study of 338
canine oral melanomas, chow chows, golden retrievers,
and Pekingese/poodle mixes were overrepresented, and
the gingiva and labial mucosa were the most commonly

affected sites. Melanomas can be amelanotic in some
cases, posing a diagnostic challenge. However, Melan A
is a specific and sensitive marker for canine melanoma.
Dogs with melanomas of the labial mucosa may have an
increased survival time (310 days) compared to those
with oral melanomas at other sites (123 days). This dif­
ference was, however, not statistically significant. In this
same study, postsurgical survival time was 173 days.
Survival was significantly associated with the presence of
KIT anywhere in the section of a melanoma. This also
becomes important when considering the use of c‐kit
inhibitors such as toceranib phosphate (Palladia®, Pfizer
Animal Health) in the treatment of oral melanomas.
When evaluating the effects of multimodal therapy with
adjuvant treatment with carboplatin, the median overall
survival for all dogs was 440 days. In a study evaluating
the use of radiation therapy with an alternate‐day sched­
ule of 4 Gy/fraction for a total of 48 Gy over four weeks,
8% of dogs had acute reactions, and 7.6% of dogs showed
chronic effects including osteonecrosis and the develop­
ment of fistulae. Local efficacy was determined by tumor
size, and systemic metastasis influenced long‐term sur­
vival in patients with tumor recurrence.
Antiangiogenic therapies have also been evaluated after
the discovery of higher vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) levels in the plasma and serum of dogs with malig­
nant melanomas than in a control population. In a study
describing the effect of radiation on the expression of
VEGF and VEGF receptor in the canine melanoma cell line
TLM 1, radiation induced significantly higher VEGF pro­
duction in the 8 and 10 Gy group, which may have contrib­
uted to tumor resistance. The enhanced secretion of VEGF
may increase survival by decreasing apoptosis, stimulating
proliferation, and increasing angiogenic potential.
When evaluating the efficacy of a xenogenic vaccine
targeting tyrosinase as an adjuvant treatment, results
have been contradictory. One study found no difference
between progression‐free survival, disease‐free interval
or median survival time in dogs that received this treat­
ment. A study evaluating the safety of administration of
this vaccine in cats revealed side‐effects of grade 1–2 in
11.4% of cats, suggesting a minimal risk of adverse effects.
Oral melanoma is highly metastatic and recurrent, with
age, size, site, and stage being reliable prognostic indicators.
A subset of well‐differentiated melanocytic neoplasms in
dogs has been described, and these tumors have shown a
mean survival of 23.4 months and a median survival of 34
months after local excision without adjuvant therapy.

­Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common
oral tumor in domestic cats and the second most

539

VetBooks.ir

540

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

­common oral tumor in dogs. This tumor can vary in
appearance and may present as an ulcerated area or a
mass. In cats, sometimes the ulcerated area appreciated
on oral examination may represent the “tip of the i­ ceberg”
(Figure 50.5).
Although historically, the sublingual/lingual region
has been reported to be the most commonly affected
site, recent reports show the gingiva on the mandible and
maxilla to be most often involved. Metastasis to man­
dibular lymph nodes in these cases, as evaluated by fine
needle aspiration cytology, has been documented to be
as high as 31–36%. A significant association between
mandibular lymph node metastasis and survival time has
not been found. Evidence of pulmonary metastasis,
which had been evaluated by three‐view thoracic radiog­
raphy or necropsy, was present in 10% of cases but was
not a significant negative prognostic factor. Interestingly,
tumor volume appeared not to be a predictor for regional
and distant metastasis, as no significant association was
seen between tumor size and metastasis.
Feline oral SCC is generally considered to carry a poor
prognosis, and outcome has been largely dependent on
the degree of primary tumor invasion at diagnosis. Most
cats with oral SCC succumb to the effects of progressive
local disease and treatment failure. The prognostic
impact of completeness of surgical margins is unclear,
and studies evaluating multimodal treatment have
shown improved survival times compared to monother­
apy. A study evaluating multimodal therapy for nonre­
sectable tumors found survival times with complete
remission of up to 759 days. Twenty‐one cats treated
with 10, once‐daily fractions of 4.8‐Gy showed a median
overall survival of 174 days.
Squamous cell carcinoma in dogs commonly arises in
dentate areas, although well‐differentiated tumors have
been reported to arise more commonly in edentulous areas
and the tongue. A retrospective study evaluating 84 dogs
with a diagnosis of oral and oropharyngeal SCC reported
(a)

(b)

different subtypes, including conventional (well differenti­
ated, moderately differentiated, and poorly differentiated),
papillary, basaloid, adenosquamous, and spindle cell carci­
noma. Neutered female dogs, dogs aged 10–15 years,
English springer spaniels and Shetland sheepdogs were
overrepresented in this retrospective study.
Papillary SCC is the term used for a well‐differentiated
variant of this tumor that grossly as well as microscopi­
cally shows papillae or fronds on the surface. Papillary
SCC appears to carry the best prognosis. Thought to be
a tumor of young dogs, papillary SCC has recently been
shown to be a tumor of adult dogs as well, with a retro­
spective study revealing that more than 75% of the
affected canine population was older than 6 years of age.
In this study, two distinct histologic presentations were
described that correlated with the appearance on imag­
ing studies: the cavitating and noncavitating patterns.
Predominance of large breeds and the rostral maxilla
as the most common location in dogs with papillary SCC
have also been reported. In this study, surgical excision
with 1–2 cm margins allowed for a mean tumor‐free
interval of 12.1 months. Neither study found regional or
distant metastasis. A hemangiosarcoma‐like mass com­
posed of numerous vascular clefts and variable numbers
of keratinizing epithelial cells was described in a case
report of an 8‐year‐old female mixed breed with a caudal
maxillary mass. The mass was characterized as a pseu­
doangiomatous SCC, a well‐recognized human variant
of acanthomatous SCC that shares histopathologic simi­
larities with canine gingival hemangiosarcoma. A study
evaluating risk factors for nontonsillar SCC in dogs
showed that surgical treatment can decrease the risk of
death for these patients by 91.4%. Perineural, lymphatic
and vascular invasion, as well as peritumoral inflamma­
tion, may play a role as a prognostic indicator when
looked at together as a combined score. In a study evalu­
ating the effects of combining cisplatin with piroxicam in
dogs with oral melanoma and SCC, about 50% of dogs
Figure 50.5 Photograph (a) and transverse
computed tomographic image in soft tissue
algorithm obtained after IV administration of
contrast medium (b) of a 12‐year‐old Persian
with squamous cell carcinoma (white asterisks)
of the left caudal upper jaw. Note orbital
invasion of the tumor. Copyright 2015
Alexander M. Reiter.

VetBooks.ir

50 Diseases of the Oral Cavity and Salivary Glands

with SCC responded to treatment versus 18% of patients
with oral melanoma. The most commonly reported
­side‐effect for this combination of treatment was renal
toxicosis, so close monitoring of renal values is
recommended.
A protocol of accelerated chemoradiotherapy using 14
fractions of 3.5 Gy over nine days, combined with carbo­
platin as a radiosensitizer (total dose 180 mg/m2 in feline
and 300 mg/m2 in canine cases) resulted in a complete
tumor response in most cases (4/5 feline and 3/3 canine)
with acceptable acute and long‐term side‐effects. Overall
response rate in both dogs and cats treated with bleomy­
cin enhanced with electroporation (ECT) was 89%, with
21 showing a complete response (CR) and two a partial
response (PR) whereas controls had a response rate of
33% (4 CR and 3 PR). Median time to progression in the
ECT group was 30.5 months, whereas in controls (bleo­
mycin alone) it was 3.9 months (P <0.0001). Median time
to progression for ECT cohorts was 24.2 months for the
periocular cohort and 20.6 in the advanced head SCC
cohort, respectively.

­Eosinophilic Granuloma
Eosinophilic granuloma is a disease that results from
underlying antigenic stimulation. The eosinophil is one
of the players in type I inflammatory reactions. The most
commonly identified underlying causes in cats include
ectoparasites and other insects, environmental allergens
(i.e., atopic dermatitis), and food hypersensitivity.
Eosinophilic granulomas are exfoliative, and thus diag­
nosis can be reached through fine needle aspiration or
impression smears. However, histopathologic examina­
tion is useful to rule out other differential diagnoses such
as neoplasia or infection. Distinctive histopathologic
features of eosinophilic granuloma are small foci of
­
Figure 50.6 Photographs of eosinophilic
granuloma involving the dorsal tongue
surface and left caudal oral cavity in a 9‐
year‐old domestic shorthair (a) and
eosinophilic palatitis in a 3‐year‐old
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel (b).
Copyright 2015 Alexander M. Reiter.

(a)

collagen degeneration in which degenerated collagen
­
fibers are surrounded by degranulated eosinophils,
resulting in flame figures. Clinically, these lesions are
characterized by a proliferative or ulcerative component
with yellow pinpoint areas consistent with sulfur gran­
ules. Granulomatous nodules can be seen in the tongue,
palate and/or glossopharyngeal arches (Figure 50.6).
Indolent ulcers, also known as rodent ulcers, another
presentation for this type of inflammatory process, are
commonly seen near the midline of the (usually) upper
lip but can also be seen on the lower lip. A puffy lip or a
diffuse, firm sublingual swelling are rare manifestations
of this disease. Some cats are asymptomatic, and in some
the disease may be self‐limiting.
Ulcerative eosinophilic palatitis has been described in
Cavalier King Charles spaniels. Some can have full or
near resolution of lesions with glucocorticoid therapy
whereas others may resolve spontaneously. Eosinophilic
granuloma has also been reported in the Siberian husky
in which a hereditary cause has been proposed.
Treatment involves removing the underlying cause by
recommending flea prevention, a hypoallergenic diet,
and switching to stainless steel bowls. Additionally,
immunosuppressive therapy with prednisone or predni­
solone at 0.5–1 mg/kg q24h PO may be necessary.
Recently, a study evaluating the efficacy of treatment
with amoxicillin‐clavulanic acid in cats for 21 days
showed a 42.6% reduction in mean lesion size for lip
ulcers and a 96.2% reduction in skin plaques. If the area
shows evidence of chewing trauma or exposure to for­
eign objects, debulking may be considered as well as
intralesional glucocorticoid injections (e.g., triamci­
nolone). Treatment with palmitoylethanolamide
(PLR120), a downregulator of mast cell degranulation,
showed clinical improvement in 67% of affected cats. For
cats with severe ulcerative cutaneous or oral lesions that
are unresponsive to glucocorticoid treatment, FHV‐1
(b)

541

VetBooks.ir

542

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

infection should be considered, and the diagnosis can be
achieved via immunohistochemistry or polymerase
chain reaction. Eosinophilic vasculitis, which is a rare
disease seen in dogs and cats in association with arthro­
pod and insect‐induced lesions and occasionally in mast
cell tumors, can also be present along with cutaneous
eosinophilic granulomas and plaques in the absence of
cutaneous vasculitis.

­Foreign Body
A retrospective study evaluating gastrointestinal foreign
bodies in dogs and cats showed that 63% of linear foreign
bodies originated from the base of the tongue in cats as
opposed to 3% in dogs. English bull terriers and springer
spaniels were overrepresented in this study. The most
common types of foreign object recovered from cats
were string, rope, or fishing lines. Burdock and fox tails
can also become entrapped in the oral mucosa, and in
dogs they have been reported to elicit a type of granular
stomatitis. These oral lesions most often occur on the tip
and lateral edges of the tongue and the rostral portions of
the gingiva, usually at the mucogingival junction and the
labial mucosa of the upper lip. Occasionally, the philtrum
is involved. Initially, they appear as small papules that
can then coalesce, and eventually a necrotic center may
develop. Removal of the foreign body along with thor­
ough debridement and flushing of the wound is the treat­
ment of choice. Oral antibiotics and soft food may also
be considered.
Oropharyngeal and esophageal stick penetration inju­
ries in dogs can pose a challenge, as studies have shown
that foreign bodies can be found in only about half or less
of the affected patients. Surgical exploration, local
debridement, and thorough lavage, however, have shown
a favorable outcome in both studies. Esophageal pene­
tration injuries carry the worst prognosis, and thus a
ventral medial surgical approach has been recommended
in cases where cervical emphysema is seen radiographi­
cally. Advanced diagnostic imaging with magnetic reso­
nance imaging and/or computed tomography may
improve the rate of recovery of patients with such for­
eign bodies.

­Immune‐Mediated and Autoimmune
Diseases
Failure of desmosomal adhesion can result from genetic,
autoimmune, or infectious causes. Pemphigus repre­
sents the most common autoimmune blistering derma­
tosis in domestic animals. Pemphigus vulgaris (PV) is a

deep, acantholytic dermatosis. It is rare in cats, with an
estimated incidence of one per 10 000 veterinary derma­
tology cases per year. It is more commonly seen in mature
cats. This condition is also rare in dogs, with no age pre­
disposition but a predilection for certain breeds such as
German shepherds and collies, and a predisposition for
males. PV can have mucosal and mucocutaneous mani­
festations. In most dogs, lesions first develop in the oral
cavity or mucocutaneous junctions. Lesions on haired
skin predominate over pressure points. Presentation can
be acute or chronic, and the direct Nikolsky sign is usu­
ally positive. Lesions can present as erythemas, erosions,
ulcerations, scales, and crusts. Light microscopy shows
suprabasal acantholysis and cleft formation. Erosive
lesions are preferentially located in the oral cavity and
mucocutaneous junctions. Oral involvement may also
include gingivitis, stomatitis, or glossitis. Most patients
with PV show signs of systemic disease such as anorexia,
lethargy, weight loss, and fever. Spontaneous resolution
of cases has been reported. However, 40% of dogs were
reported to have a fatal outcome due to either their local
disease or systemic manifestations.
Of the autoimmune subepidermal blistering derma­
toses, 80% of patients with bullous pemphigoid develop
oral lesions at the initial onset of disease or later during
its course. Bullous pemphigoid represents 50% of subepi­
dermal autoimmune blistering dermatoses in cats and
26% in dogs. As opposed to PV, this disease can afflict
animals of any age, even before puberty. Lesions consist
primarily of turgid vesicles, erosions, ulcers, and crusts.
Oral lesions can be seen in 60% of dogs, but in cats few
lesions are present. In cats as well as in horses, sub­
epithelial vesicles exhibit fewer inflammatory cells, and
special stains are needed to visualize degranulating
eosinophils. Long‐term remission of bullous pemphigoid
has been seen in one cat treated with corticosteroids.
Mucous membrane pemphigoid, although uncom­
mon, has been reported in at least two cats, and the
authors have witnessed one additional case. Laminin 5
and 6, collagen XVII, and integrin alpha‐6/beta‐4 have
been implicated as autoantigens in both humans and
dogs. However, only laminin‐5 has been recognized in
the feline homologue of this disease.
Canine systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) occurs
mainly in pure‐breds including spaniels, pointers,
retrievers, German shepherd dogs, and Doberman pin­
schers ranging from 2 to 6 years of age. SLE has been
reported in at least two cats with palatine and glossal
ulceration. Behavioral changes, nonerosive polyarthritis,
fever, lymphadenomegaly, weight loss, and leukopenia
are primarily seen with this condition, and dogs tend to
have one or two systemic signs. The oral ulceration is
likely a complication of the systemic vasculitis that
occurs.

VetBooks.ir

50 Diseases of the Oral Cavity and Salivary Glands

Erythema multiforme (Figure 50.7) accounts for 0.11%
of dermatology cases seen in the feline population at an
academic institution. In this report, only 38% of dogs
showed oral lesions, and no oral lesions were reported in
the only cat described. In a case report of erythema mul­
tiforme in a cat, lesions first developed on the face and
head, but there were no visible lesions in the oral cavity.
This patient did not respond to withdrawal of current
medications, but a significant improvement was noted
approximately one week after treatment with human
immunoglobulin. Toxic epidermal necrolysis and idio­
pathic vasculitis have also been reported to occur in a
small number of cats and dogs.
The diagnosis of these disorders is based on both mor­
phologic and immunologic criteria. Proper site selection,
biopsy technique, and sample handling are extremely
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

important to reach a definitive diagnosis. Biopsy of the
leading edge of a lesion when an intact blister is not
found may be sufficient. Preserving the samples in
Michel’s solution is also preferred by some pathologists.
This is a transport medium that preserves tissue anti­
genicity at ambient temperatures.
Treatment for these conditions should be considered
life‐long, and owner commitment for periodic monitor­
ing is imperative. Animals must be routinely monitored
with complete blood counts and serum chemistry pan­
els. Although glucocorticoids have been reported to be
successful in treating most of these conditions, some
cases require other forms of immunosuppressive or
immune‐modulating therapy. Some immune‐mediated
skin diseases have also been treated with tetracycline,
niacinamide and pentoxifylline which together can have

Figure 50.7 Photographs of a 6‐month‐old mixed breed with erythema multiforme manifesting on the hard palate (a), gingiva and lips
(b), as well as the sublingual area (c). Photograph of a 9‐year‐old domestic shorthair with mucous membrane pemphigoid on the right
lateral lip frenulum (d). Copyright 2015 Alexander M. Reiter.

543

VetBooks.ir

544

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

immune‐modulating and antiinflammatory effects.
Antibiotics should be prescribed in cases with a second­
ary infection. Symptomatic treatment is required acutely,
including nutritional support and pain control until
long‐term therapy takes effect. Idiopathic vasculitis can
also cause oral ulcerations.

­Metabolic Disease
Nutritional deficiencies, although uncommon, can have
oral manifestations. In the acute setting, tacky mucus
membranes can indicate dehydration or hypovolemia,
and pale mucus membranes can indicate shock or ane­
mia. Oral manifestations of metabolic disease may resur­
face with the recent increase of owners opting to feed
their pets home‐cooked diets. Protein deficits can cause
ulceration of the dorsal surface of the tongue. Severe nia­
cin deficiency can cause hyperemia and ulceration of
mucosal surfaces, especially the tongue. Severe biotin
deficiency causes salivation and scaling of the lips.
Hypervitaminosis A can lead to gingival enlargement
and delayed development and early exfoliation of incisor
teeth. Primary or secondary hyperparathyroidism can
lead to a condition known as “rubber jaw” which is char­
acterized by a diffuse decreased radiographic density in
the bones, primarily of the lower jaw.
Acute uremia is defined as a rapid decline in renal
function leading to retention of uremic wastes. The inci­
dence of acute uremia in animals is unknown, but in
humans it accounts for 1% of hospital admissions.
Uremic halitosis and oral ulcerations are common find­
ings on physical examination of severely affected
patients. This occurs especially at the labial and buccal
mucosa, lateral margins of the tongue, sublingual
mucosa, lateral lip frenula, and lip commissures. Uremic
vasculitis and thrombosis lead to necrosis and sloughing
of the mucosa. Hypothyroidism can also lead to vasculi­
tis and petechiation on the gingiva and tongue. Halitosis
is often a feature of this syndrome, as the lesions become
secondarily infected. In severe cases, there may be exten­
sive necrosis that leads to sloughing of the tip of the
tongue. The lesions are often very painful and contribute
to the anorexia often observed in animals with kidney
disease. Any condition that can produce a hypercoagula­
ble state may lead to thrombi formation and subsequent
sloughing of the affected areas.
Treatment for these conditions is symptomatic until the
inciting cause can be removed or resolved. Symptomatic
treatment includes pain management (buprenorphine
0.01 mg/kg q8–12h, IV), bypassing the mouth with
­supplemental enteral or parenteral nutrition, and use of
gastric protectants (sucralfate 0.5–1 g q4–6h, PO). Topical
mouthwashes such as a mixture of diphenhydramine,

sucralfate or aluminum and magnesium hydroxide
(Maalox®, Novartis), and lidocaine may provide some
local pain control. Dilute (0.12%) chlorhexidine rinses
also play a role in preventing secondary infection of the
necrotic areas. Other metabolic disease such as diabetes
mellitus, liver failure, and respiratory disease as well as
immunosuppressive medications have also been reported
to lead to oral ulceration and necrosis.

­Burns
Burns can be caused by electricity, chemicals, heat, fric­
tion or radiation (Figure 50.8).
Chewing on household power cords is the most com­
mon cause of electric burns in dogs and cats, and these
are likely low‐voltage injuries. The electrical current can
cause damage through its direct effect as well as via
transformation of electric energy into heat. The pet
should be evaluated for cardiac arrhythmias and neuro­
genic pulmonary edema prior to evaluating the oral cav­
ity under sedation or anesthesia. Edema and necrosis are
typically seen in the tongue, palate, and lip commissures.
Discoloration of adjacent teeth secondary to pulpitis can
also be seen. Some of the long‐term effects of electric
burns include development of an oronasal fistula and
sloughing of necrotic portions of the tongue. Patients
should be treated symptomatically for at least 7–10 days
or until the tissues fully claim themselves. Until defini­
tive surgery can be performed, antibiotics and pain med­
ication should be instituted. Nutritional supplementation
should be considered when patients refuse to eat soft
food. Definitive therapy consists of debridement of the
lesions unless these are superficial enough to heal by
contraction and reepithelialization.
Chemical burns can result from exposure to house­
hold cleaning products, phenolic compounds, essential
oils, heavy metal (thallium) or plant toxins (i.e.,
Diffenbachia). The rostral and dorsal aspects of the
tongue and the palate are usually affected. The poison
control center should be contacted in these cases for
treatment of any ingested substances. Similar to electric
cord injuries, treatment should be symptomatic, but
debridement is less often necessary. Patients should be
evaluated for esophagitis and gastritis and treated
accordingly. The hair of affected patients should be
clipped or washed with dish detergent if grooming
caused the chemical to contact oral mucosa. Thermal
injuries can be encountered in animals that are fed
home‐prepared diets or heated milk. Injuries are like
those seen with chemical burns, with the lips and nasal
plane also being affected. With both chemical and elec­
tric burn injuries, symptomatic treatment and client
education are necessary.

VetBooks.ir

50 Diseases of the Oral Cavity and Salivary Glands

(a)

(b)

(d)

(e)

(c)

(f)

Figure 50.8 Photographs of a 1‐month‐old domestic shorthair with electric burns and extensive tissue necrosis at the lips, cheeks, and
hard palate (a,b). Intraoral dental radiograph of the same patient one year post injury showing the resultant oronasal fistula (c).
Photographs of the same patient one year post injury showing scarring of the palate with a small, right‐sided, persistent oronasal fistula
(arrow) (d); scarring of the cheeks along with developmental enamel and dentin defects of multiple teeth (e); and scarring of the tongue
(f ). Copyright 2015 Alexander M. Reiter.

­Salivary Gland Disease
The prevalence of salivary gland disease in dogs and cats
in a retrospective study was 0.3% , with dogs accounting
for two‐thirds of the population studied. Salivary gland
neoplasia accounted for 30% of the cases seen, followed
by, in order of decreasing frequency, sialadenitis (26%),
degenerative or fibrotic lesions (11%), sialoceles (9%),
and infarction (8%).
Salivary gland neoplasia appears to have different
behaviors in the dog and cat. Cats tend to have more
advanced disease at the time of diagnosis. A possible
familial predisposition in Siamese cats has also been
reported. Despite this, survival times in dogs and cats
appear to be similar, at 500–550 days. Masses are
usually detected by owners, although halitosis,
­
dysphagia, and exophthalmia have been reported.
­
Adenocarcinoma is the most common histologic type
of tumor seen. A sialolipoma of a minor salivary gland
and lymphosarcoma of major salivary glands have also
been reported.

Sialadenosis typically is a bilateral and painless enlarge­
ment of the salivary glands. Although the exact cause of
this disease is unknown, concurrent gastrointestinal dis­
ease, certain medications, hormonal disorders or primary
disorders affecting the sympathetic innervation to the
glands have been implicated. Retching and gulping are
the most common clinical signs seen with this condition.
Differential diagnoses for this disease include inflamma­
tory variants including necrotizing sialometaplasia, gran­
ulomatous giant cell sialadenosis, and spirocercosis. Both
sialadenosis and necrotizing sialometaplasia have shown
response to treatment with phenobarbital at an anticon­
vulsant dose (starting at 2 mg/kg, PO BID). Cases of spi­
rocercosis also respond to phenobarbital treatment, but
this is in addition to macrocyclic lactones used to elimi­
nate the microorganism. Granulomatous disease has
responded to treatment with glucocorticoids at an anti­
inflammatory dose. Necrotizing sialometaplasia has been
reported in a few cats. In contrast to dogs, excision of the
affected salivary glands in cats provided resolution of
signs with no recurrence reported.

545

VetBooks.ir

546

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Salivary mucoceles, also known as sialoceles, are swell­
ings created by the extravasation of saliva from the ducts
or salivary glands themselves. Extravasation of saliva can
not only cause a localized swelling, but also the inflam­
mation that results can lead to signs of discomfort.
Although trauma, foreign bodies, sialoliths, aberrant
parasite migration, and neoplasia have been reported to
lead to sialocele formation, sometimes the exact cause
for these swellings cannot be determined. With these
differentials in mind, advanced diagnostic imaging such
as CT or ultrasound should be considered for evaluation.
A difference in the imaging characteristics of these
lesions can be found when comparing acute with chronic
cases, and dystrophic mineralization can occur in very
long‐standing cases. In dogs, sialoceles arise more com­
monly in the cervical and sublingual regions. However,
the sublingual area seems to be more commonly affected
in cats. Sialoceles in the cervical, sublingual, and pharyn­
geal regions can all lead to difficulty swallowing and
breathing. Surgical removal of the glands involved is the
treatment of choice, and different approaches have been

described for the resection of mandibular/sublingual
and zygomatic glands to increase exposure and also
decrease the morbidity that can be associated with these
surgeries.

­Conclusion
Examination of the oral tissues and dental structures is
an essential component of physical examination. Dental
and oral disease is very commonly seen in our pets. The
systemic health of the patient should be thoroughly
assessed before attributing a presenting complaint of
anorexia to dental and oral disease alone. The anamnesis
will also prove to be helpful in guiding your treatment
approach when dealing with patients with concurrent
conditions. Staging treatment and triaging are at times
favorable for these patients to prevent very prolonged
anesthetic episodes that may endanger the health of our
compromised patients.

Further Reading
Oral mucosa. In Nanci A eds.: Ten Cate’s oral histology:
development, structure, and function, ed 8, St. Louis,
2013, Mosby, pp 278–310.2.
Gelber HB: Alimentary system and the peritoneum,
omentum, mesentery and peritoneal cavity. In Zachary
JF, McGavin MD, eds.: Pathologic basis of veterinary
disease, ed 5, Philadelphia, 2012, Elsevier, pp 322–401.3.
Bulkacz J, Carranza FA: Defense mechanisms of the
gingiva. In Newman MG, Takei HH, Carranza FA, eds.:

Carranza’s clinical periodontology, ed 11, Philadelphia,
2012, Elsevier, pp 66–70.4.
Salivary glands. In Nanci A eds.: Ten Cate’s oral histology:
development, structure, and function, ed 8, St. Louis,
2013, Mosby, pp 253–277.
Reiter AM: Dental and oral diseases. In Little SE, ed.: The
cat: clinical medicine and management, ed 1, St. Louis,
2012, Saunders, pp 329–370.

VetBooks.ir

547

51
Gastritis and Gastric Ulceration in Dogs and Cats
Katie Tolbert, DVM, PhD, ADCVIM (SAIM) and Emily Gould, DVM, MS
College of Veterinary Medicine, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA

­Normal Gastric Mucosal Barrier
Function
The gastric mucosal barrier is provided by the luminal
production and secretion of protective factors, an intact
epithelial lining, and a rich mucosal blood supply.
Mucosal secretions including bicarbonate, mucus,
immunoglobulins, and anti-bacterial substances p
­ romote
the integrity of the mucosa and protect the underlying
epithelium from noxious insults. Potential insults to the
gastric mucosa include diffusion of luminal acid and
pepsin, fluctuations in temperature and osmolality, and
translocation of ingested bacteria. The gastric mucosal
barrier is bolstered by a single layer of epithelial cells
which is capable of rapid repair following injury. The
local production of prostaglandins acts to stimulate
bicarbonate and mucus secretion, decrease gastric acid
secretion, and promote a healthy gastrointestinal
mucosa. The total flow of blood through the gastric
mucosa can be increased to clear noxious substances
produced during the inflammatory response and deliver
oxygen and bicarbonate to injured epithelium.
Breakdown of the gastric mucosal barrier is a primary
source or consequence of nearly all causes of gastritis
and gastric ulceration.

­Etiology and Pathophysiology of
Gastritis
Canine and feline gastritis is defined as inflammation of
the stomach and occurs in response to many stimuli.
Gastritis can be classified by duration of clinical signs
(acute or chronic) and by histopathologic changes
(e.g., lymphoplasmacytic, eosinophilic, fibrosis, atrophy).
The release of a variety of inflammatory mediators,

including pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines,
eicosanoids (prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and thromboxanes), neuropeptides, nitric oxide, peroxidases, and
proteinases, perpetuate gastritis through increasing
exposure of the denuded epithelium and underlying
mucosa to toxic insults (e.g., gastric acid, bile acids,
­pepsin). As well as exerting direct effects on the gastric
mucosal cells, many of these mediators act to alter
mucosal permeability and blood flow.
Gastric ulceration, which can be a sequel of severe or
prolonged gastric inflammation and ischemia, is defined
as a defect in the gastric mucosa extending to the muscularis mucosa or through the muscularis propria. Ulcers
can be full thickness (perforating) or partial thickness.
Perforating ulcers can be associated with hemorrhage
and septic peritonitis and therefore are considered life
threatening when left untreated. Gastric ulceration is
more frequently reported in the dog than the cat, but as
observed with gastritis, toxic agents, drug‐induced reactions, neoplasia, severe systemic illness, and infectious
organisms can be injurious to the gastric mucosa in both
species.
A variety of etiologies have been implicated in the
development of canine and feline gastritis and gastric
ulceration (Tables 51.1 and 51.2). These include mechanical irritants, drugs, systemic illness, infections, breed‐
associated diseases, motility disorders, and occupational
and exercise‐related stressors.
Gastric foreign bodies and dietary indiscretion are
common causes of acute gastritis in dogs and cats.
Although the stomach is not the primary site of protein
absorption, dietary protein intolerance and food responsive disease can also be linked with gastritis in both dogs
and cats, albeit less frequently. The presentation of food
antigens to the gut‐associated lymphoid tissue in the
small intestine can initiate immediate or delayed hypersensitivity reactions capable of inducing vomiting with

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

548

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Table 51.1 Causes of gastritis in dogs and cats
Category

Dogs

Cats

Primary gastric

Dietary indiscretion, foreign body, IBD, food allergic, gastric
neoplasia (carcinoma, leiomyoma, leiomyosarcoma, mast cell
tumor)

IBD, alimentary small cell lymphoma, foreign body,
gastric neoplasia (lymphoma, carcinoma, leiomyoma,
leiomyosarcoma, mast cell tumor)

Systemic

Acute or end-stage organ (hepatic, renal) dysfunction,
anaphylactoid reaction, hypoadrenocorticism, pancreatitis,
sepsis, hypercoagulable states (Cushing disease, PLE, PLN),
portosystemic shunts

Acute or end-stage organ (renal) dysfunction,
pancreatitis, sepsis, hypereosinophilic syndrome,
eosinophilic fibrosing gastritis

Infectious

Viral (distemper, parvo, corona), bacterial (Helicobacter,
Clostridium, Salmonella, Campylobacter, E. coli), fungal
(Histoplasma), helminth (Gnathostoma binucleatum,
Physaloptera spp., Toxocara canis), oomycete (Pythium)

Bacterial (Helicobacter), helminth (Aonchotheca
putorii, Ollulanus tricuspis, Gnathostoma
binucleatum, Toxocara cati), feline dirofilariasis

Medication
related

NSAIDs, antibiotics (penicillins, tetracyclines,
chloramphenicol, lincosamides), chemotherapeutics

Same as dogs

Hyperacidity

Pancreatic gastrinomas, mastocytosis

Same as dogs

Stress, exercise
induced

Surgery, Alaskan sled dogs (exercise induced)

Surgery, prolonged hospitalization

Breed related

Basenjis (immunoproliferative enteropathy), Norwegian
lundehund (atrophic gastritis, lymphangiectasia), Rottweilers
(eosinophilic enteropathy)

None known

Miscellaneous

Benign gastric hypertrophy, bilious vomiting syndrome

IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug; PLE, protein‐losing enteropathy; PLN, protein‐losing nephropathy.

Table 51.2 Causes of gastric ulceration in dogs and cats
Category

Specific causes

Ulcerogenic drugs

NSAIDs (selective and nonselective), steroids (in combination with NSAID or additional risk factor )

Primary gastric

Neoplasia (carcinoma, lymphoma, mast cell tumor, leiomyosarcoma), IBD, gastric foreign body

Systemic disease

Hepatic dysfunction, hypoadrenocorticism, GDV, pancreatitis, sepsis, hypercoagulability (DIC, PLE, PLN),
hyperacidity (gastrinoma, mastocytosis)

Stress

Surgery, severe critical illness

Infectious

Helminths (Aonchotheca putorii, Ollulanus tricuspis, Gnathostoma binucleatum, Toxocara cati), fungal
(histoplasmosis), oomycete (pythiosis)

Miscellaneous

Toxic/caustic substances, ingestion of sharp/perforating objects, thermal injury secondary to foodstuffs,
occupation related (Alaskan sled dogs), iatrogenic (perforation during gastroscopy)

DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; GDV, gastric dilation‐volvulus; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; NSAID, nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drug; PLE, protein‐losing enteropathy; PLN, protein‐losing nephropathy.

­secondary gastritis. Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
is considered to be a predisposing factor for gastric
ulceration, but this is a relatively uncommon complication of IBD.
Invasive gastric and nongastric tumors resulting in
gastric hyperacidity cause physical damage to the gastric
mucosal barrier that can incite the development of secondary gastritis and gastric ulceration. Primary gastric
neoplasms represent 1% of all cancers diagnosed in companion animals. Gastric carcinoma (most common in the
dog), lymphoma (most common in the cat), leiomyomas,

leiomyosarcomas, and mast cell tumors are the most frequently reported in association with gastritis. Mast cell
tumors, systemic mastocytosis, and pancreatic gastrinomas increase the risk of ulceration due to the overproduction of histamine and gastrin, respectively. Mast cell
tumors and gastrinomas were overrepresented in one
large literature review of cats with gastroduodenal
ulceration.
Nonneoplastic, proliferative masses associated with
gastritis include gastric polyps and benign gastric
­hypertrophy or hyperplasia with accompanying gastritis.

VetBooks.ir

51 Gastritis and Gastric Ulceration in Dogs and Cats

Chronic hypertrophic pyloric gastropathy has been
­documented in many breeds and usually manifests with
clinical signs of pyloric outflow obstruction.
Drugs, household chemicals, and plants are also a
­frequent cause of gastritis in dogs and cats. A list of
common plants and household chemicals associated
­
with gastritis may be found in an excellent review by
Webb and Twedt (see Further Reading list).
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), a
leading cause of gastritis and gastric ulceration in companion animals, are both directly and indirectly injurious
to the gastric epithelium as a result of being weak
acids and via their inhibitory effect on prostaglandin
production, respectively. Aspirin, flunixin meglumine,
indomethacin, ibuprofen, acetaminophen, ketorolac,
deracoxib, and carprofen have all been associated with
the development of gastric lesions. Nonselective COX
NSAIDs (e.g., aspirin) are the most ulcerogenic and
should be used with caution. NSAID‐induced ulcers are
often localized to the pyloric antrum and pylorus. COX‐2
selective NSAIDs (e.g., meloxicam) are considered less
ulcerogenic than nonselective inhibitors, but careful
monitoring is still advised as all NSAIDs can be ulcerogenic as well as delay healing of epithelial injury. NSAIDs
should be considered contraindicated and used sparingly
in companion animals that have concurrent diseases
with ulcer‐­inducing potential.
Corticosteroids at high doses can cause gastritis, but
they are unlikely to be the sole cause of gastric ulceration
except when given concurrently with an NSAID or in the
presence of other risk factors. Other drugs commonly
associated with gastritis in either ­species include some
antibiotics (e.g., penicillins, chloramphenicol, lincosamides, tetracyclines) and chemotherapeutic agents.
Ingestion of noxious chemicals (e.g., phenols/alcohols),
toxic substances (e.g., lead, Dieffenbachia), foodstuffs
capable of producing thermal damage and foreign bodies
has also been reported to cause gastritis and ulceration.
Systemic illness (e.g., hepatic, renal, neurologic or endocrine disease) and/or conditions causing poor gastrointestinal (GI) perfusion (e.g., hypoadrenocorticism,
gastric dilation‐volvulus, thromboembolic disease) can
trigger gastric inflammation and/or gastric ulceration.
Ulcer development in animals with hepatic dysfunction
most commonly results from compromised hemodynamics. Although severe renal dysfunction results in
decreased elimination of uremic toxins and gastrin, gastric ulcers are uncommonly documented in dogs and
cats with end-stage renal failure.
Infectious causes of gastritis include a variety of bacterial species, helminths, oomycetes, fungi, and viruses.
Most infectious agents rarely cause gastric signs alone,
however, and therefore are not discussed in detail in this
chapter. Although uncommon, infectious and parasitic

etiologies (e.g., pythiosis, gnathostomiasis, Aonchotheca
putorii, Toxocara cati) have also been associated with
gastric ulceration. In cats, heartworm infection may
cause vomiting and gastritis, while this is uncommon
in dogs.
Bilious vomiting syndrome, a frequently encountered
yet poorly understood gastric motility disorder in dogs,
can induce gastritis through reflux of injurious bile salts
into the stomach. Affected dogs generally vomit early in
the morning following an overnight fast.
Other less commonly encountered causes of gastritis
and gastric ulceration include occupational stress (e.g.,
racing Alaskan sled dogs) and breed‐related gastropathies, including atrophic gastritis in the Norwegian
lundehund and immunoproliferative enteropathy
­
in basenjis. Hypereosinophilic syndrome, particularly in
Rottweilers, and both hypereosinophilic syndrome and
feline gastrointestinal eosinophilic sclerosing fibroplasia (FGESF) in cats can cause severe gastritis and g­ astric
ulceration. Hospitalization and postoperative stress
may be a more common cause of ulceration in cats than
in dogs.
Helicobacter pylori and Related Organisms
The relationship between colonization with Helicobacter
spp. in canine and feline patients and the occurrence of
gastritis and gastric ulceration is unclear. Helicobacter
pylori is an important cause of gastritis and ulceration in
humans but not in companion animals, and the role of
other Helicobacter species as gastric pathogens in dogs
and cats is less well defined. Multiple Helicobacter spp.
(H. heilmannii, H. pylori, H. felis, H. bizzozeronii) have
been isolated in both dogs and cats with varying degrees
of gastritis. Thus, Helicobacter infection should only be
considered as a cause of clinical signs in dogs and cats
when associated with histopathologic evidence of gastric
inflammation, and after other causes have been excluded.

­Epidemiology of Gastric Disease
Consideration of the animal’s signalment aids in the
prioritization of differentials for gastritis and gastric
­
ulceration. For example, foreign body ingestion, dietary
indiscretion, and infectious causes of gastritis are more
commonly identified in younger animals. Dachshunds
and other chondrodystrophic breeds predisposed to
intervertebral disc disease might be at higher risk for
subclinical gastric ulceration with concurrent steroid
and/or NSAID therapy. German shepherd dogs have
been reported to be at greater risk for gastric ulceration
­following ibuprofen administration.

549

VetBooks.ir

550

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Gastritis resulting from inflammatory bowel d
­ isease,
systemic disorders, and neoplasia is more common in
middle‐aged to older companion a­ nimals. Breed‐related
gastritis, however (seen in Norwegian lundehunds,
Rottweilers, and basenjis) can occur at any age.
Adenocarcinomas develop in middle‐aged dogs (<10
years) more frequently than other gastric neoplasms,
and are usually located in the pyloric antrum or gastric
body (greater curvature). Collies, German shepherd
dogs, Staffordshire terriers, Bouviers des Flandres,
Norwegian elkhounds, and Belgian shepherds have
been identified as breeds at higher risk for developing
gastric carcinoma. Male dogs are overrepresented
among dogs with gastric neoplasms in some reports,
although a sex predisposition is not yet widely recognized. The Norwegian lundehund is at higher risk for
development of neuroendocrine carcinoma secondary
to chronic, severe atrophic gastritis. Lymphoma is
more prevalent in older cats, while middle‐aged cats
are more likely to be diagnosed with inflammatory
bowel disease. No breed predispositions are recognized for primary gastric cancer in cats, but one report
exists of two related Persians with confirmed gastritis
and adenocarcinoma.
Large‐breed, deep‐chested and working dogs (Great
Danes, standard poodles, Irish wolfhound, Newfound­
land, Weimaraner, mastiff and hound breeds, German
shepherd dogs) are at higher risk for gastric dilation‐­
volvulus (GDV) and secondary ulceration.
Young to middle‐aged, spayed female dogs are more
likely to develop hypoadrenocorticism and gastritis secondary to vomiting. Breeds such as the standard poodle,
Novia Scotia duck tolling retriever, Rottweiler, Great
Dane and Portuguese water dog are overrepresented.
Geographic location influences the risk of development
of fungal gastritis. Histoplasma capsulatum is one of the
most common canine mycotic pathogens in the United
States and manifests primarily with signs of gastrointestinal disease in young to middle‐aged dogs. Histoplasma
spp. infection should be ruled out in dogs displaying signs
of gastrointestinal disease that are living in endemic
regions such as the mid‐western, southern, and Gulf
Coast regions of the US, as well as Central America.
There is a higher prevalence of histoplasmosis in males
compared to females, with pointers, Weimeraners, and
Brittany spaniels identified as predisposed breeds.
Pythium insidiosum has been documented in dogs with a
travel history to or residing in tropical regions, the Gulf
Coast and mid‐western states, and northern California.
Male Labrador retrievers and German shepherd dogs are
overrepresented. Dogs infected with parvovirus, distemper virus, and coronavirus are often younger (less than
3 years of age), unvaccinated and from multidog environments (kennels, shelters).

Environmental history may also give clues towards
identification of uncommon causes of feline gastritis.
The nematode Ollulanus tricuspis is found in cats
throughout the US, whereas Aonchotheca putorii is more
common in tropical, temperate areas worldwide. Feline
dirofilariasis occurs more commonly in the mid‐west
and south‐east, with a higher prevalence also reported in
northern California and Florida.

­History and Clinical Signs of Gastritis
The duration (acute versus chronic) and severity of signs
in dogs and cats with gastritis and gastric ulceration vary
depending on the underlying etiology. Clinical signs can
range from overt gastrointestinal signs to only weight
loss. For animals with “garbage gut” or those that have
ingested caustic substances, toxins, ulcerogenic medications or foreign bodies, the onset of clinical signs is often
rapid (usually within a few hours). Clinical signs in
patients with gastric foreign body obstruction often
include lethargy, inappetence, vomiting, and antisocial
or “hiding” behavior. Owners should be questioned
regarding the possibility of exposure to yarn, string,
tinsel, needles or hair ties accessible in the house.
­
Intoxications secondary to chocolate (theobromine),
macadamia nuts, mycotoxins (e.g., mushrooms, sago
palms, blue‐green algae, molds), and marijuana should
be considered in dogs exhibiting vomiting in association
with an acute onset of neurologic abnormalities.
Viral etiologies should be suspected when there is an
outbreak of gastrointestinal signs in multiple dogs from
the same shelter or household. Viral gastroenteritis can
cause inappetence, fever, lethargy, vomiting, and small
bowel diarrhea. Distemper is known to cause severe
­neurologic signs, but manifests as gastrointestinal (inappetence, vomiting, diarrhea) and respiratory signs early
in the course of infection.
As the vast majority of episodes of drug‐induced gastritis and GI ulceration in the dog are caused by NSAID
use (with or without steroids), a full drug history should
be obtained for any dog (or cat) presenting with signs of
gastric disease. Dogs receiving chronic NSAID therapy
with gastrointestinal signs should be regularly evaluated
for gastritis. A change as subtle as hyporexia should raise
concern. A recent history of antibiotic administration
preceding development of clinical signs should raise
­suspicion for an adverse reaction to medication.
Infectious gastritis should be suspected if there is
travel history to an endemic area or there has been ingestion of uncooked or raw foods. Vomiting in animals with
pythiosis or histoplasmosis is often accompanied by
other clinical signs including diarrhea, cutaneous
lesions, lymphadenopathy, and ocular abnormalities

VetBooks.ir

51 Gastritis and Gastric Ulceration in Dogs and Cats

(uveitis, retinal lesions). Dogs suffering from fungal
mycosis may also exhibit anorexia and rapid weight loss,
and succumb quickly to their disease. Puppies or younger
dogs, especially those that have not received a broad‐
spectrum anthelminthic, are at higher risk for parasitic
disease.
Animals with neoplasia‐induced gastric disease may
have a more chronic history, with progressive signs of
gastrointestinal disease (e.g., weight loss, lethargy, anorexia, ptyalism, vomiting, diarrhea). Clinical signs of
lymphoma in cats are often protracted and mimic those
of inflammatory bowel disease, although cats with
lymphoblastic lymphoma often exhibit a more rapid
deterioration. Some gastric neoplasms can lead to gastroesophageal reflux, thus these animals can present
with signs of esophagitis including regurgitation or ptyalism following meals (see Chapter 52). Animals with
mastocytosis or gastrinomas can have evidence of
hematemesis, depending on the severity of gastric
lesions. Cutaneous lesions can also accompany systemic
mastocytosis and fungal disease.
Inflammatory bowel disease and food responsive gastroenteritis are two of the most common causes of gastritis in young and middle‐aged dogs. Common clinical
signs in animals with IBD can include weight loss (with or
without good appetite), lethargy, hyporexia or anorexia,
intermittent vomiting and either large or small bowel
diarrhea with large bowel diarrhea being more common.
Beef, wheat, lamb, egg, chicken, soy, and wheat are common dietary allergens, but any protein or carbohydrate
source is capable of eliciting an immune reaction.
Younger dogs that are presented with mild clinical signs
and predominantly diarrhea of large bowel origin are
more likely to have food‐responsive disease. Cats with
inflammatory bowel disease often exhibit weight loss,
hyporexia, anorexia, ptyalism, vomiting, and diarrhea.
Cutaneous lesions, lower airway abnormalities
(­coughing, tachypnea) and palpably thickened intestinal
loops on exam should increase the clinical suspicion
for eosinophilic gastroenteritis or hypereosinophilic
syndrome in cats.
Dogs and cats that develop gastritis secondary to systemic disease often have other clinical signs related to
the primary system involved. Hepatic dysfunction can
result in polyuria and polydipsia (PU/PD), petechiae or
ecchymosis secondary to coagulopathy, and neurologic
signs indicative of encephalopathy in severely affected
cases. Portosystemic vascular anomalies should be ruled
out in younger dogs with chronic or intermittent gastrointestinal and neurologic signs and inability to gain
weight. Suspicion of a shunt is particularly high if the
animal’s owners report a history of worsening neurologic
signs following ingestion of a meal. Vomiting secondary
to advanced kidney disease should be suspected in dogs

with PU/PD, weight loss, and a poor hair coat. Dogs with
hypoadrenocorticism commonly present for waxing and
waning lethargy, hyporexia, vomiting and soft stools or
small bowel diarrhea.
Cats with secondary causes of gastritis (e.g., hyperthyroidism, chronic kidney disease [CKD] or liver disease)
also typically display extragastrointestinal clinical signs.
Owners might note hyperactivity, weight loss, dull hair
coat, alopecia, and occasionally aggression in hyperthyroid cats. Clinical signs of renal and liver disease mimic
those seen in dogs, although uremic ulceration of the
tongue and palate might be noted more frequently in
cats. Uremic gastropathy, characterized by erosive or
ulcerative gastritis, has been a previously reported sequel
of renal dysfunction. Recent studies, however, suggest
this is not a common finding in cats with CKD.
Physical exam findings in companion animals with
gastritis or gastric ulceration are variable and depend on
the underlying etiology. Slightly thickened or “ropey”
small intestinal loops are often appreciated in both dogs
and cats with inflammatory bowel disease. Many of these
patients are moderately to severely underweight.
Abdominal lymphadenomegaly might be noted on
abdominal palpation in cats with IBD or GI lymphoma.
Pruritus and/or signs compatible with allergic dermatitis
might be noted in patients with food‐responsive gastritis. Cranial abdominal pain might be appreciated on
physical examination in cases of foreign body ingestion,
pancreatitis, gastric neoplasia, and/or severe GI ulceration. These animals might also be febrile. Linear foreign
bodies may become anchored to the base of a cat’s
tongue, so careful inspection of this area on physical
examination is critical. Depending on the severity and
chronicity of disease, patients can exhibit signs of dehydration, hyperthermia, and/or hypovolemic or septic
shock. Cardiac arrhythmias can also be noted secondary
to hypovolemia and ischemia. Frank blood or tarry stools
may be identified on rectal examination, but the absence
of these signs does not rule out gastric bleeding. Severe
or prolonged blood loss is often associated with pale
mucous membranes.
Neurologic abnormalities (e.g., myoclonus, nystagmus, tremors, seizures or inappropriate mentation, head
pressing, star gazing) are often observed in animals with
distemper virus, intoxications or hepatic dysfunction.
Pyrexia, cutaneous lesions, lymphadenopathy, and ocular lesions (uveitis, tapetal hyper‐ or hyporeflectivity,
fundic lesions) can occur with fungal infections. Tapetal
hemorrhage or a detached retina might be visible (secondary to systemic hypertension) during the fundic
exam of patients with renal dysfunction.
Cutaneous lesions such as edema, ulceration, and
abscessation are often found in dogs with systemic
­mastocytosis and fungal disease.

551

VetBooks.ir

552

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

­Diagnostic Approach to Suspected
Gastritis
Clinicopathologic Examination of the Gastritis
Patient
A minimum database of clinicopathologic testing,
including a complete blood count, serum chemistry,
urinalysis, and total thyroxine (in middle‐aged to older
cats), is typically recommended for dogs and cats being
presented with moderate to severe signs and/or a
chronic history of disease, prior to more invasive testing. Clinicopathologic abnormalities vary depending
on the underlying etiology, duration, and severity of
disease. Patients with peracute causes of gastric
­inflammation or ulceration (e.g., foreign body ingestion, intoxication or GDV) can lack bloodwork
­abnormalities in the early stages of the disease. However,
baseline bloodwork and imaging are recommended as
they can demonstrate evidence of GI bleeding or other
co‐morbidities or reveal an underlying predisposing
cause. Anemia is the most common laboratory finding
in dogs and cats with gastroduodenal ulceration.
Depending on the severity and chronicity of gastric
bleeding, the anemia can vary from regenerative to
nonregenerative with clinicopathologic features of
iron deficiency (e.g., microcytosis, hypochromasia).
Peripheral eosinophilia may be observed in dogs or cats
with infectious causes of gastritis or gastric ulceration,
hypoadrenocorticism or the eosinophilic enteropathies
such as hypereosinophilic syndrome or eosinophilic
IBD. Neutrophilic leukocytosis can be observed in
patients with hyperadrenocorticism, IBD or infectious
diseases.
An elevated blood urea nitrogen:creatinine ratio in the
presence of anemia strongly argues for further assessment of possible GI bleeding. Electrolyte derangements
may be present as a result of gastrointestinal losses (vomiting, diarrhea). The absence of a stress leukogram, with
or without altered serum sodium and potassium ratios
(<27:1) and/or hypoglycemia, hypocholesterolemia, and
hypoalbuminemia would support pursuit of additional
testing for hypoadrenocorticism.
Coagulation testing should be included as part of
the minimum database in patients with unidentified
causes of GI bleeding. Common causes of prolonged
clotting times in dogs with clinical signs of gastric
­disease include septicemia, hepatic failure, and rodenticide intoxication.
Fecal flotation, examination of vomitus, and empirical
anthelminthic treatment are recommended in animals
where parasitic disease is likely or before pursuing more
invasive diagnostic testing such as gastroscopy or exploratory laparotomy.

Diagnostic Imaging in Gastric Disease
Survey radiographs and abdominal ultrasonography
(AUS) can have variable results in patients with gastritis
and gastric ulceration. Neither condition should be
excluded on the basis of normal abdominal imaging.
Abdominal radiographs performed in patients with signs
of gastric disease can reveal radiopaque foreign bodies,
gastric and extragastric neoplasms (if large enough to distort normal anatomy) and/or other causes of inflammation and ulceration (e.g., pancreatitis, GDV). Gastric
neoplasms in both cats and dogs are rarely identified with
radiographs alone, except in cases of calcified (­radiopaque)
carcinomas. Abdominal effusion and pneumoperitoneum
are not specific for gastric perforation, but signal the need
for urgent exploration with additional imaging modalities
or exploratory surgery in a patient with compatible clinical signs. Mediastinal and esophageal masses can be
observed in dogs with pythiosis, so thoracic radiographs
are recommended for dogs with compatible clinical signs.
Ultrasonographic abnormalities observed in some
patients with gastric disease, particularly gastric ulceration, include disruption of normal wall layering and/or
focal gastric wall thickening. Hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and abdominal lymphadenopathy can be present in
dogs with neoplastic and/or infectious causes of gastric
disease. Gastric masses are often visible on AUS, but the
absence of a mass does not rule out infiltrative neoplasia.
Most commonly, changes on abdominal ultrasound are
nonspecific with abnormalities suggestive of, but not
diagnostic for, gastritis or gastrointestinal disease.
Gastric Histopathology
Histopathologic evaluation of biopsies (endoscopic or
full thickness) is required for the definitive diagnosis
of gastritis while diagnosis of ulceration is generally
made by visualization of the ulcerated mucosa and acquisition of biopsies with endoscopy or exploratory surgery.
However, the underlying cause is often not identified on
evaluation of gastric tissue, thus correct diagnosis often
requires consideration of the patient’s signalment, history, clinical signs, bloodwork, and imaging.
Gastroscopy or abdominal exploratory surgery are
the only antemortem methods for obtaining a definitive
diagnosis of gastric ulceration and gastric mucosal
biopsy specimens for histopathologic examination.
Animals with very diseased, friable tissue or preexisting
ulceration are at greater risk for endoscopic‐induced
perforation, so caution is warranted with gastroscopy in
patients where there is a suspicion of gastric ulceration.
Ulceration secondary to NSAID administration is found
more often in the pyloric antrum than other sites of the
stomach. Mastocytosis typically causes multiple diffuse

VetBooks.ir

51 Gastritis and Gastric Ulceration in Dogs and Cats

ulcerative lesions in dogs. Gastrointestinal disease secondary to infectious etiologies often requires histopathologic or immunohistochemical identification of the
organism. Helicobacter‐associated gastritis in cats and
dogs is definitively diagnosed by identification of the
organism in gastric biopsies using fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) or polymerase chain reaction
(PCR). Increased tissue urease activity and positive urea
breath tests have been correlated with the presence of
Helicobacter, but are also identified in the presence of
other urease‐producing bacteria and thus lack specificity. Special staining methods (Steiner staining) and
immunohistochemistry methods can aid in species
differentiation.
Gastritis and/or gastric ulceration secondary to gastric
neoplasms (carcinomas, lymphoma, mast cell tumors) or
gastrinomas can be identified via histopathologic
­examination of tissue (e.g., stomach, pancreas) biopsies.
Serum gastrin measurement provides a noninvasive test
when gastrinoma is suspected. Marked hypergastrinemia in the presence of gastroduodenal ulceration is suggestive of a pancreatic gastrinoma. Thus, a serum gastrin
measurement should be performed in any patient presenting for chronic gastritis and gastroduodenal ulceration where other systemic diseases are eliminated as
causes. Serum gastrin concentration should be interpreted cautiously in the face of acid suppressant treatment, which can result in ­
increased serum gastrin
concentrations.
Ancillary Diagnostic Testing in Gastric
Disease Patients
Testing for the presence of bacterial enteropathogens
such as E. coli, Clostridium, Campylobacter and
Salmonella spp. might be considered as an ancillary
diagnostic test for dogs ­presenting with fever, acute hemorrhagic diarrhea, and vomiting. However, results should
be interpreted with caution, as these organisms have
been isolated from the feces of healthy dogs and cats.
In cases where there is a high suspicion of gastrointestinal mycosis or oomycete disease, multiple diagnostics
are available for antemortem diagnosis. Pythium testing
includes serology, enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA), PCR or immunohistochemistry (IHC) of
infected tissues or blood. A quantitative urine antigen
enzyme immunoassay is available for Histoplasma
­detection. Pyogranulomatous lesions and visualization
of fungal organisms can be noted in biopsies obtained
from dogs with fungal gastritis within the liver, spleen,
­ iopsies
lymph nodes, or gastrointestinal tract. If present, b
of cutaneous lesions should be submitted for histopathology and fungal culture. Gastritis in the Norwegian
lundehund is often secondary to lymphangiectasia (diag-

nosed by endoscopic visualization and histopathology).
Evidence of protein‐losing enteropathy is variably
­present on bloodwork. It has been hypothesized that
this syndrome can also lead to development of gastric
carcinoma as a result of chronic, severe gastritis.

­Treatment of Gastritis and Gastric
Ulceration
The best course of therapy for animals with gastritis or
gastric ulceration is removal of the offending agent, if
possible, and amelioration of mucosal injury. Specific
therapies will depend on the identified cause (e.g., azole
treatment for Histoplasma infection, chemotherapy/­
surgery for neoplasia).
Nonspecific, supportive treatment for animals with
gastritis and vomiting should begin with restoration of
fluid deficits and normalization of electrolyte imbalances, if present. A list of commonly used medications
for gastritis and gastric ulceration is provided in
Table 51.3.
Acid suppressants (e.g., histamine‐2 receptor antagonists [H2RAs] and proton pump inhibitors [PPIs]) are
recommended in vomiting animals with clinical signs of
vomiting‐induced esophagitis but should not be used
prophylactically. H2RAs are competitive inhibitors for
the interaction of histamine with its receptor on the gastric parietal cell but differ in potency (famotidine > ranitidine > cimetidine). In contrast, PPIs (e.g., omeprazole,
pantoprazole, esomeprazole) are inactivators of the proton pump and are more effective than H2RAs in raising
both feline and canine intragastric pH. Thus, PPIs,
administered twice-daily, are considered the treatment
of choice when concern for acid‐induced tissue injury
exists. Preliminary evidence suggests that PPIs are more
effective when given alone than in combination with
H2RAs in dogs for the treatment of upper GI ulceration.
Antiemetics (e.g., 5‐HT3 and neurokinin receptor antagonists) may be administered to vomiting animals once
mechanical obstruction has been ruled out as a cause of
the clinical signs.
Cytoprotective agents (e.g., sucralfate) can be given,
once vomiting is controlled, if there is evidence or suspicion of gastrointestinal bleeding. Sucralfate is most
effective at an acidic pH and can interfere with appropriate absorption of pH‐dependent drugs. Thus,
sucralfate should be administered as a slurry at least
1–2 hours before or after administration of meals and
other medications. The PGE1 analog misoprostol is
indicated for use in NSAID‐induced toxicoses but does
not promote healing in non‐NSAID‐induced causes of
GI ulceration.

553

VetBooks.ir

554

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Table 51.3 Commonly used medications for canine and feline gastritis
Drug

Mechanism of action

Formulations

Doses

Omeprazole;
Esomeprazole

Proton pump inhibitor (PPI): inactivator
of parietal cell H+ ‐ K+ ‐ ATPase pumps;
inhibits acid production

Tablet, capsule (Prilosec
Over the Counter®)
Omeprazole reformulated
paste (Gastrogard®;
Nexium®)

1 mg/kg PO BID (canine, feline)
1 mg/kg IV BID (canine)

Pantoprazole

Same as above (PPI)

Injectable (Protonix®)

1 mg/kg slow IV BID (canine)

Famotidine

Histamine‐2 receptor antagonist:
competitive inhibitor of histamine
receptors on gastric parietal cell,
decreases acid production; tolerance with
repeated dosing

Tablet (Pepcid AC®)
Injectable

1 mg/kg PO BID (canine, feline)
1 mg/kg IV BID (canine, feline)

Ranitidine

Same as above although less efficacious;
prokinetic activity

Tablet

1.5–2.0 mg/kg PO BID (canine, feline)

Sucralfate

Cytoprotective agent: sucrose‐sulfate‐
aluminum complex that cross‐links with
acid to form protective barrier

Tablet (administered as
liquid slurry)
Oral liquid suspension
(Carafate)

250 mg PO TID (small dogs, cats)
500 mg PO TID (small to medium dogs)
1 g PO TID (large dogs)

Misoprostol

Prostaglandin (PGE)1 agonist: used for
prevention of NSAID‐induced
gastrointestinal injury

Tablet (Cytotec)

3 μg/kg PO BID (canine)

Metoclopramide

Antiemetic (dogs only): dopamine
receptor antagonist which acts to
decrease nausea and vomiting; prokinetic
activity

Tablet (Reglan)
Injectable (Reglan)

0.2–1 mg/kg PO, SC QID (canine)
CRI: 1 mg/kg/day (canine)

Chlorpromazine

Antiemetic (dogs only): same mechanism
of action as metoclopramide

Tablet (Thorazine)
Injectable

4–8 mg/per dog (do not exceed
0.5 mg/kg) PO BID (canine)
0.2–0.4 mg/kg SC, IM TID (canine)

Maropitant

Antiemetic: neurokinin (NK1) receptor
antagonist that works at the
chemoreceptor trigger zone (CRTZ) to
decrease nausea and vomiting

Tablet (Cerenia®)
Injectable

1 mg/kg SC q24h (canine, feline)
2 mg/kg PO q24h (canine, feline)

Ondansetron

Antiemetic (canine, feline): serotonin
5‐HT3 receptor antagonist, no effect on
dopamine receptors

Tablet (Zofran®)
Injectable (Zofran®)

0.1–0.2 mg/kg IV BID (canine)
0.1–1 mg/kg PO q24h BID (canine)
0.5 mg/kg IV, PO BID (feline)

Cisapride

Prokinetic: increases lower esophageal
peristalsis and increases gastric emptying.
Also effective colonic prokinetic

Compounded tablet or
suspension

0.1–0.5 mg/kg PO BID‐TID (canine)
2.5 mg PO TID (felines <10 lb), 5 mg PO
TID (felines >10 lb)

ATP, adenosine triphosphate; BID, twice a day (bis in die); CRI, constant rate infusion; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; NSAID, nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drug; PO, by mouth (per os); QID, four times a day (quater in die); SC, subcutaneous; TID, three times a day (ter in die).

Prokinetic drugs (e.g., cisapride, ranitidine, erythromycin, metoclopramide) canbe used for the treatment of
gastric motility disorders (e.g., bilious vomiting syndrome) when mechanical obstruction has been ruled out.
Dietary restriction (<24 hours with access to water at
all times) can be considered for dogs with nonobstructive acute gastritis but should be used with caution in
cats as they are predisposed to hepatic lipidosis with
even short periods of dietary rest. Dietary modification
(hydrolyzed, limited ingredient, and/or low fat) is neces-

sary for animals with chronic gastritis where diet is
­suspected to be the cause of gastric signs.
Broad‐spectrum anthelminthic drugs are recommended in animals when an underlying cause of gastritis cannot be identified and/or prior to pursuit of
invasive diagnostics (e.g., endoscopy, surgery). Triple
antimicrobial therapy with amoxicillin, metronidazole,
and bismuth subsalicylate has been used in dogs to
treat Helicobacter‐associated gastritis, but this course
of therapy might not eradicate infection.

VetBooks.ir

51 Gastritis and Gastric Ulceration in Dogs and Cats

­Prognosis
The prognosis for patients with gastritis and/or gastric
ulceration ranges from excellent to guarded depending
on the underlying etiology, severity of disease at
presentation, and individual response to therapy.
­
Uncomplicated, acute disease in younger, otherwise

healthy animals without significant co‐morbidities is
usually associated with a good prognosis. In contrast,
onset of significant gastric disease and ulceration in
older animals with chronic histories of gastrointestinal
disease or other co‐morbidities is often associated with
progression of an underlying disease process and can
carry a more guarded prognosis.

­Further Reading
Allenspach K, Wieland B, Grone A, Gaschen F.
Chronic enteropathies in dogs: evaluation of risk
factors for negative outcome. J Vet Intern Med
2007; 21: 700–8.
Liptak JM, Hunt GB, Barrs VR, et al. Gastroduodenal
ulceration in cats: eight cases and a review of the
literature. J Feline Med Surg 2002; 4: 27–42.

Parkinson S, Tolbert K, Messenger K, et al. Evaluation of the
effect of orally administered acid suppressants on
intragastric pH in cats. J Vet Intern Med 2015; 29: 104–12.
Stanton ME, Bright RM. Gastroduodenal ulceration in
dogs. J Vet Intern Med 1989; 3: 238–44.
Webb C, Twedt DC. Canine gastritis. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2003; 33: 969–85, v–vi.

555

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

557

52
Disorders of the Esophagus
Silvia Funes, DVM, MS, DACVIM (SAIM)1 and Craig Ruaux, BVSc (Hons), PhD, MACVSc, DACVIM (SAIM)2
1
2

VCA Bay Area Veterinary Specialists and Emergency Hospital, San Leandro, CA, USA
School of Veterinary Science, Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand

­Normal Esophageal Anatomy
and Physiology
The esophagus is a readily distensible, muscular tube
that transports ingested material from the oropharynx to
the stomach. It is divided into three sections –the cervical, thoracic and abdominal segments – and enclosed at
each end by a muscular sphincter (the upper and lower
esophageal sphincters).
The esophageal wall has four distinct layers: adventitia, muscularis, submucosa, and mucosa. The entire
muscularis layer in the canine esophagus is composed of
skeletal muscle, whereas the distal one‐third of the feline
esophagus consists of smooth muscle. This difference in
muscular structure may partly explain the differing prevalence of esophageal disease in dogs and cats, with cats
relatively rarely presenting with esophageal diseases
other than foreign bodies or squamous cell carcinoma.
The upper esophageal sphincter is composed of fibers
from the cricopharyngeus muscle and thyropharyngeus
muscle. In dogs, the lower esophageal sphincter is
­composed of an outer layer of striated muscle and an
inner layer of smooth muscle, while in cats the lower
esophageal sphincter consists of smooth muscle only.
Swallowing is a complex motor reflex requiring coordinated action of the tongue, oropharynx, upper esophageal sphincter, and esophagus to ensure that food
enters the gastrointestinal tract and not the upper airways. When swallowing is not occurring, the upper and
lower esophageal sphincters are tightly closed and the
esophagus is relaxed. During swallowing, the upper
esophageal sphincter relaxes and the food bolus is
pushed into the cervical section of the esophagus. A primary peristaltic wave is generated, transferring the
bolus to the stomach. This primary peristaltic wave will
be followed by secondary waves if the esophagus is not

cleared of material. Relaxation of the lower esophageal
sphincter accompanies the primary peristaltic wave,
allowing entry of the food bolus into the stomach.
The most common esophageal disorders encountered
in private practice include esophagitis, megaesophagus,
esophageal strictures, and esophageal foreign bodies.
Less commonly encountered disorders include great
vessel anomalies, lower esophageal hiatal disorders,
esophageal neoplasia, spirocercosis, cricopharyngeal
dysphagia, esophageal diverticulae, and esophageal
fistulae.

­Recognition of Esophageal
Disorders
Common clinical signs of esophageal disease include
regurgitation, dysphagia (difficult swallowing), ptyalism
(excessive salivation), extension of the head and neck,
repeated swallowing attempts, and pain. Regurgitation is
a hallmark sign of esophageal disease and needs to be
­differentiated from vomiting. Regurgitation is defined as
the passive retrograde expulsion of material from the
esophagus while vomiting is an active process mediated
by a central reflex. Vomiting is usually associated with
abdominal contractions and might show prodromal signs
of nausea (lip smacking, increased salivation, discomfort
or anxiety) or the presence of bile in the ejected material.
Oropharyngeal dysphagia, a less common clinical
syndrome, should be differentiated from regurgitation.
­
Clinical signs of oropharyngeal dysphagia include multiple
swallowing attempts with a single bolus, dropping food or
water from the mouth or nostrils, and difficulty drinking.
When possible, having the owner video record the episodes may be helpful in distinguishing oropharyngeal
swallowing disorders from esophageal motility disorders.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

558

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

One of the most frequent complications of esophageal disorders is aspiration pneumonia; this is the most
common cause of death in animals with esophageal
motility disorders. Dogs with aspiration pneumonia
secondary to esophageal disease can present with fever,
inappetence, coughing, mucopurulent nasal discharge,
and pulmonary crackles. Dogs with chronic and severe
esophageal dysfunction may present with weight loss
and poor body condition scores secondary to
­inadequate food intake. Dogs with foreign bodies or
esophagitis are usually painful during swallowing.
Foreign bodies are often associated with an acute onset
of regurgitation. The presence of esophageal disease at
the time of weaning is more commonly seen with congenital idiopathic megaesophagus, vascular ring anomalies or congenital stenosis. The history may indicate a
recent anesthetic procedure that could cause reflux
esophagitis and potential stricture, exposure to caustic
medications (e.g., doxycycline) or foreign bodies. Signs
of concurrent neuromuscular disease can be seen in
dogs with megaesophagus secondary to myasthenia
gravis.

­Diagnostic Approach to Esophageal
Disease
Plain thoracic and cervical radiographs are the initial
step in all animals with clinical signs and histories consistent with esophageal disease. Radiographs are useful
in the identification of megaesophagus, radiopaque foreign bodies, and hiatal defects. In addition, the lungs and
mediastinum can be evaluated for any evidence of aspiration pneumonia or pneumomediastinum associated
with esophageal perforation.
A contrast esophagram should be considered when
plain radiographs do not identify a lesion. The contrast
study can be performed under fluoroscopy or using
plain radiography (see Chapter 53). The use of fluoroscopy helps in the evaluation of esophageal motility.
Contrast studies can be useful in the identification of
radiolucent foreign material, strictures or neoplasia.
Contrast esophagram studies are usually contraindicated in animals with megaesophagus because of the
high risk of aspiration pneumonia. A water‐soluble iodinated contrast agent is preferred if esophageal perforation is suspected.
Esophagoscopy can be useful for the diagnosis of
esophageal neoplasia, esophagitis, strictures, and perforation. This minimally invasive procedure allows the
direct visualization of the esophageal mucosa and lumen
and can be used to obtain biopsies, retrieve foreign bodies, balloon esophageal strictures or deploy esophageal
stents.

­Specific Esophageal Disorders
Megaesophagus
Congenital Megaesophagus

Megaesophagus is a condition characterized by diffuse
esophageal dilation and decreased or absent esophageal
motility. Megaesophagus may be a congenital or acquired
(adult‐onset) disease. A familial predisposition has been
identified in several breeds including the Great Dane,
German shepherd, Irish setter, Chinese shar‐pei,
Newfoundland, miniature Schnauzer, Labrador retriever
and fox terrier breeds, as well as Siamese cats. In the
wirehaired fox terrier, congenital megaesophagus is
inherited as a simple autosomal‐recessive trait, while in
miniature Schnauzers it is transmitted as either a simple
autosomal‐recessive or dominant trait. Affected dogs
usually start having clinical signs of regurgitation at or
shortly after weaning.
The main differential diagnosis that should be considered in young dogs with regurgitation at the time of
weaning is a congenital vascular ring anomaly. Plain
radiographs are usually sufficient to differentiate between
these disorders, although contrast studies are necessary
in some cases.
The etiopathogenesis of congenital megaesophagus is
unclear. Esophageal motility and nerve stimulation studies in dogs with megaesophagus indicate a defect in the
afferent neural pathway, while the efferent neural pathway appears to be intact.
The prognosis for congenital megaesophagus is
guarded to poor. Some dogs can be managed for months
to years while others rapidly succumb due to uncontrolled regurgitation and aspiration pneumonia.
Breeding of affected patients is not recommended.
Treatment details for megaesophagus are discussed
below.
Acquired Megaesophagus

Acquired megaesophagus can occur in any breed or age.
Acquired megaesophagus may be primary (idiopathic)
or secondary to multiple disorders, particularly diseases
causing neuromuscular dysfunction.
The most common cause of secondary acquired megaesophagus in dogs is myasthenia gravis(MG). MG may
be congenital (rare) or acquired. Acquired MG is an
autoimmune disorder characterized by autoantibodies
directed against the acetylcholine (Ach) receptors of
skeletal neuromuscular junctions. These antibodies bind
to the Ach receptors, reducing the number of receptors
available for normal neuromuscular transmission. When
acetylcholine is released from presynaptic vesicles at the
nerve terminal, it is unable to bind to the receptors on
the postsynaptic muscle fiber membrane. Depending on

VetBooks.ir

52 Disorders of the Esophagus

the clinical presentation, MG can be classified as generalized, focal or acute fulminant. Generalized MG usually
presents with generalized muscular weakness that worsens after exercise; megaesophagus has been well documented in these cases. Acute fulminant MG usually
presents as a flaccid tetraparesis and acute respiratory
distress.
The gold standard for the diagnosis of acquired MG is
the detection of serum autoantibodies directed against
Ach receptors. An Ach receptor antibody concentration
of ≥0.6 nmol/L is considered positive. Approximately
2% of dogs with generalized MG, however, are negative
for Ach receptor antibodies. A presumptive diagnosis
can be made by a positive response to an ultra short‐acting anticholinesterase agent (Tensilon test: edrophonium chloride IV at 0.1–0.2 mg/kg). This test can lead to
a cholinergic crisis in nonmyasthenic patients or if accidentally overdosed, producing bronchoconstriction,
bradycardia, salivation, lacrimation, retching, diarrhea,
and vomiting. In this situation, atropine sulfate should be
administered IV (0.02–0.04 mg/kg IV). Dogs with focal
or generalized MG are treated with anticholinesterase
agents such as pyridostigmine bromide (1–3 mg/kg PO
q8–12 h or 0.01–0.03 mg/kg/h as a constant rate IV
­infusion) or neostigmine bromide (2 mg/kg/day PO in
divided doses to effect or 0.04 mg/kg IM q6h).
Focal MG usually affects the motor fibers of cranial
nerves innervating the larynx and pharynx.
Megaesophagus associated with focal MG can be misdiagnosed as idiopathic acquired megaesophagus, and
assessment of anticholinesterase antibody titers is
strongly recommended in the work‐up of the great
majority of dogs with esophageal motility disorders.
Endocrine diseases such as hypoadrenocorticism and
hypothyroidism have historically been associated with
megaesophagus. Megaesophagus has been reported in
dogs with primary, secondary and atypical hypoadrenocorticism. Proposed causes include altered muscle carbohydrate metabolism due to a lack of physiologic
cortisol production, and the effects of abnormal sodium
and potassium concentrations on membrane polarization. An adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulation test is necessary for the diagnosis. Although a
definitive association between hypothyroidism and megaesophagus has not been proven, there are reports of
dogs with hypothyroidism and megaesophagus. There is
also an association between MG and hypothyroidism
and thyroid function should be evaluated concurrently
with diagnostic testing for MG.
Megaesophagus has also been described as a paraneoplastic syndrome. According to one study, megaesophagus was present in 40% of dogs with thymoma. Thymoma
also has been associated with MG in dogs and cats.
Complete thymus resection can result in resolution of

megaesophagus. However, nonresectable thymoma in
dogs with megaesophagus has a poor prognosis.
Idiopathic megaesophagus is the most common cause
of megaesophagus in dogs. It usually affects large‐breed
dogs between 5 to 12 years old. The etiopathogenesis is
unknown. There is no sex or breed predilection. Many
dogs affected with idiopathic megaesophagus have a very
dilated and aperistaltic esophagus.
Treatment of Megaesophagus
The treatment of dogs with idiopathic megaesophagus is
entirely supportive and symptomatic, while animals with
acquired megaesophagus should be treated specifically
for the underlying disease. Thoracic radiographs are
recommended to monitor and document esophageal
­
dilation and evaluate for aspiration pneumonia.
Frequent feeding of small, high‐calorie meals with the
patient in a cranially elevated position will help meet
nutritional requirements and reduce regurgitation.
Upright feeding, holding the dog in vertical position, or
using “Bailey” chairs are often effective strategies for
controlling regurgitation in many dogs. Very weak
patients or those in whom the regurgitation is uncontrollable might benefit from placement of a gastrostomy
tube. The optimal food consistency depends on the
patient and should be tailored to each individual dog.
The most common complications of megaesophagus
are aspiration pneumonia and esophagitis. Aspiration
pneumonia should be treated using broad‐spectrum
antibiotics. Culture and sensitivity testing of a transtracheal wash or bronchoalveolar lavage sample is useful to
guide antibiotic choice. Esophagitis can also worsen
megaesophagus and lead to strictures.
The use of prokinetic medications in dogs with megaesophagus has not been shown to have any benefit.
Metoclopramide and cisapride exert their actions on
smooth muscle and do not have any action on skeletal
muscle, thus they are not useful in dogs with esophageal
hypomotility. These medications may also increase the
tone of the lower esophageal sphincter, decreasing
esophageal emptying. In cases of esophageal reflux,
however, these medications might be useful because they
decrease the episodes of reflux and esophagitis.
Bethanecol binds and stimulates cholinergic (muscarinic) receptors and may be helpful in stimulating
esophageal propagating contractions.
Prognosis for Animals with Megaesophagus
The prognosis for patients with megaesophagus depends
on the underlying disease and the presence of secondary
complications such as aspiration pneumonia. In dogs
with MG, resolution of megaesophagus can occur within

559

VetBooks.ir

560

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

the first six months. Dogs with congenital megaesophagus have a more guarded prognosis. Some dogs can
recover and acquire normal esophageal function if
­dietary management is begun early. The prognosis for
idiopathic megaesophagus in adult dogs is poor and
spontaneous recovery rarely occurs. Most dogs eventually die due to aspiration pneumonia.

­Esophagitis
Esophagitis can be defined as chronic or acute inflammation of the esophageal mucosa. Esophagitis can be
caused by a chemical or caustic injury (acid, drug‐
induced), esophageal foreign body, gastroesophageal
reflux, radiation, or food retention secondary to megaesophagus. The degree of inflammation can be mild, with
lesions localized in the mucosa, or severe, affecting the
muscularis layer.
The administration of oxytetracycline and doxycycline
has been associated with esophagitis in cats. Other orally
administered medications including clindamycin, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, and bisphosphonates
can also produce esophagitis.
Esophageal foreign bodies can cause severe esophageal
inflammation in dogs and cats. They are usually located
in the thoracic inlet, at the base of the heart or the lower
esophageal sphincter.
Gastroesophageal reflux is a consequence of movement of gastric content into the esophagus. Exposure of
the mucosa to the refluxed gastric acid, digestive
enzymes, and bile acids can rapidly induce inflammation. Gastroesophageal reflux has been associated with
anesthesia, hiatal hernias, neoplasia affecting the distal
esophagus or lower esophageal sphincter, and delayed
gastric emptying. Anesthesia is a known risk factor for
gastroesophageal reflux. The duration of the anesthesia
and preanesthetic agents used appear to influence the
risk of gastroesophageal reflux. Medications that
decrease the lower esophageal tone, such as thiopentone,
propofol, morphine, xylazine, and atropine, can increase
the risk of reflux. Prolonged fasting (24 hours) before
anesthesia is associated with a higher risk of gastroesophageal reflux.
Clinical signs of esophagitis include decreased appetite, odynophagia (painful swallowing) or dysphagia, ptyalism, coughing, and regurgitation. Some animals only
show subtle signs with decreased appetite and increased
salivation. Clinical signs consistent with esophagitis 1–4
days after an anesthetic procedure are suggestive of
esophageal reflux, and should be managed aggressively
to decrease the risk of esophageal stricture formation.
Dogs with chronic vomiting should be monitored closely.
The final diagnosis of esophagitis is done by direct

­visualization of the esophageal mucosa via endoscopy.
Focal or diffuse mucosal erythema with increased friability is often seen.
Treatment
Treatment of esophagitis is focused on the elimination
of the underlying cause and allowing inflammation to
resolve. Esophageal foreign objects need to be treated
as an emergency and retrieved as soon as possible.
Administration of drugs associated with esophagitis
(doxycycline, oxytetracycline, clindamycin) should be
discontinued. The main cornerstones of the treatment
of esophagitis are acid suppression, mucosal protection
via sucralfate administration, and supportive care. In
some cases, supportive care may require interventions
to provide nutritional support, such as percutaneous
endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube placement. The
use of prokinetic medications is controversial, but is
recommended when reflux esophagitis is suspected.
The most common acid suppressants used in dogs
and cats are proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) and histamine‐2 receptor antagonists (H2‐blockers). Proton
pump inhibitors covalently bind to and irreversibly
inhibit the H+‐K+‐ATPase proton pumps. PPI medications are available in both oral (omeprazole) and parenteral (pantoprazole, esomeprazole, lansoprazole)
formulations. H2‐blockers act by blocking the action
of histamine on parietal cells in the gastric mucosa,
decreasing the production of acid by these cells.
PPIs have proven to be more effective at raising intragastric pH than histamine‐2 receptor antagonists.
Administration of PPIs twice daily (0.7–1 mg/kg q12h)
rather than once daily is recommended to effectively
increase the intragastric pH in both dogs and cats. The
combination of PPIs and H2‐blockers is not superior to
the administration of a PPI alone.
Sucralfate is an aluminum salt of a sulfated disaccharide that, when activated in an acidic environment, forms
a paste‐like material that binds to and protects exposed
submucosa and the mucosa from acid exposure.
Sucralfate is generally administered as a slurry 3–4 times
per day, separate from food and other medications.
Prokinetic medications such as metoclopramide and
cisapride are useful to increase the tone of the lower
esophageal sphincter and enhance gastric motility. In
cases of gastroesophageal reflux, the use of metoclopramide (2 mg/kg q24h as a constant rate infusion [CRI]) or
cisapride (0.5 mg/kg q8h PO) is recommended.
Anesthesia is the main cause of gastroesophageal
reflux and esophagitis in dogs and cats. The position
during anesthesia has not been identified as a risk factor.
The frequency of reflux is greatest in abdominal procedures. When acid reflux is confirmed, esophageal lavage

VetBooks.ir

52 Disorders of the Esophagus

with water, followed by 20 mL of 4.2% bicarbonate, is
recommended.
In severe cases of esophagitis, placement of a gastrostomy tube may be indicated to ensure adequate caloric
intake, while also reducing esophageal pain and further
irritation of the esophageal mucosa.

­Esophageal Strictures
Esophageal strictures arise as the result of severe esophageal inflammation affecting the muscularis layer. During
the healing process of these lesions, intramural fibrous
contraction may occur, leading to a band of scar tissue
that produces a circumferential narrowing of the esophageal lumen.
The main clinical signs associated with esophageal
strictures are regurgitation, weight loss, coughing, salivation, anorexia, odynophagia, and vomiting. Benign
esophageal strictures are usually a consequence of severe
esophagitis due to esophageal reflux secondary to anesthesia or foreign bodies. Malignant esophageal strictures
are associated with neoplasia. Strictures secondary to
gastroesophageal reflux are often located between the
thoracic inlet and the diaphragm, whereas strictures
­cranial to the thoracic inlet are usually associated with
foreign body injuries.
Clinical signs and the history of the patient will typically suggest the presence of an esophageal stricture.
Barium contrast studies, using conventional radiography
or fluoroscopy, are useful diagnostic tools. Endoscopic
visualization of esophageal stricture is the most reliable
method of diagnosis, and has the advantage that treatment can be immediately initiated. Circumferential narrowing of the esophagus, with intraluminal fibrous tissue
bands, is usually visualized.
Treatment
There are two preferred techniques typically used for the
treatment of benign esophageal strictures: bougienage
and ballooning.
Bougienage involves the use of rounded, rigid or semirigid instruments that are pushed through the esophagus
to progressively stretch the stricture. Different sizes are
used serially to gradually open the stricture. The bougienage technique applies both radial and shearing forces
to the fibrous tissue at the site of the stricture. Wire‐
guided bougienage appears to be safe and is commonly
associated with a good outcome.
Esophageal ballooning is performed by passing an
inflatable balloon into the stricture. The balloon dilates
and becomes rigid when inflated, applying a radial force
to the stricture. The balloons are positioned into the

lumen using endoscopy or fluoroscopy guidance. Balloon
dilation does not apply shearing forces to the stricture
tissue.
Esophageal ballooning and bougienage are reportedly
equally safe and effective. The number of repetitions of
the dilation necessary varies between patient (with most
requiring 1–4 sessions); both methods have success rates
of 70–88%. The interval between dilation attempts is
usually 7–10 days. Both methods have been associated
with complications, including mucosal tearing, hemorrhage, and esophageal perforation. When dilating an
esophageal stricture, the aim is to return the patient to
normal or at least manageable swallowing function that
will allow sufficient nutritional intake. Dilation of the
esophagus to the prestricture diameter is usually unnecessary, as many animals will show marked improvement
in swallowing function with less than complete dilation
of the esophagus.
During the series of dilation treatments, it is critical to
aggressively manage esophagitis and prevent further
damage from gastroesophageal reflux. Sucralfate suspensions, antacids (PPIs), and prokinetics (cisapride,
metoclopramide) are generally indicated to protect the
mucosa, reduce acid secretion and increase the tone of
the lower esophageal sphincter. The use of systemic
­corticosteroids is controversial in these patients and further studies are necessary to evaluate their efficacy.
Intralesional corticosteroid injection using triamcinolone can be used instead of systemic corticosteroids.
Mitomycin‐C can also be used topically at the stricture
site, after dilation, to reduce collagen formation and the
risk of recurrence of the stricture.

­Esophageal Foreign Bodies
Esophageal foreign bodies are more common in dogs
than in cats. The most common foreign bodies in dogs
are bone fragments and rawhide type chews. In cats,
string or linear foreign bodies attached to the base of the
tongue are the most frequently encountered. Esophageal
foreign bodies are most commonly found between the
base of the heart and the diaphragm.
Clinical signs associated with foreign bodies include
regurgitation, gagging, anorexia, and retching. The
severity of esophageal damage depends on both the type
and duration of the obstruction. Animals with esophageal perforation or aspiration pneumonia commonly
present obtunded, febrile, anorectic, and with coughing.
Radiopaque foreign bodies can be diagnosed using
thoracic radiographs. Thoracic radiographs are also useful to rule out the presence of aspiration pneumonia or
esophageal perforation. Contrast radiography is useful to
reveal radiolucent foreign material. Direct visualization

561

VetBooks.ir

562

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

of the foreign body using esophagoscopy confirms the
diagnosis, and is typically a prequel to treatment.
Treatment
Esophageal foreign bodies are considered medical emergencies. Esophagoscopy can be used to confirm and
retrieve the foreign material using a variety of grasping
instruments. Foreign bodies located close to the lower
esophageal sphincter may be able to be pushed into the
stomach. The long‐term prognosis is usually excellent
although short‐term complications are common. The
most common complications include esophagitis, aspiration pneumonia, and esophageal perforation (pneumothorax). Dogs with moderate and severe esophagitis
are more prone to develop strictures.
When extensive esophageal perforation or necrosis is
present, surgical removal is recommended. Esophageal
surgery has been associated with a higher risk of esophageal dehiscence due to the segmental blood supply, the
absence of a serosal layer and the movement and tension
of the surgical site. The most common complications
include dehiscence, pyothorax, and pleuritis. Transthoracic
esophagostomy retrieval of foreign bodies has been associated with a survival rate of 77–93%.
Medical treatment for esophagitis is necessary after
retrieving the foreign material. Recheck thoracic radiographs are useful to identify pneumothorax and/or
pneumomediastinum secondary to esophageal perforation. Small esophageal perforations may be able to be
medically managed with antibiotics and supportive care.
In cases of severe esophageal injury, after retrieval of the
foreign body, the placement of a gastrostomy tube should
be considered.

­Vascular Ring Anomalies
Vascular ring anomalies (VRAs) are congenital malformations of the embryonic aortic arches that affect both

dogs and cats, producing esophageal constriction.
Persistent right aortic arch (PRAA) is the most common anomaly in dogs and cats; this anomaly is associated with entrapment of the thoracic esophagus. PRAA
occurs when the aorta develops from the embryonic
right fourth aortic arch rather than the left fourth aortic arch. As a consequence, the esophagus is constricted
between the ligamentum arteriosum (LA) dorsally,
pulmonary artery on the left, aorta on the right, and
the heart ventrally. Although VRAs have been reported
in many breeds of dogs and cats, German shepherds,
Irish setters and the Labrador retriever may be
predisposed.
Regurgitation and failure to thrive are the most common clinical signs and are often present at the time of
weaning. Thoracic radiographs often reveal dilation of
the esophagus cranial to the base of the heart; plain radiography is also useful to screen for concurrent aspiration
pneumonia. When plain radiographs are nondiagnostic,
a barium contrast study may aid in visualization of
esophageal obstruction at the base of the heart. Direct
visualization of the esophageal mucosa via esophagoscopy may be useful to differentiate between extraluminal
and intraluminal compression.
Treatment
Definitive treatment of PRAA involves surgical ligation
and transection of the ligamentum arteriosum via thoracoscopy or thoracotomy. Esophageal hypomotility and
regurgitation may persist after surgical ligation and the
risk of this outcome increases with the duration of clinical signs. In a recent study evaluating the short‐ and
long‐term outcome following surgical repair of PRAA,
the long‐term outcome for dogs was excellent in 30%,
good in 57%, and poor in 13%. Patients with persistent
regurgitation after surgery are treated supportively as
described for idiopathic megaesophagus, with upright
feeding, small, frequent meals, and restraint of the
­animal in a “Bailey” type chair.

Further Reading
Johnson BM, DeNovo RB, Mears EA. Canine
Megaesophagus. In: Bonagura JD, Twedt DC, eds. Kirk’s
Current Vet Therapy XV. Philadelphia, PA: WB
Saunders; 2014: e224–230.
Parkinson S, Tolbert K, Messenger K, et al. Evaluation of the
eﬀect of orally administered acid suppressants on
intragastric pH in cats. J Vet Intern Med 2015; 29: 104–12.
Shelton GD. Treatment of autoimmune myasthenia gravis. In:
Bonagura JD, Twedt DC, eds. Kirk’s Current Vet Therapy
XIV. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 2014: 1109–1112.

Sutalo, M. Ruetten, S. Hartnack, C.E. Reusch, and P. H.
Kook. The Eﬀect of Orally Administered Ranitidine and
Once-Daily or Twice- Daily Orally Administered
Omeprazole on Intragastric pH in Cats. J Vet Intern
Med 2015; 29: 840–846.
Tolbert MK, Odunayo A, Howell RS, Peters EE, Reed
A. Efficacy of intravenous administration of combined
acid suppressants in healthy dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2015:
29: 556–60.

VetBooks.ir

563

53
Motility Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
Reto Neiger, Dr. Med Vet, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM), DECVIM-CA1
and Silke Salavati, Dr. Med Vet, PhD, DipECVIM-CA, MRCVS2
1
2

Small Animal Clinic Hofheim, Hofheim, Germany
Royal School of Veterinary Studies, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland

Gastrointestinal (GI) motility disorders are a diagnostic
and therapeutic challenge. They can consist of delayed or
accelerated transit times as well as impaired or inappropriate relaxation anywhere in the GI tract. Delayed transit is the most common form. This may be a primary
localized neuromuscular disorder, part of a more generalized GI motility disturbance (e.g., dysautonomia) or
secondary to systemic health problems (metabolic, toxic,
inflammatory, neoplastic, obstructive, etc.).

­Motility Disorders of the Esophagus
Physiology of Esophageal Motility
The esophagus acts as a simple tube for the transport of
food from the oral cavity to the stomach. Between swallows, it is collapsed but can distend markedly to accommodate a food bolus. Structurally, it is of similar
composition to the remainder of the GI tract, but it lacks
a serosa. In dogs, the muscular layer (responsible for the
motor function) is composed of two layers of striated
muscles spiraling in oblique bundles and crossing each
other at right angles. In cats, there is a transition zone
from striated to smooth muscle at the level of the heart.
There are two sphincters: the upper esophageal
sphincter (UES), consisting of the cricopharyngeus muscle, and the gastroesophageal sphincter (GES), which is a
thickening of the esophageal muscle at the junction to
the stomach.
Esophageal transport of a food bolus – as part of the
complicated swallowing act – is under complete autonomic neuronal control. Efferent neurons from the
nucleus ambiguous in the medulla oblongata innervate
the striated muscle (dogs and cats) and the smooth
­muscle (cats) via the vagus nerve. Once the food bolus
is voluntarily pushed caudally into the oropharynx,

a ­
complex reflex is instituted, that starts with cricopharyngeal relaxation. The food bolus is then passed
through the UES into the cervical esophagus. Immediately
thereafter, the UES closes, preventing material from
entering the trachea or being pushed back into the pharynx. Continuous peristaltic contractions move the food
aborally, where it passes through the relaxed GES (primary esophageal peristalsis). In a case where the first
peristaltic wave is inadequate for complete transport,
secondary esophageal peristalsis occurs, where local
esophageal distension generates another peristaltic wave.
Clinical Signs of Esophageal Motility Disorders
The classic clinical sign of esophageal disease is regurgitation. Additional common complaints are dysphagia,
hypersalivation, retching and gagging, odynophagia, and
repeated swallowing attempts. Less common signs are
anorexia and lethargy. Both dogs and cats can show signs
of aspiration pneumonia (fever, tachypnea, coughing,
dyspnea).
On physical examination, low body condition score/
weight loss or poor growth might be apparent. Rarely, a
dilated esophagus can be palpated in the cervical region.
Bradycardia, loss of pupillary light reflexes, decreased
tear production (demonstrated by a Schirmer tear test),
dry mucous membranes, and constipation/diarrhea in
combination with megaesophagus are indicative of a
dysautonomia.
Causes of Esophageal Motility Disorders
In small animals, primary esophageal motor dysfunction
is poorly defined and infrequently recognized, except for
idiopathic megaesophagus and esophageal diverticula in
dogs. A high prevalence of subclinical primary esophageal dysmotility has been reported in certain dog breeds

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

564

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

(Chinese shar‐pei, bouvier des Flandres) and in young
dogs (up to 2 years of age). The reported prevalence of
abnormal esophageal motility in cats is 0.05%.
Secondary esophageal dysmotility is seen in most animals with obstructive or inflammatory esophageal disease; these will not be covered in detail in this chapter
(see Chapter 52). Obstructive disorders can be grouped
into intraluminal (foreign body), intramural (neoplasia,
granuloma, stricture) or extraluminal (vascular ring
anomaly, mediastinal mass), whereas inflammation
(esophagitis) is frequently due to gastroesophageal reflux
disease (GERD).
Megaesophagus

Megaesophagus is defined as generalized esophageal
dilation with hypo‐ or amotility and can be primary
­(idiopathic) or secondary (acquired). It has to be differentiated from localized esophageal dilation, which can
be frequently observed proximal to obstructive disorders. However, early cases of megaesophagus might have
only segmental dilation, which may become generalized
with time. In addition, not all dogs with abnormal esophageal motility progress to megaesophagus.
Idiopathic megaesophagus may be congenital or
acquired. In some dog breeds (Great Dane, German
shepherd, Irish setter, golden retriever, Labrador
retriever, greyhound, Newfoundland, shar‐pei), a familial predisposition is reported, while in others (miniature
schnauzers and fox terriers) an autosomal dominant
inheritance trait has been discovered. In cats, megaesophagus is uncommon. The acquired adult‐onset form
is most commonly idiopathic (>70%) or secondary to
other systemic disorders, especially those causing neuromuscular dysfunction.
The pathogenesis of megaesophagus in dogs is still
poorly understood, but defects in afferent neural pathways have been suggested, while efferent neuromuscular
pathways seem to be intact. Decreased motor responses
of the UES and GES to intraluminal stimuli have been
reported.
Ancillary diagnostic tests are performed in dogs with
megaesophagus with the intent to detect an underlying
cause (e.g., myasthenia gravis), as treatment of the underlying disorder might lead to complete resolution of
esophageal dilation, and to identify co‐morbidities such
as aspiration pneumonia. Initial tests can include a
complete blood count (CBC) and determination of
­
C‐reactive protein (or other acute phase proteins) as a
measure of the severity of secondary inflammation/
infection. Measurement of acetylcholine receptor antibody (AchRA) titer by an accredited laboratory can aid
the diagnosis of myasthenia gravis and should be done in
all dogs with megaesophagus. Focal myasthenia gravis
occurs in the absence of muscle weakness and is the

­second most common cause (≈25% of cases) of acquired
megaesophagus. Endocrinopathies such as hypoadrenocorticism and hypothyroidism have frequently been
implicated as a cause of megaesophagus in the dog.
However, the association of megaesophagus with
hypoadrenocorticism is rare. In almost all dogs that
simultaneously suffered from hypoadrenocorticism and
megaesophagus, Na:K ratios were abnormally low.
Consequently, an adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
stimulation test is only indicated in these dogs if electrolyte abnormalities (hyponatremia and hyperkalemia with
a Na:K ratio <27) are observed.
Other potential tests that could be considered in dogs
with megaesophagus, on an individual basis, include
blood lead concentrations (lead poisoning), edrophonium
chloride challenge test (generalized myasthenia gravis) or
electromyography in a dog with generalized muscle
­weakness (polyradiculoneuritis, polymyositis, etc.).
Diagnostic Tests to Assess Esophageal
Motility
Survey radiographs do not assess esophageal motility,
but can be informative regarding luminal obstructions,
dilation/ diverticula, strictures, and megaesophagus.
The esophagus is not visible in its physiologic state as
it has the same opacity as the surrounding soft tissue. A
mildly air‐filled esophagus or small “pockets” of air can
be present due to physiologic transient dilation, aerophagia (anxiety, dyspnea) and during sedation/anesthesia.
Both left and right lateral radiographic views might
be necessary in some cases to diagnose esophageal
dilation.
Megaesophagus is characterized radiographically via
visualization of a dilated, enlarged, air‐filled esophagus
(sometimes also filled with fluid or ingesta). The trachea
can show some ventral deviation. The caudodorsal
­thorax might appear hyperlucent.
If plain radiographs are inconclusive, contrast studies
(esophagrams) can be helpful. They should not be performed if the cause of regurgitation is already clear on
the plain radiographs. The use of barium sulfate in cases
where perforation cannot be excluded/is suspected
(pneumomediastinum) or where the risk of immediate
regurgitation is high should be avoided. Ideally, contrast
studies of the esophagus should be limited to the use of
iodine‐containing media.
Immediately after oral administration of contrast
(10–20 mL/animal at a time), a few longitudinal parallel
esophageal folds outlined by barium can be visible in the
normal canine esophagus, while cats show additional
transverse mucosal folds in the caudal third of the esophagus (so‐called “herringbone” pattern). To assess subtle
motility disorders limited to the passage of solid food,

VetBooks.ir

53 Motility Disorders of the Alimentary Tract

contrast can be mixed with food and the radiographs can
be repeated.
To diagnose functional cricopharyngeal and esophageal dysmotilities that do not lead to dilation (achalasia,
cricopharyngeal bars), a sliding hiatal hernia (type I) or
GERD, contrast‐enhanced videofluoroscopic esophagography (fluoroscopy) is the imaging modality of choice,
as it provides continuous, dynamic and real‐time assessment of the entire swallowing process. Conscious animals are placed in lateral or sternal position. Neat liquid
barium, barium paste, barium mixed with canned food
(all administered via syringe) or barium‐soaked kibble
(in animals willing to eat) can be used. Three to five swallows are observed in real time with at least one followed
all the way into the stomach.
Esophagoscopy is rarely useful to investigate functional dysphagia as esophageal motility cannot be
assessed under general anesthesia, but it can be performed to remove esophageal foreign bodies, detect
esophagitis/GERD, esophageal tumors or hiatal hernias.
Esophageal mucosal biopsies can be useful in the diagnosis of GERD, esophagitis, and neoplasia, but can be
­difficult to retrieve due to the firmness of the mucosa
and the difficulty in achieving an oblique or 90° angle.
Esophageal manometry allows assessment of the intraesophageal pressure generated by peristalsis and provides
clinically important information on esophageal motor
function. Recently, high‐resolution impedance manometry
has become the standard for the evaluation of esophageal
function in humans. This technique has recently been used
in dogs (Figure 53.1) and while technically demanding and
limited to a research setting at the moment, it gives an overall highly informative assessment of esophageal motility.
Treatment of Esophageal Motility Disorders
Medical treatment of esophageal dysmotility in dogs qnd
cats is typically unrewarding. Management of megaesophagus is directed towards treating the inciting cause
(e.g., use of pyrido‐ or neostigmine in myasthenia gravis)
and based on the optimization of feeding regimens.
Feeding from an elevated position, sometimes aided by
using specialized feeding chairs, and the attempt to avoid
complications like aspiration pneumonia are the most
important measures. The ideal type of food (kibbles, gruel,
homogenized food, etc.) for individual patients has to be
found in a “trial‐and‐error” fashion. If an underlying disease process is suspected, empirical treatment is often initiated until test results (e.g., AchRA titer) are available.
Aspiration pneumonia has to be treated aggressively, usually with intravenous fluids and antibiotics, coupage, and
potentially secretolytics. If esophagitis is suspected or
proven, oral sucralfate s­uspension and proton pump
inhibitors (to avoid GERD) should be prescribed.

­Motility Disorders of the Stomach
Gastric motility is a highly coordinated process involving
neuromuscular and hormonal signals and is triggered as
a response to either the presence of food in the stomach
or a range of different local (mechanical or functional) or
systemic diseases. There are three separate types of gastric motility disorders: accelerated gastric emptying, retrograde transit (reflux), and delayed gastric emptying.
Physiology of Gastric Motility and Emptying
Functionally, the stomach can be divided into the proximal (consisting of cardia, fundus, first third of the corpus) and distal (distal two thirds of the corpus and
antrum) compartments. The proximal compartment is
responsible for the accommodation of food and liquids
and characterized by slow tonic contractions. The distal
compartment is characterized by phasic propagating
contractions generated by pacemaker cells (interstitial
cells of Cajal [ICC]) that lead to mechanical milling of
gastric contents (called trituration) and their final expulsion through the pylorus. Pressure and amplitude of
these contractions increase in an aboral direction.
Digestive motility resulting in gastric emptying occurs
in three consecutive phases:
1) propulsion (proximal part of the antrum contracts)
2) emptying and mixing (pylorus opens partially and
duodenal peristalsis is momentarily halted while particles up to 2 mm pass the pylorus)
3) retropulsion (larger particles are propelled back into
the corpus).
Interdigestive motility occurs to empty nondigestible
food particles/foreign bodies, swallowed saliva, and
small amounts of mucus and cellular debris. In the dog,
this motility pattern is called the migrating motor complex (MMC) and starts with intense contractile activity
in an aboral direction (“clean sweep”) followed by a
period of relative quiescence and a short phase of irregular undirectional contractions. Interdigestive motility in
the cat is uniquely associated with long fused migrating
spike burst contractions interspersed with short periods
of irregular activity.
Clinical Signs of Gastric Dysmotility
In dogs with delayed gastric emptying, clinical signs can
include gastric distension and vomiting of undigested or
partially digested food >8 h after feeding (when the
stomach should be empty). In cats, the importance of
gastric emptying disorders remains unclear. Clinical
signs include anorexia, vomiting, regurgitation, and
weight loss.

565

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

(a)
Upper esophageal sphincter
Swallow

Esophagus

Thorax

Relaxation

VetBooks.ir

566

Peristaltic wave

Gastric

Lower esophageal sphincter

(b)

Figure 53.1 (a) Physiologic swallow pressure topography of a healthy dog extending from the pharynx to the stomach. The colors reflect
the intensity of the pressures; red stands for high and blue for low pressure (color scale on the left). The upper and lower esophageal
sphincters are clearly detectable as high‐pressure zones. There is a relaxation of both sphincters following a swallow. (b) Dog with
esophageal manometer catheter in place. Source: Courtesy of Jennifer Kempf and Peter Kook, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zurich,
Switzerland.

VetBooks.ir

53 Motility Disorders of the Alimentary Tract

Gastroesophageal reflux disease is detected more frequently in dogs than cats. It can occur spontaneously or
be related to general anesthesia. In both species, it can
result in ptyalism, retching, regurgitation or vomiting,
pain when swallowing and dysphagia (see Esophageal
Dysmotility, earlier). Occasionally, excessive grass eating
and cough are also reported in dogs.
The frequency of duodenogastric reflux in dogs is
unclear. However, it has been proposed to lead to bilious
vomiting syndrome (BVS), which is characterized by
vomiting of bile and mucus after a prolonged fasting
period.
Accelerated gastric emptying is rarely a problem leading to clinical signs in dogs, but is hypothesized to be the
cause of vomiting in hyperthyroid cats. Acute infectious
or obstructive diseases of the gastrointestinal tract can
also lead to secondary hyperperistalsis of the stomach,
but hypoperistalsis, vomiting/retching, and diarrhea are
more frequent presenting complaints.
Other signs of gastric dysmotility or its underlying
causes can include anorexia, belching, pica, weight loss
or abdominal pain. In animals with dysautonomia,
­gastric hypomotility is one of many problems due to denervation of the autonomous nervous system. Hence,
other clinical signs typically associated with this disease,
such as dry eyes and nose, mydriasis, regurgitation, and
constipation, are often predominant.
Physical examination findings can range from no
detectable abnormalities to the presence of an enlarged
abdomen (gastric distension), decreased or increased
bowel sounds, and nonspecific/cranial abdominal pain.
Rarely, neuromuscular abnormalities may also be
observed if severe metabolic or systemic derangements
(electrolyte abnormalities, dysautonomia) are present.
Causes of Gastric Dysmotility
Delayed Gastric Emptying

Delayed gastric emptying is probably underdiagnosed in
both dogs and cats, especially in cases where no obvious
obstruction of gastric outflow is present. Mechanical
obstructions (gastric neoplasia, hyperplasia, polyps, foreign material) are usually easy to diagnose based on
history, physical examination and diagnostic imaging
­
procedures and are not further discussed in this chapter.
However, diagnosis of functional problems (due to either
local or systemic disorders) is not as straightforward.
A number of primary causes of functional gastric stasis
have been described in the dog, including infectious and/
or inflammatory diseases, peptic ulcers, and following
surgical procedures. Systemic disorders suspected to
affect gastric motility include electrolyte disturbances
(especially hypercalcemia, hyper‐ or hypokalemia), disorders of acid–base balance, septicemia, pancreatitis,

peritonitis, systemic inflammatory response syndrome
(SIRS), dysautonomia, and metabolic diseases such as
diabetes mellitus
Gastric dilation‐volvulus (GDV) in large and giant dog
breeds has been speculated to be caused by delayed gastric emptying, but evidence for the influence of size or
weight on gastric emptying times and the presence of
gastric dysmotility in dogs with GDV is controversial.
Diseases of the large intestine (e.g., colitis, constipation) can potentially also delay gastric emptying via
reflex mechanisms.
The clinical importance of gastric emptying disorders
in the cat is unknown. There are a few case reports of
delayed gastric emptying in cats with rare conditions
such as pylorospasm, hyperplastic gastropathy, and
dysautonomia. Delayed or dysfunctional gastric emptying is suspected in conjunction with conditions like diabetes mellitus, pancreatitis, and inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD) but specific investigations into these diseases as causes of gastric dysmotility in cats are lacking.
Retrograde Transit

Gastroesophageal reflux disease and duodenogastric
reflux are retrograde transit disorders. Neither of these
conditions has been extensively investigated in small animals. GERD is more often associated with diseases of the
esophagus or the distal esophageal sphincter, and occurs
most commonly during or after general anesthesia.
Duodenogastric reflux can lead to BVS (also called
fasting vomiting) in dogs. Clinical signs of BVS improve
in most cases by changing the feeding regimen (frequent
feeding of small meals) and administration of prokinetics
and gastroprotectants. This suggests an underlying
abnormality in gastrointestinal motility, but no further
investigations have been performed to date. No reports
exist of duodenogastric reflux in cats apart from its
occurrence with experimental devascularization and
ulceration of the stomach.
Accelerated Gastric Emptying

Accelerated gastric emptying (for example, in acute
infectious or obstructive disease) is usually associated
with hypermotility of the entire GI tract; hence diarrhea
can be the predominant problem, or occur alongside
other clinical signs. Isolated hypermotility of the stomach has not been reported in dogs.
Diagnostic Tests to Assess Gastric Motility
and Emptying
Several methods have been used to assess gastric motility – especially gastric emptying times – in small ­animals.
Their diagnostic usefulness and availability for the practitioner are summarized in Table 53.1.

567

VetBooks.ir

568

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Table 53.1 Methods to assess gastric emptying in small animals and their diagnostic usefulness and availability to the practitioner
Technique

Information gained

Availability in pets

Plain radiographs

+

+++

Contrast radiographs (barium)

++

+++

Contrast radiographs (BIPS)

+

++

Ultrasonography

+

++/+++

Endoscopy

(+)

++/+++

13

C‐based breath tests

++

+ /++ (referral /research)

Blood tracers (paracetamol)

Unknown

+ (if reference method to measure paracetamol is available)

Scintigraphy

+++

+ (referral/research)

CT or MRI

−

++

Manometry

++

+ (referral/ research)

Wireless motility capsule

+++

+ (referral/ research)

Surface electrical resistance

(+)

− (research)

BIPS, barium‐impregnated polyethylene spheres; CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.

Diagnostic Imaging for Gastric Motility Disorders
in Routine Veterinary Practice

Plain abdominal radiographs showing liquid or solid gastric contents after a fasting period of >6–8 hours in the
dog and >4 hours in the cat should raise the suspicion of
delayed gastric emptying. If no obvious cause can be
identified, serial radiographic imaging after oral administration of contrast media (i.e., liquid barium sulfate,
iodinated contrast) can be performed (for the full protocol see section on small intestinal dysmotility later).
This method only evaluates emptying of liquid contents, which is less relevant, and can appear normal even
though emptying of solids is impaired. Liquids (including neat barium) should be emptied from the stomach
within three hours in dogs and within 60 minutes in cats
(50–70% of cats have an empty stomach at 15 and 30
minutes, respectively). Completion of gastric emptying
when barium is mixed with food can be variable in both
dogs and cats (4–16h), and barium can separate from the
food, making this method unreliable to assess solid‐
phase gastric emptying in small animals.
Barium‐impregnated polyethylene spheres (BIPS)
were originally designed to mimic solid‐phase gastric
emptying and to detect GI obstructions. They are commercially available in two sizes (1.5 and 5 mm diameter),
with the smaller theoretically being emptied with
­digestive contractions and the larger with interdigestive
­motility. Attempts have been made to assess gastric emptying times using BIPS in both dogs and cats, but the
data are not reliable. In one study using dogs, the time to
emptying of half the administered BIPS from the stomach was nearly twice as long as that of simultaneously
administered, radiolabeled food. In cats, gastric emptying

of 1.5 mm BIPS also did not parallel “true” gastric emptying of a solid radiolabeled meal, but rather assessed
interdigestive motility. Therefore, interpretation of solid‐
phase gastric emptying with BIPS cannot be recommended in small animals.
Technologic advances have facilitated the availability
and feasibility of using abdominal ultrasonography to
assess gastric emptying. Even though gastric motility can
be visualized with ultrasound and the frequency of antral
contractions has been reported in healthy dogs (4–6/min
during emptying), no standardized protocol to assess
gastric emptying is available. Also, as this method is
based on the estimated change in antral volume, it might
not accurately reflect gastric emptying if antral contents
are moved into the fundus by the antral contractions.
This procedure requires a skilled operator and the
administration of a test meal or liquid of a defined volume, which can be challenging in veterinary patients. At
this stage, ultrasound cannot be recommended to assess
gastric emptying in a routine setting.
Diagnostic Tests Currently Restricted to Referral
Centers or Research Facilities

Radioscintigraphy is considered the gold standard
method to assess gastric emptying and has been used in
a number of studies to determine physiologic gastric
emptying times and validate new tests. Due to the need
for special facilities and equipment, this technique is not
often applied in small animal patients. Most commonly,
99m
technetium bound to tracer substances to avoid GI
absorption (i.e., albumin colloid) is used. “Dual isotope”
methods where solid‐ and liquid‐phase gastric emptying
are assessed simultaneously (using both 99mtechnetium

VetBooks.ir

53 Motility Disorders of the Alimentary Tract

and 111indium) have also been described. Typical gastric
half‐emptying times when using canned food are around
70 minutes in dogs and 2–4 hours in cats.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed
tomography (CT) imaging have so far not been used in
veterinary patients to assess gastric emptying, although
these modalities have been used in human patients. One
complicating factor might be the need for sedation or
general anesthesia, which can influence GI motility.
Some protocols for sedation have been evaluated regarding their influence on gastric emptying, but the results
are inconsistent, especially in cats. In dogs, a combination of acepromazine and butorphanol was shown to significantly prolong GI tract emptying times and decrease
motility.
Noninvasive methods to detect smooth muscle
contractions based on measurement of changes in
electrical resistance across the epigastric region after
ingestion of a test meal using standard ECG electrodes have been assessed in dogs. Because of the
sensitivity of these methods to artifacts induced by
even slight body movements, their future application
in dogs and cats is probably confined to research
purposes.
Methods that might have potential to be used in a routine clinical setting involve plasma or breath tracers. The
paracetamol (acetaminophen) absorption test has been
described for assessment of liquid‐ and solid‐phase gastric emptying. Plasma drug concentrations are measured
in serial blood samples after ingestion of paracetamol in
solution, and the rate of gastric emptying is related to the
appearance of paracetamol in the blood, as it is poorly
absorbed from the stomach but rapidly from the
­duodenum. However, this test has so far only been used
in a research setting and not been validated against
scintigraphy.
Breath tests have been studied comparatively well to
assess gastric emptying in dogs and to a lesser degree in
cats. These tests involve the ingestion of a stable 13C‐
labeled substrate which is rapidly absorbed (e.g., octanoic acid or sodium acetate) and metabolized to 13CO2,
which is then detectable in exhaled breath. The test protocol is simple, labelled tracers are comparably cheap
and no special equipment or expertise is required. Breath
samples can be collected from animals with a facemask,
which does not involve excessive restraint. Samples can
be stored for up to 60 days in sealed containers and can
be sent to the laboratory for analysis, where the 13C:12C
ratio is determined by infrared or mass spectrometry.
From these data plotted against time, gastric emptying
times and coefficients can be calculated. Normal gastric
half‐emptying times determined by breath test are
around 2.7–3.4 hours in dogs and four hours in cats. 13C‐
breath tests show acceptable to good correlation to

­scintigraphy and ultrasonography, respectively, in dogs
and good correlation compared to scintigraphy in cats.
Treatment of Gastric Dysmotility
No guidelines for the appropriate indication, combination, and duration of motility‐modifying therapies for
gastric emptying disorders are available. Due to the diagnostic challenges discussed above, correct assessment of
most gastric motility disorders or any therapeutic effect
is difficult. It is important to investigate, diagnose, and
treat any underlying disease leading to dysmotility before
motility‐modifying drugs are administered (Table 53.2).

­Motility Disorders of the Small
Intestine
Small intestinal (SI) motility ensures the efficient absorption of nutrients (mixing of chyme with digestive
enzymes, optimal contact of ingesta with the intestinal
mucosa) and orderly aboral movement of content,
including indigestible residues. Motility is also critical in
preventing bacterial translocation, which is achieved by
constant net aboral flow of luminal contents and the unidirectional “valve” function of the ileocecal junction,
preventing backflow of cecal contents.
Physiology of Small Intestinal Motility
Similar to gastric motility, physiologic motility of the SI
in dogs consists of digestive contractions (uncoordinated
circular segmentation and highly coordinated propulsive
peristalsis) and interdigestive motility (interdigestive
migrating motility complexes [IDMMCs]). In cats,
IDMMCs do not exist; instead, they show migrating
spike complexes that are less vigorous than the canine
counterpart.
Dogs have been extensively used to understand the
physiology of intestinal motility, the importance of neurotransmitters, hormones, and other polypeptides and
the effect of different dietary components on GI transit
times. Very little of the information gained from experimental studies in dogs can be directly translated into
v­ eterinary practice.
There is evidence for breed and/or size differences in
GI transit times in dogs, with larger breeds showing
longer transit times compared to miniature breeds. This
might be partially due to the relative size of the GI tract
compared to body weights: the GI tract of dogs >60 kg
comprises 2.8% of their total body weight, compared to
7% in small‐breed dogs (<5 kg). Hence, breed and age
characteristics must be taken into account when assessing SI or total GI transit times.

569

VetBooks.ir

570

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Clinical Signs of Hypo‐ and Hypermotility
of the Small Intestine
Clinical signs of small intestinal dysmotility can be variable, and heavily depend on the underlying cause.
Assessing the animal’s signalment and taking a thorough
history including any drug administration, potential for
accidental ingestion of medication(s), toxins or foreign
material, vaccination status, contact with other animals,
recent surgical procedures, etc. can help to initially classify the possible problem.
Local diseases (within the abdominal cavity or the GI
tract) are more likely to cause clinical signs obviously
associated with intraabdominal organs, ileus or GI
obstruction (abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, but
also anorexia, constipation) whereas systemic diseases
can present with a variety of signs not necessarily immediately associated with the GI tract (e.g., mydriasis, dry
nose and eyes, and prolapse of the third eyelid in dysautonomia or generalized neuromuscular signs in muscular dystrophy).
Physical examination in patients with signs of GI dysmotility can be variable and depend on the underlying
problem. Signs can be unspecific (lethargy, poor body
condition), point towards a local intraabdominal process
(nausea, abdominal pain, distension, mass, fluid‐filled
intestines) or be suggestive of a more generalized systemic problem (generalized weakness, neurologic abnormalities). Depending on the severity of fluid losses
through vomiting and/or diarrhea, clinical signs can also
be dominated by dehydration or hypovolemia (circulatory shock) or even SIRS.
Diseases Associated with Dysmotility
of the Small Intestine
Most reports regarding SI motility focus on functional or
mechanical GI ileus. Ileus is defined as the inhibition of
propulsive bowel activity, irrespective of the pathogenic
mechanism.
In small animals, SI ileus due to a primary (systemic or
local) neuropathy or neuromuscular disease is much less
common than secondary ileus, for which the causes are
multiple.
Dysautonomia and Other Neuromuscular Diseases

Dysautonomia is a generalized neuropathy first described
in cats in the United Kingdom. Subsequently, this disease
has been documented worldwide in dogs and cats. It is
characterized by generalized autonomic dysfunction
with megaesophagus/esophageal hypomotility, gastric
and small intestinal distension/hypomotility, and urinary
bladder distension. Degenerative lesions are found in
autonomic ganglia, the spinal cord and axons, but the

cause for these changes is unknown. Diagnosis is based
on typical clinical signs, ophthalmic pilocarpine test and
(postmortem) histopathology. Supportive care (with or
without chronic topical piloacarpine) is the only treatment option. Prognosis is grave in most cases.
Muscular dystrophy has been described in the golden
retriever (X‐linked genetic disorder), rarely other dog
breeds and cats, and is primarily characterized by progressive muscular weakness. It is typically caused by
mutations in the dystrophin gene responsible for muscle
structure and metabolism. Affected dogs and cats show
hypertrophy of skeletal musculature, tongue, diaphragm,
esophagus and sartorius muscle and atrophy of others.
Clinical signs apart from muscle weakness and tremor
include dysphagia, gastroparesis, abdominal pain, and
intestinal distension. In one postmortem canine study,
petechial hemorrhages, ecchymosis, and ulceration of
the gastric mucosa and generally dilated intestinal loops
were described, which was suggested to be indicative of
decreased intestinal transit. Most dogs die of cardiac or
respiratory failure within 8–9 months.
One case of visceral myopathy in a 6‐month‐old
domestic shorthair kitten with a six‐day history of anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea has been reported. Severely
dilated loops of hypomotile intestine were found and
20 cm of jejunum was resected. On histopathology, the
distal jejunum showed a markedly atrophic longitudinal
muscle layer with focal degeneration, calcification, loss
of myocytes, and replacement by fibroblasts. The cat was
alive and doing well 20 months after surgery.
Postoperative Ileus and Short Bowel Syndrome

Postoperative ileus, defined as “ileus that develops following abdominal surgery, typically resolving spontaneously with 2–3 days,” is more frequent in humans than
dogs and has not been reported in cats. Laparotomy and
manipulation of the viscera are the main postulated etiologies but other factors, such as anesthetic agents or
postoperative opioid administration, can contribute.
Diagnosis can be based on clinical signs such as nausea,
vomiting, intestinal distension and abdominal pain and
via the exclusion of other causes of functional ileus (e.g.,
metabolic disorders, renal injury, septic peritonitis, pancreatitis, obstruction) postoperatively. Treatment consists of intermittent orogastric or permanent nasogastric
tube placement to empty the stomach of excess fluid and
gas, early postoperative (“trickle”) feeding, as this might
stimulate coordinated propulsive activity of the GI tract,
and the administration of prokinetics. Prognosis is generally good to excellent.
Short bowel syndrome is defined as malabsorption due
to insufficient intestinal surface area to an extent that
fluid and nutrients to sustain life cannot be absorbed
without specific nutritional support. There is evidence of

VetBooks.ir

53 Motility Disorders of the Alimentary Tract

dysmotility of the remaining parts of the GI tract, with
reduction of slow waves and disappearance of interdigestive motility. Clinical signs usually consist of watery diarrhea, steatorrhea, polyphagia, and weight loss. Total
parenteral nutrition and aggressive medical management are often necessary in the early postoperative
period, until oral feeding can counterbalance the nutritional needs. Stabilization of intestinal function should
start within 1–3 months after surgery. Complete recovery occurs within 3–12 months, but depends on the
extent of surgical removal of intestinal segments, with
early reports demonstrating a poor prognosis in some
cases with massive resections (74–88%).
Intestinal Pseudoobstruction

Intestinal pseudoobstruction or functional paralytic
ileus is characterized by the presence of chronic intestinal dilation and dys‐ or amotility in the absence of
mechanical obstruction. Only 12 cases of chronic intestinal pseudoobstruction have been reported in small animals (10 dogs and two cats) that showed clinical signs of
chronic intestinal disease (anorexia, intermittent vomiting, diarrhea). Diagnosis was based on abdominal imaging with radiographs showing generalized intestinal
dilation but no evidence of mechanical obstruction.
Histopathology showed some recurrent common features in dogs such as atrophy or complete loss of smooth
muscle fibers (n = 10), moderate to severe lymphoplasmacytic or mixed inflammation of the muscular layers (n
= 7) with predominantly T cells being present (n = 4),
and varying degrees of fibrosis/sclerosis (n = 6). In one
dog, severely hyperplastic smooth muscle of the lamina
propria and thickening of the muscularis mucosae were
reported. In cats, the histologic picture was somewhat
different: even though muscle atrophy was present, this
was true only for the longitudinal muscle layers in certain segments of the jejunum in one cat. Seven out of the
10 dogs were euthanized due to progressive disease
within days to five weeks after diagnosis.
Secondary Small Intestinal Hypomotility

Dogs and cats frequently suffer from obstructive intestinal diseases (foreign bodies, bezoars, neoplasia, volvulus), hence these conditions – together with neoplasia
and intussusceptions – should always be considered as
potential cause of dysmotility.
Few large‐scale reports examining clinical abnormalities, causes, prognostic factors, and outcome in small
animals with mechanical ileus are available. Of 704
examined cases, the average age was 4 years for dogs and
3 years for cats, with 60% being male. Mean duration of
illness before presentation was four days and most common symptoms included inappetence, vomiting, lack of
defecation, and abdominal pain. Mechanical ileus due to

a solitary foreign body obstruction (plastic balls, stones,
textiles) was the most common cause (69 cats and 338
dogs) followed by a linear foreign body (35 cats, 43 dogs)
and neoplasia (24 cats, 195 dogs). Less common causes
were intussusception, ileal obstipation, intraabdominal
inflammatory or neoplastic adhesions, volvulus, incarcerations of intestinal loops, idiopathic intestinal paralysis, intestinal diverticula, and parasitic infections.
Diagnosis (history of foreign body ingestion, physical
examination revealing abnormal intestinal palpation,
diagnostic imaging confirming the suspicion of obstruction/ileus) is usually straightforward and the optimum
treatment depends on the localization, size, material or
underlying cause (i.e., neoplastic) of the obstruction. In
most cases (>90%), surgical intervention is necessary.
Long‐term‐survival can be achieved in >80% of patients.
A longer duration of clinical signs, presence of a linear
foreign body (as opposed to a discrete one), multiple
­surgical procedures/incisions of the intestine and intestinal perforation have been associated with increased
mortality, whereas neither the degree of obstruction
(partial or complete) nor the location of the foreign body
had an effect on survival.
Obstruction due to neoplasia carries a much graver
prognosis, with median survival times of six months for
dogs and seven days for cats.
Intussusception is frequently found in young animals
and often associated with parvoviral enteritis or other
forms of acute gastroenteritis. There is some evidence
for a breed predisposition in the German shepherd dog
and pure‐breed/pedigree cats. Prognosis is good if surgical reposition or resection is successful.
Functional SI dysmotility can be secondary to any type
of infection or inflammation of the GI tract or within the
abdominal cavity. Both hypo‐ and hyperperistalsis can
occur, but reports of hyperperistalsis are scarce.
Parvoviral enteritis is the classic example of functional
ileus secondary to infection. Generalized atony of the
intestinal tract with distended and fluid‐filled intestinal
loops is a frequent finding on ultrasonography (75%) and
weak peristaltic contractions indicative of functional
ileus were observed in most of the remaining cases.
Sepsis or other serious medical illnesses requiring
hospitalization in the intensive care unit (ICU) are
­
known to be associated with gastrointestinal dysfunction
in people. Both gastric and small intestinal motility is
delayed in human ICU patients, which may lead to intolerance of enteral nutrition and increased risk of aspiration. Additionally, acute stress‐induced gastropathy and
ischemic colitis (both associated with risk of hemorrhage) is a common finding in human ICU patients. In
the authors’ experience, similar syndromes and complications also exist in small animals admitted to the ICU.
We routinely and regularly assess the grade of gastric

571

VetBooks.ir

572

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

­filling in our ICU patients (especially patients with sepsis, SIRS, on mechanical ventilation, and those with
increased risk of aspiration pneumonia) semiquantitatively via ultrasonography. If there is sufficient suspicion
of GI hypomotility (gastric distension), prokinetic drugs
like prucalopride or erythromycin are administered
early. If oral medication is not tolerated, rectal administration can be tried. Even though the authors subjectively
think this type of management decreases the risk of aspiration pneumonia and other complications, there is at
this time no objective evidence that these interventions
influence outcome of small animal ICU patients.
Acute pancreatitis causes substantial damage to the GI
tract in people and rodent models. Usually, this is associated with acute necrosis, ischemia, and bleeding, but
varying degrees of dysmotility have also been documented, likely due to cytokines being produced as part of
the local inflammatory process. In dogs, the typical clinical signs associated with acute pancreatitis (vomiting)
and the severity of abdominal inflammation in some
patients suggest that GI dysmotility or ileus is commonly
present. However, no data regarding GI dysmotility in
pancreatitis in small animals are available.
There is some evidence that both acute kidney injury
(e.g., in leptospirosis) and chronic kidney disease have an
inhibitory function on orderly intestinal motility. In
other conditions, GI dysmotility is suspected but not
proven. One example is diabetes mellitus, where altered
levels of neuropeptides have been documented in experimental animals. However, even in humans, the exact
mechanism for small intestinal dysmotility in this endocrinopathy is not well understood. So far, no consistent
correlation between changes in enteric neurotransmitters, numbers of ICCs (decreased markedly in one
­neuroanatomic human case report) and manometric or
transit observations has been detected.
It is likely that (gastro)intestinal dysmotility is also
­present in other chronic conditions such as IBD, canine
idiopathic large bowel diarrhea (CILBD), hepatitis/
hepatopathies, etc. Unfortunately, no study investigating
GI motility in these conditions in dogs and cats is
available.
Iatrogenic and Toxic Causes of Gastrointestinal
Ileus

Intestinal dysfunction is a common side‐effect when
­opioid mu‐ and delta‐agonists are administered as analgesics. Most commonly, constipation and vomiting are
observed. This can occur immediately after the first dose
and persist for the duration of therapy. In most cases,
discontinuation of opioid treatment is sufficient to
improve intestinal function. Occasionally, laxatives and
other therapies may be used additionally to treat
constipation.

A variety of toxins (e.g., mercury, thallium, lead), pharmaceuticals (antibiotics like lasalocid, nitrofurantoin,
salinomycin), pesticides (e.g., organophosphates),
organic solvents and other chemicals (e.g., acrylamide,
hexacarbons) have been reported to cause peripheral
neuropathies, which might include ileus or other forms
of dysmotility of the GI tract (i.e., megaesophagus, etc.)
although these are infrequently seen and poorly
documented.
Diagnostic Tests to Assess Small Intestinal
Motility or Transit Times
The outcome of SI motor activity depends on the patterning of contractions in both space and time; that is,
where and when do the contractions occur with respect
to each other? Methods to assess these relationships
must address substantial technical challenges to gather
functionally relevant information.
Diagnostic Imaging Procedures for Small Intestinal
Transit Studies

Contrast studies of the SI are the most commonly used
method to assess transit time or to search for intestinal
obstruction in small animals. Neat liquid barium sulfate,
ionic or nonionic organic iodine contrast media or, less
frequently, contrast mixed with semisolid food is administered orally. The recommended dosage for liquid barium is 6–16 mL/kg body weight, with the high end of the
dose range for cats and small dogs and the lower end for
large dogs. The protocol for performing a contrast study
of the GI tract in dogs and cats is summarized in Box 53.1.
Usually, the final radiograph is taken after 12 hours to
check the complete gastric and SI evacuation of contrast.
Barium‐impregnated polyethylene spheres (see above)
have also been used for SI transit studies. The sensitivity
and specificity of this method, however, is low.
Contrast fluoroscopy is used in human medicine to
detect mucosal disease and stenoses that may induce
secondary changes in motility, transit, and absorption.
However, this technique is insensitive for the direct
detection of abnormal transit times. Observation times
are limited (radiation exposure) and once the majority of
contrast has entered the small intestine, overlying loops
of bowel hinder the interpretation. Fluoroscopy has not
been reported for assessment of small bowel transit in
small animals.
Ultrasonographic assessment of small intestinal motility is challenging due to observer variability, interference
from intraluminal gas and the difficulty of finding objective measures to assess contractions. Even though two
studies found that Doppler ultrasound techniques
(pulsed‐wave and duplex Doppler, respectively) allow
graphic visualization and qualitative and quantitative

VetBooks.ir

53 Motility Disorders of the Alimentary Tract

Box 53.1 Guidelines for performing a contrast passage of the gastrointestinal tract
Preparation
Type of contrast media

Dosage of contrast
media

Timing of radiographs
(always both lateral and
ventrodorsal views)

Tips for practical
­execution and overall
interpretation

24 h fast or immediately if foreign body or perforation is suspected
No sedation or general anesthesia
1) Liquid barium sulfate (used at a concentration of 30% weight/volume, which may require
dilution. Higher concentrations are too opaque, especially with digital systems)
●● Preferred option
2) Water‐soluble iodine‐containing contrast (diluted 1 part to 2–3 parts water)
●● Indicated if rupture of parts of the alimentary tract cannot be excluded or if endoscopy
is necessary afterwards
●● As these media are hypertonic, they osmotically attract water to the gastrointestinal
lumen which can exacerbate dehydration and leads to dilution of contrast
3) Mixture of 1. or 2. with food
●● Does not always correlate with solid‐phase transit time (contrast can separate from
food)
●● Admixed food particles cannot always be distinguished from pathologic filling defects
of the gastrointestinal tube
Either 10–12 mL/kg BM or
Medium‐sized to large dog: 5–7 mL/kg BM
Small dog and cat: 10–15 mL/kg BM
●● Administer via syringe or gastric tube if necessary
●● The stomach has to considerably fill with contrast media
●● There should not be an interruption of visualization/filling of the entire gastrointestinal
tract, as this might cause false interpretation of radiographs
Dog
●● Immediately before and after contrast media administration
●● Additionally at 15, 30, and 60 min; then every 15–60 min until barium reaches rectum
●● Later radiograph times must be adjusted for every patient; a “standard” protocol is just a
starting point and will probably need to be modified
●● If transit is quick, radiographs at 10–15‐min intervals may be required
●● Depending on pictures so far, late additional radiographs after 12 and 24 h (until stomach
has completely emptied and all contrast media has reached the colon)
●● If an abnormalitiy is suspected, it is best to obtain multiple radiographs close together to
confirm persistence of the lesion (with iodine‐containing media: half the above‐­
mentioned time‐points)
Cat
●● Immediately before and after contrast media administration
●● Additionally at 5, 20, 30, 40, 60 and 120 min
●● Late additional radiographs after 6 and 12 h
(with iodine‐containing media: identical time‐points)
BEWARE: Do NOT omit any of the radiographs or “only” perform radiographs at the late time‐
points (6–24 h after administration) as important subtle changes or evidence of partial
obstructions can be missed!
●● Rule of thumb: at the end of the examination the stomach has emptied completely and all
contrast is in the large intestine
●● The above‐mentioned times are guidelines. For individual cases they might vary depending on passage timings
●● Fluoroscopy can be helpful for initial orientation, but is not routinely necessary, increases
radiation exposure and is not always available
●● Have a stop‐watch handy as well as a time indicator that can be placed on the radiograph
film
●● Make sure enough staff are available at the necessary time‐points

573

VetBooks.ir

574

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

analysis of intestinal motion in dogs, these procedures
are rarely used in routine practice.
Scintigraphy can potentially be used to assess small
intestinal transit times. However, unless the test substance is delivered past the pylorus, this technique also
includes gastric emptying. Therefore, scintigraphy is
usually imprecise about actual small intestinal transit
time and more accurately assesses orocecal transit time.
In small animals, scintigraphy has rarely been used for
assessing small bowel transit alone. Dual‐scintigraphy
(using 99mtechnetium and 111indium) can be used to
assess whole‐bowel transit times. More recently, scintigraphy has been used to assess GI motility in comparison
to a wireless motility capsule, which gives accurate information about whole‐intestinal transit times and their
respective subsets.
Recording of Small Intestinal Muscle Contractions

These procedures are usually of an invasive nature
(implanted strain gauges or luminal manometers) or can
be used ex vivo only. As far as the authors are aware, no
attempts at noninvasive detection of electrical potentials
created by intestinal muscle contractions (as done with
moderate success for gastric emptying) have been reported
in small animals. It can be assumed, however, that they are
extremely prone to artifacts created by patient movement.
Breath Tests and Other Tracer Tests

The lactulose or hydrogen breath test, which is the breath
test most widely used to assess SI transit in humans, has
also been applied to dogs. Nonabsorbable lactulose is
fermented, yielding H2 on reaching the colon. This
hydrogen gas is rapidly absorbed and exhaled.
Interpretation of hydrogen breath test results can be
complicated if carbohydrate malabsorption is present.
Additionally, the effect of diet is not entirely clear, hence
this test is not currently recommended for routine use.
Salicylazosulfapyridine has been administered orally,
intraduodenally or intracecally in experimental dogs as a
SI tracer substance; the detection of its metabolite sulfapyridine in plasma correlates with SI transit time. Apart
from drug metabolism studies, this tracer has not been
used in a clinical setting or in dogs with GI diseases.
Treatment of Small Intestinal Dysmotility
Treatment of small bowel dysmotility is usually targeted
to the specific etiology. Intestinal obstruction should be
relieved surgically as soon as the patient is stable enough
for general anesthesia. If infection, inflammation or sepsis is suspected, a search for the underlying cause,
depending on the predominant clinical signs, followed
by appropriate treatment should be initiated. If intestinal
hypomotility is suspected to be drug induced, any

medication with the potential to adversely affect GI
­
motility should be discontinued.
Supportive treatment is mandatory to maintain fluid
and electrolyte balance and perfusion of vital organs.
Prokinetics (Table 53.2) should be used cautiously and
only if elimination of the inciting cause and supportive
treatment is not sufficient to restore SI motility. Especially
in severe infectious enteritis, prokinetics are not recommended, as they might increase the risk for intussusception or volvulus. In postoperative ileus, however, or in
patients requiring long‐term intensive care, prokinetic
agents have a place to decrease hospitalization time and
co‐morbidities such as aspiration pneumonia. Intestinal
stasis in severely ill patients increases the risk of intestinal
bacterial translocation, hence cautious feeding of small
energy‐dense meals (depending on what the primary condition is and what the patient tolerates) and prokinetic
treatment can aid in maintaining small bowel function.

­Motility Disorders of the Large
Intestine
Physiology of Large Intestinal Motility
The large intestine is mainly responsible for the absorption of water and electrolytes, and storage of intestinal
content, as feces enter the colon in a liquid state. There
are three prominent patterns of colonic motility:
segmentation contractions which separate and mix the
ingesta, increasing the contact time with the mucosa
for absorption
●● antiperistaltic contractions propagating ingesta back
toward the ileum, again slowing down intestinal transit and allowing additional time for absorption
●● mass movements, which are unique to the large intestine. Also known as giant migrating contractions
(GMCs), the mass movement consists of strong and
prolonged peristaltic aboral contractions, which
­evacuate the entire large intestinal content.
●●

In contrast to the interdigestive phases, when the colon
shows no considerable motility, colonic contractions
increase significantly following a meal. These so‐called
gastrocolic and duodenocolic reflexes are controlled by
the enteric nervous system and ensure coordinated
movement and orderly evacuation of the GI tract with
the ingestion of a “new” meal.
Clinical Signs of Hypomotility
and Hypermotility of the Large Intestine
Large intestinal (LI) diarrhea is a manifestation of colonic
hypermotility and hypersecretion, typically characterized

VetBooks.ir

53 Motility Disorders of the Alimentary Tract

Table 53.2 Mechanism and site of action, dosages and important clinical information for drugs with prokinetic actions in small animals
Class

Site of action

Dose

Other properties

Comments

Removed from the human
market due to severe cardiac
arrhythmias; in some canine
studies no effect on gastric
emptying; in high doses (3 mg/
kg) decreases gastric motility

Serotonergic 5‐HT4 agonists
Cisapride

GES, stomach,
intestine, colon,
CRTZ

0.1–0.5 mg/
kg PO TID‐BID

5‐HT3 antagonist
5‐HT2 antagonist
5‐HT1 agonist

Mosapride

Stomach, colon

0.25–2 mg/kg PO BID;
5 mg/cat BID

None

Prucalopride

Stomach, small and
large intestine

Dog: 0.01–0.16 mg/kg SID
stimulates gastric
emptying
0.6 mg/kg SID stimulates
GI peristalsis
1–1.25 mg/kg SID induces
migrating motor
complexes (defecation)
Dosages up to 2 mg/kg
SID described

None

Can be administered rectally as
well if oral administration is
not considered safe (risk of
aspiration) or gastric motility
is severely impaired

Tegaserod

Small and large
intestine

0.05–0.1 mg/kg PO or IV
BID

5‐HT1 antagonist

Not currently on the market
(allegedly increased risk of
cardiovascular disease in
people)

GES, stomach, small
and large intestine

0.5–1 mg/kg PO or IV
BID

5‐HT1 antagonist

Induces interdigestive motility,
which might lead to “dumping”
of gastric contents into the
duodenum before appropriate
digestion can take place

Cat: 0.24–0.5 mg/kg SID

Motilin‐like substances
Erythromycin

Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors
Ranitidine

Stomach, colon

1–2 mg/kg PO BID‐TID
or slow IV/CRI

H2‐histaminergic
antagonist

Probably only mild to no
prokinetic effects

Nizatidine

Stomach, colon

1 mg/kg IV BID; 2.5 mg/
kg PO SID–BID

H2‐histaminergic
antagonist

Probably even less effective
than ranitidine

Bethanechol

Esophagus

5–15 mg/dog PO TID

Cholinomimetic
substance

Mirtazapine

Stomach, others
unknown

0.6 mg/kg PO SID
In experimental dogs:
2 mg/kg SID

Noradrenergic and
specific serotonergic
tricyclic antidepressant

Others/Miscellaneous

Limited clinical data available,
but at 2 mg/kg SID showed
accelerated gastric emptying
times in experimental
fistulated dogs

Source: Modified from Washabau and Day (2013). Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.
BID, twice a day (bis in die); CRI, continuous rate infusion; CRTZ, chemoreceptor trigger zone; GES, gastroesophageal sphincter;
GI, gastrointestinal; IV, intravenous; PO, by mouth (per os); SID, once a day (semel in die); TID, three times a day (ter in die).

by increased defecation frequency, decreased fecal volume per defecation, tenesmus, increased fecal mucus,
and the occurrence of fresh blood (hematochezia).
Large intestinal hypomotility results in constipation,
which is defined as absent, infrequent or difficult

­defecation (tenesmus). In its most severe form, constipation leads to obstipation where impacted, hard and dry
feces make normal defecation impossible. Typically owners observe frequent attempts to defecate, tenesmus and
dyschezia (difficult or painful defecation) with little or

575

VetBooks.ir

576

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

no feces produced. Animals might vocalize during
attempts at defecation. Other possible signs are anorexia,
lethargy, vomiting, and an abnormal stance (hunched
up). Infrequent passage of watery material and mucus,
which has bypassed the impacted feces, might be wrongly
interpreted as diarrhea.
Animals with LI diarrhea will frequently be normal on
physical examination, even though in some cases rectal
palpation might reveal irregular mucosal surface or rectal masses. Impacted feces and, depending on the severity of the problem, dehydration, abdominal pain, and
debilitation are findings in animals with decreased
colonic motility or obstruction resulting in constipation,
obstipation or even megacolon.
Diseases Associated with Dysmotility
of the Large Intestine
Increased Large Intestinal Motility

As increased LI motility is part of the manifestation of
every type of “colitis” (acute or chronic), the number of
underlying diseases is manifold. In dogs, this includes
infectious (e.g., Trichuris vulpis, toxins from Clostridium
perfringens infection, Prototheca zopfii) and noninfectious (e.g., food hypersensitivity) causes, diseases with
inflammatory (IBD, granulomatous colitis [GC] of boxers and bulldogs) or neoplastic infiltration of the colonic
wall, as well as a number of “idiopathic” disorders where
hypermotility is implicated as a primary cause; these
include fiber‐responsive colitis and CILBD. The latter is
also often called irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), spastic
colon, nervous/stress‐induced colitis or mucoid colitis.
In these dogs, inciting stressors can sometimes be identified (travel, changes in daily routine, loss of other pets or
family members). They can show submissive or anxious
behavior (urination, separation anxiety, fear of noise),
but tend not to be aggressive.
Canine idiopathic large bowel diarrhea is defined by
colonic dysfunction in the absence of identifiable structural, biochemical, or microbiologic abnormalities and
thus is a diagnosis of exclusion. While no studies have
shown a pathophysiologic mechanism in dogs, abnormal
myoelectrical activity leading to abnormal LI motility is
likely part of this disease in humans, in combination with
psychosocial factors, altered pain, and visceral reception.
The prevalence of CILBD ranges from as low as 5% to
26% in dogs. It is more commonly found in large breeds
and those under stress (police/customs, guide dog for
the blind, herding) or dogs that are easily overexcited.
Decreased Large Intestinal Motility

Constipation can be due to intestinal or systemic
problems. Intestinal causes are mostly obstructive
­
­(intraluminal [stricture, fecolith, tumor] or extraluminal

[prostatomegaly, pelvic fracture, perianal tumor, pseudocoprostasis]) or dietary (foreign material [bone, stones,
garbage, hair]) in origin. Systemic problems can be
caused by external factors (long inactivity, confinement
[hospitalization]), drugs (opioids, barium, sucralfate,
­calcium channel blocker, anticholinergic) or be part of
metabolic problems (dehydration, hypokalemia, hypercalcemia). Finally, neuromuscular dysfunction may also
result in decreased LI motility. Here, colonic hypomotility is frequently associated with lumbosacral spinal cord
problems (Manx cat deformity, neoplasia, degenerative
disease, injury) and feline idiopathic megacolon, and less
frequently with ganglioneuritis (one dog reported),
dysautonomy (Key–Gaskell syndrome), and canine
hypothyroidism.
Megacolon is more commonly seen in cats than dogs.
It is defined as persistently increased large bowel diameter, often as an end‐result of chronic constipation.
Idiopathic megacolon accounts for about two‐thirds of
all feline cases of constipation. Its etiopathogenesis is
incompletely understood, but dilation of the colon
appears to be due to functional disturbances of the
colonic smooth muscle cells. Lesions seem to begin in
the descending colon and then progress to involve the
ascending colon. Affected cats are usually middle‐aged
(mean 5–6 years) with males (70%) more commonly
affected. Repeated episodes of obstipation are often
reported. Diagnosis is reached when all other causes
(mechanical obstruction, inflammation, neoplasia) have
been excluded and typically involves neurologic assessment, diagnostic imaging studies (with and without
­contrast), and histopathology.
Assessment of Large Intestinal Motility or
Transit Times
Real‐time assessment of LI motility is difficult to perform and thus complete GI or orocecal transit times are
usually investigated.
Diagnostic Imaging Procedures Available
in Routine Practice

On survey radiographs, size and opacity of the LI are
extremely variable and formed feces are of a heterogeneous opacity. Nevertheless, a ratio of the maximal diameter of the colon to L5 length >1.48 is a good indicator of
feline megacolon (sensitivity 77%, specificity 85%).
Contrast radiographs after rectal administration of positive (barium) or negative (air) contrast media or their
combination (double contrast studies) might be indicated in animals with LI diarrhea or constipation to
exclude an obstruction but they do not show true LI
motility. The LI should not be assessed on a SI contrast
study as LI filling is incomplete and there is overlap with

VetBooks.ir

53 Motility Disorders of the Alimentary Tract

parts of the SI. LI contrast studies should also not be
done two hours after a cleansing enema, 6–12 hours
after colonoscopy and 3–4 days after full‐thickness
colonic biopsies. Ultrasound has so far not been investigated to evaluate LI motility.
Measurement of Gastrointestinal Transit Times

Different ways to assess LI motility or whole‐intestinal
transit have been employed, but are so far limited to
research purposes or require special equipment. The
simplest way to assess oroanal transit time is to feed plastic markers of different colors and recover them from the
feces. Different radiopaque markers have been used in
healthy dogs as well. Similar to assessment of gastric
emptying (see earlier), radioscintigraphy has also been
used to determine LI motility (e.g., with 111In). Recently,
total GI transit times and LI transit times were measured
with a wireless motility capsule system in dogs. Other
tests used in human medicine, such as colonic manometry or MRI, have so far only been used in experimental
dogs to assess LI motility and are not useful for routine
diagnostics.
Treatment of Large Intestinal Dysmotility
Treatment of Idiopathic Colitis and CILBD

Treatment of LI dysmotility secondary to infectious or
inflammatory colitis, neoplasia or mechanical impairment is directed towards the underlying cause.
Treatments for IBD with LI involvement, food hypersensitivity, fiber‐responsive colitis and CILBD overlap
­frequently, as all involve some form of dietary modification (see later). This also explains why definitive diagnosis and accurate separation of these disease entities can
be difficult.
Dietary modifications often include the change to a
novel protein (and possibly carbohydrate) source or a
hydrolyzed protein diet. Alternatively, increasing the
amount of dietary fiber or adding bulk‐forming agents
(e.g., a commercial high‐fiber diet or the addition of
­psyllium 1–3 tbsp/day or unprocessed wheat bran 1–5
tbsp/day) to the food also frequently leads to clinical
improvement.
Antibiotics usually have no place in treating “idiopathic” colitis. However, the authors have noticed that
some dogs improve with the administration of metronidazole or tylosin, similar to antibiotic‐responsive chronic
enteropathy/IBD, even if constipation or LI diarrhea are
the only presenting complaints.
Antiinflammatories can aid in controlling LI symptoms in some dogs. As in small intestinal forms of IBD,
this might include the administration of steroids (if all
other causes of clinical signs, especially infectious diseases, have been excluded), for example prednisolone

(1–2 mg/kg SID to BID) or budesonide (0.05–1 mg/kg/
day with the total dose not exceeding 3 mg q8h).
Alternatively, sulfasalazine (15–30 mg/kg BID to TID,
maximum 6 g/day) has been particularly useful in controlling idiopathic colitis in some dogs. However, this is
usually done on an empirical basis, and the decision
regarding which dogs can or need to be treated with
either of those antiinflammatory compounds is often
arbitrary.
When CILBD is suspected (and all other causes of colitis have been ruled out), treatment should start with
dietary modifications (fiber supplementation; see earlier). The remainder of treatment depends on the nature
of clinical signs (intermittent, alternation between constipation and diarrhea, abdominal pain/cramping) and
their suspected inciting cause. Different types of bulking
agents (psyllium, kaolin, pectin) can help in times of
diarrhea. Alternatively, motility modifiers or antispasmodics may be tried (Table 53.3). Antispasmodic drugs
might relieve some pain and sedatives reduce stress
effects. Most dogs only require treatment for a day to
two weeks, with some requiring long‐term treatment.
Stressors should be avoided and behavioral therapy can
be considered. Drugs modifying behavior, including amitriptyline, can be tried in refractory cases of CILBD (see
Table 53.3). The prognosis of CILBD is good, particularly
for dogs that respond to fiber supplementation.
Treatment of Constipation

Management of constipation depends on the severity
and the underlying cause, which should be addressed
first (mechanical obstruction, pelvic fracture, neurologic
disorder, etc.). If possible, drugs that may cause constipation (opioids, diuretics, antispasmodics, anticonvulsants,
sucralfate, NSAIDs) should be minimized or discontinued. In overweight animals, weight loss should be
encouraged and their activity increased. Cat litter boxes
should always be kept clean, to encourage defecation,
and water intake should be increased (availability of
water bowls, addition of water to food).
In addition, or as sole treatment in mild cases, dietary
modification is recommended. This can again consist of
bulk‐forming agents (high‐fiber diet, added psyllium or
bran) or the administration of lactulose or other laxatives
(see Table 53.3). A single enema or rectal suppository on
an outpatient basis can also be considered.
In more severe or refractory cases, manual removal of
impacted feces and several warm water enemas (in many
cases requiring general anesthesia) are necessary.
Adequate amounts of intravenous fluids need to be
administered to correct dehydration and possible electrolyte abnormalities and to prevent worsening of obstipation. Constipation is most commonly a recurring
problem and long‐term prophylactic measures (dietary

577

VetBooks.ir

578

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Table 53.3 Treatments for chronic idiopathic large bowel disease (CILBD)
Class

Name

Dose

Comment

Fiber

Psyllium

Daily dose:
½ tablespoon for toy breeds
1 tablespoon for small‐breed
dogs
2 tablespoons for medium‐
breed dogs
3 tablespoons for large‐breed
dogs

Median dose was 1.3 g/kg/day in one
study

Canned pumpkin

1–4 tablespoons mixed with
food per day

Coarse wheat bran

1–4 tablespoons mixed with
food per day

Commercially available
diets with high fiber
contents

Feeding recommendation by
weight/the manufacturer

Available from reputable pet food
manufacturers

Loperamide

0.04–0.2 mg/kg PO q8–12h

Not for prolonged use

Diphenoxylate

0.05–0.1 mg/kg PO q6–8h

Often in combined preparations with
atropine sulfate

Laxatives

Lactulose

1 mL per 4.5 kg PO BID–TID

Hyperosmotic

Bisacodyl

5–20 mg per dog PO SID

Stimulant/prokinetic

Antispasmodics
(neurotropic)

Chloriazepoxide (5 mg)
and clidinium bromide
(2.5 mg)

0.1–0.25 mg/kg clidiniium
PO BID–TID for a few days

Librax®. Can be given prophylactically
or metaphylactically as well as
therapeutically

Propantheline

0.25 mg/kg PO TID (round
dose to nearest 3.75 mg)

Do not use for longer than 48–72 h

Hyoscyamine

0.003–0.006 mg/
kg PO BID–TID

Not for prolonged use

Butylscopolamine/
hyoscin

0.5–0.8 mg/kg PO SC IM or
IV SID–TID

Inhibits M1 muscarinic acetylcholine
receptors in the GI and urinary tract,
does not cross blood–brain barrier.
Often in combination with metamizole

Motility‐modifying
agents

Antispasmodics
(musculotropic)

Behavior‐modifiying
agents

Dicyclomine

0.15 mg/kg BID–TID

Mebeverine

2.5–5 mg/kg PO BID

Pinaverium

1 mg/kg PO BID

Trimebutine

0.33 mg/kg PO TID

Amitriptyline

1–2 mg/kg PO SID–BID

The atypical tricyclic antidepressant
clomipramine exists as an authorized
preparation for use in dogs and is
claimed to have better anticompulsive
properties. Amitriptyline is bitter/
distasteful. Some caution and careful
monitoring are warranted in patients
with cardiac or renal disease

Selegiline

0.5–1 mg/kg PO SID

Dopamine agonist. Dose can be
increased to 2 mg/kg SID if no
response after 2 months

Clomipramine

1–2 mg/kg PO BID

Tricyclic antidepressant. Increase
gradually up to 3 mg/kg PO BID if
necessary after 14 days

Source: Modified from Lecoindre and Gaschen (2011). Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.
BID, twice a day (bis in die); IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; PO, by mouth (per os); SC, subcutaneous; SID, once a day (semel in die);
TID, three times a day (ter in die).

VetBooks.ir

53 Motility Disorders of the Alimentary Tract

adjustment and laxative therapy) are often needed
permanently.
Chronic treatment of constipation and idiopathic
megacolon might require prokinetic treatment. Drugs
that show some effect on colonic motility include
cisapride and prucalopride. The influence of H2
receptor antagonists on colonic motility is not entirely
clear. Newer drugs that might have some positive
effect on colonic motility in dogs (lubiprostone, mirtazapine) have not been thoroughly tested in clinical
cases.
Subtotal colectomy should be considered in cases of
feline idiopathic megacolon refractory to conventional
(diet, laxatives) and prokinetic treatment.

­Prokinetics
Prokinetic drugs are divided into serotonergic 5‐HT4
agonists, motilin‐like drugs, dopaminergic D2 antagonists, H2‐receptor antagonists, and novel compounds
(see Table 53.2).
5‐HT4 Agonists
Drugs acting on gastrointestinal 5‐hydroxytryptamine
(5‐HT4 or serotonin) receptors have potent prokinetic
effects. Of the various 5‐HT4 agonists, cisapride has
been most extensively studied, but was withdrawn from
most of the European and US markets due to lethal
­cardiac side‐effects (torsade de pointes tachycardia) seen
in humans. Other 5‐HT4 agonists include mosapride
(available in Japan), prucalopride (available in the USA
and Europe), and tegaserod (also removed from the
­market for similar reasons as cisapride).
The gastric prokinetic properties of cisapride have
been documented in many experimental settings, but in
some studies, no effect on gastric emptying in dogs was
observed. In high doses (3 mg/kg), it can even slow emptying of solids.
Mosapride has been shown to restore gastric motility
in dogs with vincristine‐ or prednisolone‐induced g­ astric
hypomotility in healthy experimental dogs, but seems to
have no effect on the distal intestinal tract.
Prucalopride stimulated gastric emptying in a dose‐
dependent manner at relatively low doses (0.01–0.16 mg/
kg), stimulates physiologic gastrointestinal peristalsis/
defecation at higher doses (approximately 0.6 mg/kg)
and induces MMCs at still greater doses (around 1 mg/
kg) in dogs.
Naronapride (ATI‐7505) is marketed as a selective 5‐
HT4 agonist without the cardiac side‐effects in humans,
but only one study has assessed its gastric prokinetic
properties in dogs so far. It was found to be orally

bioavailable in dogs with an increase in coordinated
­
antral and small bowel contractility but little effect on
colonic motor activity.
Motilin‐Like Drugs
The antibiotic drug erythromycin accelerates gastric
emptying by inducing phase III contractions of the interdigestive MMCs, even when used in a subantibiotic
­dosage. These contractions are similar to those induced
by the endogenous gastrointestinal hormone motilin.
Several synthetic erythromycin derivates have been
developed; for example, EM574, which is 250 times more
potent than erythromycin itself in inducing MMCs and
has no antibacterial properties. Similarly, mitemcinal
(GM‐611) has been shown to accelerate gastric emptying
in healthy dogs as well as to improve delayed gastric
emptying in a canine model of diabetic gastroparesis.
Another synthetic erythromycin derivative, ABT‐229,
accelerates gastric emptying, motility index, and gastroduodenal coordination in a dose‐dependent manner.
This compound is around 40‐fold more potent than
erythromycin.
One potential complication that can arise from the
stimulation of interdigestive motility is that it can lead to
“dumping” of gastric contents into the duodenum before
they have been acidified and denatured appropriately.
This can then lead to inadequate absorption of nutrients
and osmotic diarrhea.
Dopaminergic D2 Antagonists
There is no convincing evidence that dopaminergic
D2 antagonists like metoclopramide and domperidone have prokinetic effects on the canine stomach,
even though metoclopramide in particular has been
advocated for this purpose for years. Consequently,
these drugs should not be used solely for this indication in dogs.
Metoclopramide has no effect on complete gastric
emptying times or corporeal contractions in experimental dogs. Regarding its effects on MMC disruption or
inhibition as well as antral contractions, study results are
inconsistent. When emptying of solid and liquid contents were assessed separately, metoclopramide slowed
solid gastric emptying (cooked liver), while accelerating
emptying of liquids (5% dextrose). There is some potential evidence from several studies that metoclopramide
might improve antropyloroduodenal coordination and
the frequency of pyloric and duodenal contractions in
experimental settings, possibly by enhancing acetylcholine effects. However, there was no acceleration of gastric
emptying in dogs after GDV surgery. Effects of metoclopramide might be dose dependent, as the standard dose

579

VetBooks.ir

580

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

(0.2–0.4 mg/kg) did not reduce gastroesophageal reflux;
however, a high dose (1 mg/kg followed by a CRI with
1 mg/kg/h) reduced reflux. Thus, metoclopramide might
not be harmful in a dog with suspected gastric hypomotility, especially as nausea and vomiting might also be
present and its antiemetic effects via 5‐HT3 antagonism
are undisputed, but metoclopramide cannot induce a
strong prokinetic effect, particularly in cases with complete gastric atony.
Domperidone decreases the frequency of corporeal,
pyloric, and duodenal contractions and deteriorates
antropyloroduodenal coordination by decreasing the
frequency of contractions spreading from the antrum or
pylorus to the duodenum. It is therefore not indicated as
a prokinetic agent in the dog.
Itopride (Ganaton®, Abbott) is used to treat functional
dyspepsia in people. It is a prokinetic benzamide derivate, unlike metoclopramide and domperidone. This
drug has both antidopaminergic and antiacetylcholinesterase actions. Its gastroprokinetic dose, when administered intraduodenally in healthy experimental dogs, was
1–3 mg/kg while at doses of 10–100 mg/kg it inhibited
apomorphine‐induced vomiting. It seems to have similar
prokinetic effects to cisapride and mospride when given
orally.
Histamine H2‐Receptor Antagonists
Some H2‐receptor antagonists (ranitidine and nizatidine,
but not cimetidine or famotidine) have prokinetic effects
mediated by cholinergic mechanisms, especially on gastric smooth muscle or, in the case of ranitidine, also on
isolated small intestine.
The gastric prokinetic properties of ranitidine have
been assessed in both rodents and humans. However,
neither in healthy subjects nor in various diseases (gastric stasis in intensive care patients, peptic ulcers, and
others) have the effects on gastric emptying, gastric volume/retention or pH been consistent. Some studies
suggest acceleration of liquid gastric emptying times as
well as faster passage of a motility capsule, possibly
based on an increase in phase III motor activity. Other
studies show no effect on gastric motility, and two studies even demonstrate a dose‐dependent delay in gastric
emptying. In dogs, only a few studies are available
assessing the effect of ranitidine of gastroesophageal
reflux during anaesthesia (where it had no apparent

effect) or on GI transit times using a wireless motility
capsule (also no effect).
Nizatidine has also been studied extensively regarding
its gastric prokinetic properties in experimental rodents
and humans. Most studies seem to agree that it has more
consistent gastroprokinetic effects than ranitidine or
famotidine. In addition, it also enhances colonic peristalsis in humans. In experimental dog models, it was as
potent as cisapride in accelerating solid‐phase gastric
emptying, but clinical studies or extensive in vivo studies
in dogs are lacking.
Novel Prokinetic Compounds
Several new drugs and compounds have been tested
for their prokinetic properties in dogs. Some have a
defined mechanism of action, some are herbal extracts
where the principal component is not identified. This
includes DA‐9701 (marketed as Motilone® in Korea),
which is an extract from Corydalis tubers (a genus of
plants in the Papaveraceae family with about 470 species, also sometimes known as Chinese poppy) and
Pharbitis seeds (plants belonging to the Convulvulaceae
family and often used synonymously to morning glory,
which is another genus [Ipomoea]of this family). This
substance lead to improvement of gastric accommodation and increased postprandial volume in healthy
experimental dogs, but the effects on gastric emptying
are unclear.
Lubiprostone (Amitiza®, Mallinckrodt) is used in the
management of chronic idiopathic constipation or
inflammatory bowel disease with constipation in
humans. It is a selective type‐2 chloride channel (ClC‐2)
activator and hence increases chloride ion transport and
fluid secretion into the intestinal lumen. This compound
has been shown to accelerate gastric emptying in healthy
experimental dogs, as well as small bowel and colon
transit and interdigestive motility.
Mirtazapine (several brand names) is a noradrenergic
and serotonergic antidepressant used in small animals as
appetite stimulant. One study in healthy experimental
dogs has shown that it can accelerate gastric emptying
times when given at a high dose, but it is unclear if this
translates to a clinical setting yet.
To the authors’ knowledge, none of the drugs mentioned above have been used outside a research setting
or in spontaneously occurring disease in dogs.

­Further Reading
Ferguson L, Wennogle S, Webb C. Bilious vomiting
syndrome in dogs: retrospective study of 20 cases. J Vet
Intern Med 2016; 52(3): 157–61.

Khorzad R, Whelan M, Sisson A, Shelton GD. Myasthenia
gravis in dogs with an emphasis on treatment and critical
care management. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2011; 21(3): 193–208.

VetBooks.ir

53 Motility Disorders of the Alimentary Tract

Lecoindre P, Gaschen FP. Chronic idiopathic large bowel
diarrhea in the dog. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2011; 41(2): 447–56.
Washabau RJ, Day MJ, eds. Canine and Feline
Gastroenterology. St Louis, MO: Saunders, 2013.
Watrous BJ. Clinical presentation and diagnosis of dysphagia.Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1983; 13: 437–59.
Whitehead K, Cortes Y, Eirmann L. Gastrointestinal
dysmotility disorders in critically ill dogs and cats. J Vet
Emerg Crit Care 2016; 26(2): 234–53.

Wyse CA, McLellan J, Dickie AM, Sutton DGM, Preston T,
Yam PS. A review of methods for assessment of the rate
of gastric emptying in the dog and cat: 1898–2002. J Vet
Intern Med. 2003; 17(5): 609–21.
Zacuto AC, Marks SL, Osborn J, et al. The influence of
esomeprazole and cisapride on gastroesophageal reflux
during anesthesia in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2012; 26(3):
518–25.

581

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

583

54
Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency in Dogs and Cats
Panagiotis G. Xenoulis, Dr Med Vet, PhD
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPI) results from an
inadequate production of pancreatic enzymes from pancreatic acinar cells, leading to maldigestion and clinical
signs of weight loss, polyphagia, and diarrhea. There are
currently no studies estimating the prevalence of EPI in
the general canine and feline population, but EPI is considered the second most common disease of the exocrine
pancreas in small animals (after pancreatitis). Although
EPI is considerably more common in dogs than in cats, in
the past few years EPI has been diagnosed with increasing frequency in the feline population, likely due to
increased awareness of this condition in cats and the
availability of better tests for its diagnosis.

­Pathogenesis
In humans, it has been estimated that EPI occurs when
more than 90% of the exocrine pancreas (i.e., pancreatic acinar cells) is destroyed. When that happens, the functional
capacity of the remaining exocrine pancreas is inadequate
for the production and secretion of sufficient amounts of:
enzymes for the digestion of protein, fat, and
carbohydrate
●● bicarbonate for neutralization of gastric acid entering
the duodenum
●● pancreatic intrinsic factor for the absorption of
­cobalamin in the ileum
●● antimicrobial proteins for regulation of small intestinal microbiota.
●●

Therefore, EPI has multiple consequences.
The main consequence of EPI is deficient intraluminal
digestion of nutrients. This is mainly the result of
insufficient production and secretion of pancreatic
­
­proenzymes and enzymes by an inadequate number of
pancreatic acinar cells. However, this is not the only
mechanism leading to nutrient maldigestion and malabsorption in EPI. Studies have shown that there is also

altered a­ctivity of intestinal mucosal enzymes and
impaired intestinal function. In some cases, these
­functional abnormalities are accompanied by mucosal
pathology. Although the exact reason for these abnormalities is unknown, it is speculated that the lack of
trophic ­influence of pancreatic secretions, as well as bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine, may play a role.
In addition, acid injury of the intestinal mucosa may
occur, as a result of lack of neutralization of gastric acid
entering the duodenum.
Another major consequence of EPI is related to cobalamin absorption. The exocrine pancreas is a major source of
intrinsic factor in the dog and the main one in the cat.
Therefore, EPI leads to a significant reduction in or even
total absence of intrinsic factor in the intestinal lumen,
which in turn leads to cobalamin malabsorption and
cobalamin deficiency at both the intracellular and extracellular level. Overgrowth of cobalamin‐binding bacteria in
the small intestine may also be a contributing factor. Severe
cobalamin deficiency is typically recognized by low serum
cobalamin concentrations. Cobalamin deficiency has been
shown to have major biochemical implications (e.g., defective amino acid metabolism and DNA synthesis) and has
also been shown to be a negative prognostic factor in animals with gastrointestinal diseases, including EPI.
Alterations in the intestinal bacteria and small intestinal bacterial overgrowth are likely common in animals
with EPI due to the lack of antibacterial properties of
pancreatic secretions. Intestinal dysbiosis is believed to
contribute to clinical signs of EPI and might often be a
reason for treatment failure, especially when proper
antibiotic treatment is not used.

­Etiology
Current studies on the etiology of EPI in dogs have investigated specific canine breeds predisposed to developing
this disease. Therefore, information from those studies

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

584

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

involves certain breeds and may or may not hold true for
other breeds.
Most studies available to date have investigated the etiology and pathogenesis of EPI in German shepherd dogs
(GSD) and rough‐coated collies, and in those breeds EPI
is most commonly the result of pancreatic acinar atrophy
(PAA). In those breeds, PAA likely is the result of an
immune‐mediated condition resulting in atrophic lymphocytic pancreatitis, as evidenced by histopathology of
the pancreas in dogs during the development of PAA.
Eventually, this chronic inflammation, which is limited
to the exocrine portion of the pancreas, leads to total
destruction of pancreatic acinar tissue and PAA. In those
breeds, PAA is most likely acquired and almost certainly
has a genetic basis. The earlier belief that EPI in these
breeds has an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance
has been largely abandoned, and a polygenic inheritance
pattern is currently suggested. Genome‐wide association
studies in GSD have failed to identify any specific genes
or major loci associated with EPI, suggesting that EPI in
this breed might have several different genetic causes or
might be the result of multiple loci with small effects.
Further studies are required to identify the genes
involved in the development of PAA in GSD and other
dog breeds. In addition, the roles that various environmental factors might play in association with a predisposing genetic background have not been investigated.
Pancreatic acinar atrophy is typically considered to be
by far the most common etiology of EPI in the overall
canine population. Although PAA can be the cause of
EPI in any canine breed, other etiologies might be more
common in certain breeds. End‐stage chronic pancreatitis leading to pancreatic fibrosis is likely the most important etiology after PAA, and it has been reported as a
cause of EPI in several studies. Chronic pancreatitis can
be especially difficult to diagnose in dogs and cats and,
therefore, in most cases a diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis has not been reached by the time EPI is diagnosed. In
chronic pancreatitis, both endocrine and exocrine pancreatic cells may be destroyed and therefore EPI may be
accompanied by diabetes mellitus in some cases.
Recently, isolated pancreatic lipase deficiency has been
reported as a cause of EPI in dogs. In these cases, all other
pancreatic enzymes and proenzymes are synthesized and
secreted normally. Isolated pancreatic lipase deficiency
causes severe lipid maldigestion and malabsorption, leading to the typical signs of EPI despite the fact that there is
no deficiency in other pancreatic enzymes. The cause of
isolated pancreatic lipase deficiency in dogs is unknown.
Other possible causes of EPI in dogs include pancreatic duct obstruction, pancreatic hypoplasia or aplasia,
and pancreatic neoplasia. All of these are extremely rare
causes of EPI in dogs.
Chronic pancreatitis is believed to be the most common cause of EPI in cats. PAA has been reported in three

cats with EPI and is therefore believed to be a considerably less common cause of EPI in this species compared
to dogs. Other causes of EPI in cats may include pancreatic aplasia or hypoplasia, pancreatic tumors, isolated
deficiencies of pancreatic enzymes, and pancreatic duct
obstruction (for example, as a result of neoplasia,
Eurytrema procyonis infestation, and complications
from cholecystoduodenostomy surgery).

­Signalment
Dogs and cats of any breed can develop EPI. However,
certain groups are clearly predisposed. The most well‐
described breed predisposition for EPI involves the GSD.
Studies in North America and Europe have shown that
GSDs have increased prevalence of EPI, with this breed
representing approximately 60% of all cases of EPI. Other
breeds predisposed to EPI include rough‐coated collies,
Cavalier King Charles spaniels, cocker spaniels, West
Highland white terriers, and chow chows. No breed predispositions have been described for cats.
Dogs of almost any age can develop EPI, with a reported
age range extending from 3 months to 17 years. When
considering all dogs with EPI, the disease more commonly
appears in young adult dogs (median age 3 years). However,
within the group of dogs with EPI, there are subgroups
that have different ages of onset. Specifically, the onset of
the disease might be at an earlier age in certain breeds
(median 18 months for chow chows; median 3 years for
GSDs and rough‐coated collies) compared to other breeds
(median 7 years for Cavalier King Charles spaniels). These
differences may in part reflect differences in the etiology of
EPI; for example, EPI as a result of PAA typically develops
in young adult dogs (usually by the age of 5 years). EPI that
develops in older dogs (such as Cavalier King Charles
spaniels) might be more likely to be the result of chronic
pancreatitis rather than PAA, because more time is
believed to be required until pancreatic acinar cells are
destroyed as a result of chronic low-grade inflammation.
Cats of any age can develop EPI, with some cats diagnosed at less than 1 year of age. However, EPI is more
commonly diagnosed in middle‐aged to older cats, with
a mean age of 8 years.
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency can occur in both
male and female dogs. Most studies agree that females
are slightly predisposed compared to males. No sex predilection has been reported for cats.

­Clinical Features
The classic and most common presentation of dogs with
EPI involves a chronic history of weight loss (Figure 54.1),
a normal or increased appetite, and diarrhea, which is

VetBooks.ir

54 Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency in Dogs and Cats

Figure 54.1 This dog presented with significant weight loss due
to EPI. The dog had lost 10 kg during the last few months. This is a
common clinical presentation of dogs with EPI although weight
loss is often not as severe.

might be seen. Other possible clinical signs include
coprophagia, borborygmus, flatulence, abdominal discomfort, and a poor hair coat. In some cases, EPI may be
subclinical and those cases can only be diagnosed with
appropriate laboratory testing (see section on Trypsin‐
Like Immunoreactivity). Dogs may remain in the subclinical phase for years or sometimes for life.
Cats with EPI have a similar presentation to dogs. In a
retrospective study of 150 cases of feline EPI, the most
common clinical sign was weight loss (which was often
the only clinical sign), followed by loose stools, poor hair
coat, anorexia, increased appetite, depression, watery
diarrhea, and vomiting. It is likely that many of these
clinical signs reflect concurrent diseases such as chronic
pancreatitis and inflammatory bowel disease. In cases
where chronic pancreatitis is the cause of EPI, polyuria
and polydipsia may be seen as a result of concurrent diabetes mellitus.

­Diagnosis
The diagnostic evaluation of animals suspected of having
EPI should always take into consideration the clinical
presentation, general clinicopathologic findings, and the
results of diagnostic modalities used to specifically assess
pancreatic structure, function, and pathology.
Routine Clinical Pathology
Findings of complete blood count (CBC), chemistry profile, and urinalysis are typically unremarkable in animals
with EPI. When present, routine blood test abnormalities (e.g., increased hepatic enzyme activities, hypoalbuminemia, hyperglycemia) reflect concurrent diseases
such as inflammatory bowel disease and diabetes
mellitus.
Trypsin‐like Immunoreactivity

Figure 54.2 The feces from the dog in Picture 1. The feces are
large in volume and semi-formed. This is a common finding in
dogs with EPI.

usually characterized by passage of large volumes of
semiformed feces (Figure 54.2). However, it is not
uncommon for some dogs with EPI to present with a
clinical picture that deviates from the classic presentation. In those cases, periods of anorexia, absence of
diarrhea, and occasionally watery diarrhea or vomiting

Trypsin‐like immunoreactivity (TLI) measures serum
concentrations of trypsin and trypsinogen and is the test
of choice for the diagnosis of EPI in dogs. This test is
highly sensitive and specific for the diagnosis of EPI.
Animals with EPI produce and secrete lower than n
­ ormal
amounts of trypsinogen in serum and therefore a subnormal TLI concentration (usually defined as <2.5 μg/L)
in an animal with compatible clinical signs is sufficient to
make a diagnosis of EPI. A TLI result well within the reference range is sufficient for excluding EPI in the vast
majority of cases, and a normal TLI result should direct
clinicians towards the investigation of other disorders
as the cause of the observed clinical signs.
One exception to this rule is the case of isolated pancreatic lipase deficiency, where the patient has EPI but

585

VetBooks.ir

586

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

secretion of trypsin and trypsinogen is normal and
therefore serum TLI concentrations are also normal.
In these cases, the diagnosis of EPI is quite challenging.
The current assays for the measurement of pancreatic
lipase concentration (i.e., Spec‐cPL) are not suitable for
the accurate measurement of pancreatic lipase concentrations at very low concentrations, and therefore isolated pancreatic lipase deficiency cannot be diagnosed
using these assays. Although epidemiologic studies are
lacking, isolated pancreatic lipase deficiency in dogs is
considered to be an uncommon cause of EPI.
Single TLI results within the equivocal range (usually
between 2.5 and 5.7 μg/L) in dogs with clinical signs of
gastrointestinal disease need to be interpreted with
­caution. In these patients, subsequent retesting of serum
TLI may show either a normal concentration or progression to EPI. Therefore, patients with canine TLI (cTLI)
results in the equivocal range should be investigated for
chronic intestinal disease, while cTLI concentrations
should also be measured a few weeks later.
Some dogs with no clinical signs characteristic of EPI
have repeatedly subnormal (<5.7 μg/L) cTLI concentrations. These dogs have been shown to have subclinical
EPI and some, but not all, are expected to develop clinical EPI in the future. The time of progression from the
subclinical to the clinical disease varies greatly and
might be from a few months to years. Thus, these
patients should be closely monitored for the development of clinical signs of EPI and cTLI testing should be
repeated periodically. It should be noted that a single
serum cTLI concentration is not sufficient for diagnosing subclinical EPI.
Because renal disease might increase serum cTLI concentrations and obscure a diagnosis of EPI, reevaluation
of nondiagnostic serum cTLI concentrations in azotemic
dogs suspected of having EPI is recommended. Similarly,
concurrent pancreatitis might falsely increase the serum
cTLI concentration.
Due to the fact that EPI appears to be less common in
cats than in dogs, diagnosis of this disease has been less
well investigated and is more challenging in this species.
Similar to dogs, the feline TLI (fTLI) test appears to be
the most reliable test for the diagnosis of EPI in cats with
a specificity of at least 85%. The sensitivity of this assay
for the diagnosis of feline EPI has not been evaluated
to date. Although there are currently two assays that
measure fTLI in serum (one radioimmunoassay that is
available in the USA and one ELISA available in Europe),
only one of those assays (the radioimmunoassay) has
been reported to be analytically validated; this test is
available through the Gastrointestinal Laboratory at
Texas A&M University. Similar to dogs, it can be recommended that nondiagnostic serum fTLI concentrations
in azotemic cats suspected of having EPI be reevaluated,
because renal disease might falsely increase serum fTLI

concentrations. The same is true for cats with concurrently increased serum feline pancreatic lipase (fPLI,
Spec‐fPL) concentrations indicating pancreatitis.
Trypsin‐like immunoreactivity testing can be performed in animals that are already on enzyme supplementation without this affecting the results. TLI assays
are species specific and do not measure trypsinogen and
trypsin of other species.
Pancreatic Fecal Elastase
An ELISA for the measurement of pancreatic elastase in
feces is commercially available and is marketed in Europe
(Shebo Biotech, Germany) for the diagnosis of canine
EPI. It is considered to be specific for EPI, although a
recent study reported false‐positive results in 23.1% of
cases and the sensitivity of this test has not been sufficiently evaluated. The fact that this test is easy and quick
to perform might make it a reasonable initial approach
for dogs with suspected EPI, but a positive test result
must be verified by measurement of a serum TLI concentration. This test might also be useful for EPI cases
that are due to pancreatic duct obstruction. However, to
date such cases have only been anecdotally reported in
the veterinary literature.
Other Tests
Serum amylase and lipase activities have been shown to
have no value in the diagnosis of EPI in either dogs or
cats. Canine pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity concentrations are low or undetectable in most dogs with EPI,
but commercial assays for the measurement of serum
PLI concentration (Spec‐cPL and Spec‐fPL) are not useful for the diagnosis of EPI in dogs and cats, respectively,
because they have been optimized to detect changes in
the higher levels of their respective working ranges.
Measurement of the fecal proteolytic activity has been
used in the past for the diagnosis of EPI in dogs and cats.
A plethora of other tests, including microscopic examination of feces and the bentiromide absorption (BT‐
PABA) test, have also been used for the diagnosis of EPI.
These tests often give false‐positive and/or false‐negative results, and many of them are impractical, expensive
or of limited availability, and thus are not recommended
for the diagnosis of canine or feline EPI. However, these
tests may be useful in special cases where serum TLI
concentration is in the normal range (e.g., EPI due to
pancreatic duct obstruction) but EPI is heavily suspected
based on the clinical picture.
Histopathology
Exocrine pancreative insufficiency is a functional and
not a histopathologic diagnosis, and thus histopathology

VetBooks.ir

54 Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency in Dogs and Cats

is not indicated for the diagnosis of EPI in dogs and cats.
While it is believed that more than 90% of the pancreatic
parenchyma needs to be destroyed in order for clinical
signs of EPI to develop, it is almost impossible to accurately determine the extent of pancreatic atrophy either
grossly or histopathologically, and thus whether acinar
cell loss is leading to EPI. The utility of histopathology is
limited to determination of the underlying cause of EPI
(PAA or pancreatitis). Even then, in dog breeds that have
been shown to be predisposed to EPI due to acinar atrophy (i.e., German shepherds, rough‐coated collies), histopathology is redundant. Therefore, histopathology
should only be used in atypical cases where the cause of
EPI needs to be determined.

­Treatment
The vast majority of animals with EPI require lifelong
treatment with pancreatic enzyme supplementation,
with or without other treatments. Although pancreatic
enzymes are essential for digestion, alternative pathways
for digestion of some nutrients do exist and therefore
rare animals may compensate for the loss of pancreatic
enzymes and display only minimal clinical signs without
treatment.
Table 54.1 summarizes the treatment options for dogs
and cats with EPI.

Pancreatic Enzyme Supplementation
Pancreatic enzyme supplementation is the cornerstone
of EPI treatment in the vast majority of cases. There are
several different types of products that can be used for
the management of EPI in animals and differences in
efficacy may exist among them. Options generally
include enteric‐coated preparations, uncoated enzyme
powder (as powder or in capsules), and raw pancreas.
Most commercially available products contain pancreatic enzymes and proenzymes that are derived from porcine pancreas (in the form of dried extracts), while raw
pancreas (which also contains pancreatic enzymes and
proenzymes) is usually obtained from cattle or pigs.
Only a small proportion of the orally administered
pancreatic enzymes remains functionally intact by the
time they reach the small intestine. It has been reported
that up to 85% of pancreatic enzyme activity can be lost
in the stomach due to the acid pH and/or the action of
gastric pepsins. Therefore, enteric‐coated preparations
have been developed to protect the enzymes from degradation in the stomach. There has been considerable discussion regarding the comparative efficacy of different
products for the treatment of EPI. To add to the confusion, results of available studies have been conflicting.
An early study suggested that enteric‐coated preparations were less effective than uncoated preparations,
while a more recent study suggested that there was no

Table 54.1 Treatment options for dogs and cats with exocrine pancreative insufficiency (EPI)
Dosage regimen
Medication

Dog

Cat

Comments

1–2 teaspoon per
10 kg in each meal

0.5–1 tsp per meal

Mix with food just prior to feeding (powder) or
give with food (enteric‐coated formulations)

Pancreatic enzymes
Powder
Enteric‐coated
formulations
Raw pancreas

Titrate to the minimum effective dose when
clinical signs are in remission
50–100 g per meal,
mixed with food

30–90 g per meal,
mixed with food

Rarely, may cause oral bleeding and irritation. In
these cases dose reduction is indicated

Tylosin

10–25 mg/kg q12h

10–25 mg/kg q12h

Treat for a minimum of 4 weeks

Metronidazole

10–15 mg/kg q12h

10–25 mg/kg q12h

The benefits of antibacterial treatment are
uncertain in cats with EPI

250–1000 μg, SC, weekly
for 6–8 weeks or orally,
daily for 8 weeks

250 μg, SC, weekly for
6–8 weeks, or orally,
daily for 8 weeks

Measure serum cobalamin concentrations every
3–6 months after initial supplementation and treat
as necessary with additional supplementation

Antibacterials

Vitamin supplements
Cobalamin (in the form
or cyanocobalamin or
hydroxycobalamin)
Acid suppression
medications

Not generally indicated

587

VetBooks.ir

588

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

difference between coated and uncoated products.
However, these studies were retrospective and uncontrolled. A more recent blinded, randomized, controlled
trial showed that dogs receiving an enteric‐coated pancreatic enzyme product responded better to treatment
compared to dogs receiving identical but uncoated product. Therefore, enteric coating seems to be beneficial,
although the results of this study may not be applicable
to all preparations of enteric‐coated pancreatic enzymes.
In a recent retrospective study of 150 cats with EPI, there
was no difference in the efficacy of different pancreatic
enzyme products suggesting that all products might be
similarly effective.
Fresh raw pancreas contains pancreatic enzymes and
can be used to effectively manage animals with EPI. Raw
pancreas should be fresh‐frozen in aliquots, and each aliquot should be used with one meal. Raw pancreas is
likely the most economical option for pancreatic enzyme
supplementation but it is also associated with certain
limitations. First, it can be difficult to obtain and inconvenient for most owners to process raw pancreas. More
importantly, raw animal tissues might be contaminated
with important pathogens (e.g., Salmonella spp.,
Campylobacter spp.) and may pose a risk for infection to
both humans and animals. For these reasons, raw pancreas is not commonly used for the treatment of EPI in
animals.
All dogs and cats with clinical EPI should receive pancreatic enzymes. Regardless of the product used, pancreatic enzymes are added to each meal. Preincubation of
the food with pancreatic enzymes is not necessary. The
starting dose varies depending on the manufacturer but
is usually titrated to individual patients after initial treatment and resolution of clinical signs. In many animals,
doses can be significantly reduced long term to the lowest effective dose. Enzyme supplementation therapy is
required for the rest of the animal’s life. Side‐effects from
pancreatic enzyme use are rare but may include oral
bleeding and irritation that typically resolve with dose
reduction.
Antibacterials
Some animals with EPI do not respond to pancreatic
enzyme replacement therapy alone. In a large percentage
of animals with EPI, this is believed to be partially due to
small intestinal dysbiosis and/or bacterial overgrowth
(SIBO), which might be present as a result of loss of the
bacteriostatic effects of pancreatic secretions and the
presence of excess undigested substrates that can be
used by intestinal bacteria. However, studies of antibacterial use in dogs with EPI have not shown improved
treatment response or prognosis consistently. In ­addition,

no studies have compared the efficacy of different
­antimicrobial agents in the treatment of dogs and cats
with EPI.
Because small intestinal dysbiosis/SIBO is believed to
be common in dogs with EPI and is notoriously difficult
to confidently diagnose, antimicrobials are usually used
in conjunction with pancreatic enzyme supplementation at the beginning of EPI treatment. Alternatively,
antimicrobials can be added to the treatment regimen
if there is poor response to treatment with pancreatic
enzymes alone. Antimicrobials commonly used
include metronidazole, tylosin, and oxytetracycline,
and are typically used for a minimum of 2–4 weeks
(see Table 54.1). Some animals might need multiple
courses of antibiotics throughout their lives. The role of
intestinal bacteria and dysbiosis is much less clearly
defined in feline EPI. Choices for antibacterial treatment in this species are similar to those in dogs, and
can be used in cases that do not respond to treatment
with pancreatic enzyme and cobalamin supplementation (see Table 54.1).
Cobalamin Supplementation
As mentioned previously, hypocobalaminemia and
cobalamin deficiency are especially common (>80% of
cases) in dogs and cats with EPI. Therefore, serum cobalamin concentrations should be measured in all animals
with EPI. Cobalamin deficiency can lead to various gastrointestinal and systemic complications, and severe
hypocobalaminemia has been reported to be a negative
prognostic factor in dogs with EPI and cats with chronic
gastrointestinal disease, that often co-exists with EPI in
this species. Cats with cobalamin deficiency have been
shown to have abnormalities in amino acid metabolism.
In a recent publication reviewing 150 cats with EPI,
cobalamin supplementation favorably affected the
response to treatment, even in cats with normal serum
cobalamin concentrations. Therefore, correction of
cobalamin deficiency is important in both dogs and cats
with EPI.
Because cobalamin deficiency can lead to cobalamin
malabsorption, oral supplementation of cobalamin was
considered not to be effective in dogs and cats with EPI.
However, recent evidence suggests that oral supplementation of cobalamin might be equally effective in these
cases. Cobalamin should be administered subcutaneously using the following dosage regimen: 250–1250 μg
(depending on the size of the animal) once a week for six
weeks, followed by an injection one month after that.
Oral cobalamin should be administered at 250 μg (cats)
or 250–1250 μg (dogs, depending on the size), daily,
for 8 weeks. Serum cobalamin concentrations should

VetBooks.ir

54 Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency in Dogs and Cats

be checked one month after the last dose and then
­monitored periodically (e.g., every six months) as some
animals may require repeated cycles or life‐long cobalamin supplementation.
Dietary Modification
There are two major dietary factors believed to be important in the management of dogs with EPI: the fat content
of the diet and the amount and type of dietary fiber.
Historically, it has been suggested that a fat‐restricted
diet should be offered to dogs with EPI because adequate
fat digestion and subsequent resolution of clinical signs
may not be achieved with enzyme replacement therapy
alone. One of the problems encountered with the use of
low‐fat diets in dogs with EPI is that weight gain could be
difficult and slow to achieve, especially in large‐breed
and cachectic dogs. In addition, low‐fat diets may contribute to deficiencies of fat‐soluble vitamins given the
fact that fat digestibility does not normalize after enzyme
supplementation.
Studies in dogs with EPI failed to show a clear benefit
of any diet (including low‐fat diets) over another. In fact,
different diets appeared to be more suitable for different
dogs, suggesting that several diets should be tried in
patients with EPI until the most appropriate one for a
specific animal is identified. Therefore, the routine and
exclusive use of fat‐restricted diets in all dogs with EPI is
not currently recommended. High‐fat diets should probably be avoided, however, at least during the initial stabilization phase. In some cases, there might be no need to
change the animal’s original diet, if it is complete and
balanced. The type of fat (e.g., long‐chain vs medium‐
chain triglycerides) also does not seem to play a crucial
role in the response to treatment.
It has been suggested by some authors that high‐fiber
diets should be used in dogs with EPI. However, there is
no convincing evidence in the literature for such recommendation. High‐fiber diets might prohibit weight gain in
hyporexic animals as a result of low caloric density.
In addition, certain types of fiber can impair the activity of
pancreatic and brush border enzymes, potentially leading
to reduced digestibility of nutrients. Therefore, high‐fiber
diets are currently not recommended in dogs with EPI.
No studies have evaluated the use of specific diets in
cats with EPI. Therefore, dietary recommendations are
based mainly on clinical experience and extrapolation
from clinical experience with dogs. Fat‐restricted diets
should be avoided if possible, for the same reasons mentioned above for dogs. In addition, cats are strict carnivores and protein and fat are their main energy sources,
while carbohydrates (which are often increased in fat‐
restricted diets) should be generally kept at low levels.

As in dogs, high‐fiber diets should probably be avoided
in cats with EPI.
Histamine‐2 Receptor Antagonists and Proton
Pump Inhibitors
Histamine‐2 receptor (H2 receptor) antagonists and proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) have been recommended by
some as adjunctive treatment in animals with EPI. A large
proportion of pancreatic enzymes, especially lipase, is
inactivated in the stomach due to low pH. It has been
hypothesized that acid‐suppressing medications may
reduce the hydrolysis of pancreatic enzyme supplements
in the stomach through the increase of gastric pH, thus
increasing efficacy. Obviously, this applies only to uncoated
enzyme supplements and raw pancreas. However, no
studies have evaluated the efficacy of acid suppression in
the treatment of EPI in dogs and cats, and therefore their
usefulness is questionable. In addition, the potential problem of reduced efficacy of enzyme ­supplements due to
hydrolysis in the stomach could be overcome by increasing the dose of enzymes or by using products with enteric
coating. Therefore, the routine use of acid suppression
medications is currently not recommended.

­Prognosis
Although clinical improvement is noted in the vast
majority of dogs and cats treated appropriately for EPI, a
percentage do not respond well to treatment for reasons
that have not been clearly defined. Good initial response
to treatment is seen in approximately 60% of dogs and
cats with EPI, with the remaining animals showing either
partial (~20%) or poor (~20%) response. Partial or poor
response is usually indicated by the animals remaining
underweight or having soft stools.
Median survival time for dogs with EPI has been
reported to be approximately five years. The most
important parameter that affects survival seems to be
initial response to treatment, with animals that have a
good ­initial response surviving on average almost eight
times longer than those with poor response. Therefore,
animals that respond well to initial treatment seem to
survive for long periods. As mentioned above, hypocobalaminemia has been shown to be a negative prognostic factor, and animals with severe hypocobalaminemia
survive half as long as animals without severe hypocobalaminemia. The nature and severity of clinical signs,
signalment, and different therapeutic interventions do
not seem to have important prognostic significance.
No data are available for survival and prognosis in cats
with EPI.

589

VetBooks.ir

590

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

­Further Reading
Batchelor DJ, Noble PJ, Cripps PJ, et al. Breed associations
for canine exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. J Vet Intern
Med 2007; 21(2): 207–14.
Batchelor DJ, Noble PJ, Taylor RH, et al. Prognostic factors
in canine exocrine pancreatic insufficiency: prolonged
survival is likely if clinical remission is achieved. J Vet
Intern Med 2007; 21(1): 54–60.
Clark LA, Cox ML. Current status of genetic studies of
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in dogs. Top Compan
Anim Med 2012; 27(3): 109–12.
Mas A, Noble PJ, Cripps PJ, et al. A blinded randomized
controlled trial to determine the effect of enteric coating
on enzyme treatment for canine exocrine pancreatic
efficiency. BMC Vet Res 2012; 28: 127.
Steiner JM. Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in the cat.
Top Compan Anim Med 2012; 27(3): 113–16.

Viviano KR, Ziglioli V. Suspected isolated pancreatic
enzyme deficiencies in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2013;
27(3): 588–91.
Wiberg ME, Saari SA, Westermarck E. Exocrine pancreatic
atrophy in German Shepherd dogs and rough‐coated
collies: an end result of lymphocytic pancreatitis.
Vet Pathol 1999; 36(6): 530–41.
Wiberg ME, Westermarck E. Subclinical exocrine
pancreatic insufficiency in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2002; 220(8): 1183–7.
Xenoulis PG, Fradkin JM, Rapp SW, et al. Suspected
isolated pancreatic lipase deficiency in a dog. J Vet Intern
Med 2007; 21(5): 1113–16.
Xenoulis PG, Zoran DL, Fosgate GT, Suchodolski JS,
Steiner JM. J Vet Intern Med. 2016; Nov; 30(6):
1790–1797.

VetBooks.ir

591

55
Pancreatitis in the Dog
Caroline Mansfield, BSc, BVMS, MVM, PhD, MANZCVS, DECVIM-CA
Melbourne Veterinary School, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Pancreatitis in the dog includes an array of presentations,
from low‐grade inflammation incidentally discovered to
animals with severe, life‐threatening systemic disease.
Clinically, veterinarians often use the term chronic pancreatitis (CP) to describe instances where the clinical
signs are mild, whereas acute pancreatitis (AP) is the
term used when there is greater severity and a rapid onset
of clinical signs. This clinical classification, h
­ owever, does
not always correlate with the histologic classification.
Histologically, AP is defined as neutrophilic inflammation, without fibrosis or exocrine atrophy, which is usually present within the body of the pancreas and/or
peripancreatic fat. There have been extensive experimental studies, predominantly in rodent models, of initiating events of AP. In essence, AP develops when inert
zymogens (precursors of digestive enzymes) are activated within pancreatic acinar cells rather than within
the duodenal lumen. If this occurs at a low level, safeguards such as pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor
(PSTI) come into play and mop up the activated pancreatic enzymes within the body of the pancreas. Once PSTI
is overwhelmed, there is an influx of proinflammatory
cytokines (especially interleukin‐8) and neutrophils.
Other inflammatory pathways are then also stimulated
including the complement, kallin‐kallikrein, and nitric
oxide pathways. Circulating anti-inflammatory mediators (such as alpha‐macroglobulins) can initially counteract this inflammatory state, but in many situations are
themselves overwhelmed. When pro-inflammatory
pathways overcome defences, there is reduced pancreatic
microcirculation, as well as ongoing inflammation and
necrosis within the pancreas due to neutrophil migration
and adherence. This inflammation and necrosis theoretically therefore starts in the pancreatic acinar cells, but
when severe spills out into the peripancreatic fat.

Although some dogs with AP may have self‐limiting
disease or mild clinical severity (mild abdominal pain,
vomiting), others develop systemic complications due to
activation of the multiple inflammatory cascades. The
cause of abdominal pain is considered to be distension of
the pancreatic capsule, or via stimulation of mesenteric
pain receptors by inflammatory exudate. The pathophysiology of pain is quite complex: the nociceptive (ascending) pathway travels via the dorsal horn, and is mediated
by amino acid (glutamate and aspartate) and neuropeptide (substance P, neurokinin A, and calcitonin gene‐
related peptide) release. If there is ongoing nociceptive
input, activation of N‐methyl‐D‐aspartate (NMDA)
receptors may occur, which is considered a key step in
the development for central sensitization. Vomiting
occurs due to both central and peripheral stimulation of
vomiting pathways, but the exact mechanism has not
been confirmed for AP. Systemic effects of AP relate
both to the clinical signs (hypovolemia, etc.) and the
presence of circulating proinflammatory mediators.
There are many potential factors that may initiate or
trigger the initial activation of pancreatic zymogens within
the acinar cells. Experimentally, it has been shown that
co‐localization of lysosomal granules and zymogen granules leads to zymogen activation. This effect appears to be
amplified by a reduction in acinar cell pH, and is considered to be the mechanism by which activation occurs in
people with sudden increases in intracellular calcium (as
can occur during cardiopulmonary bypass). In dogs, the
most commonly implicated causes of AP include dietary
indiscretion, drugs, trauma, and unknown (or idiopathic).
High‐fat, low‐protein diets in particular are clearly implicated in causing AP in dogs and rodent models; clinically
this is typically in association with long‐term feeding of
urolithiasis diets. There is a large list of drugs that may
cause idiosyncratic pancreatitis, but the most frequently
implicated drugs include azathioprine, potassium

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

592

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

­bromide, and o
­ rganophosphates. Onset of pancreatitis
can occur immediately after starting these medications. In
some cases, there is delayed onset of drug‐induced pancreatitis, particularly in humans; this would make the link
more difficult to prove in dogs. Trauma is also well recognized as a cause of AP but the pancreatic trauma is usually
one of a constellation of abnormalities. Often, no inciting
cause is identified; however, unobserved dietary indiscretion may still occur in these cases.
Chronic pancreatitis (CP) is defined histologically as
lymphocytic‐plasmacytic inflammation of the pancreas
and peripancreatic area with presence of concurrent
fibrosis. Although pancreatic function is generally preserved, dogs with CP can develop diabetes mellitus or
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency associated with the
fibrosis. The etiology of CP is poorly understood in dogs.
The currently accepted rationale for CP in humans is
called the sentinel acute pancreatitis event (SAPE)
hypothesis. With the SAPE hypothesis, pancreatic acinar
cells initially come under some type of oxidative stress
(e.g., fats, alcohol, oxidative products in the bile), but do
not develop any inflammation or fibrosis. When the
­acinar cells are sufficiently stimulated by the oxidative
stress, a pro-inflammatory response occurs (the acute
pancreatitis event). If the oxidative stresses are removed
at this point, the pancreas generally heals with no ongoing consequences. However, if there is perpetuation of
low‐grade inflammation in response to continued oxidative stresses, stellate cells that migrate to the pancreas in
response to secretion of proinflammatory cytokines are
stimulated, leading to periacinar fibrosis. It is not certain
if SAPE occurs in dogs, as many or most of the oxidative
stressors do not generally occur chronically in the canine
population, but the rationale appears logical to apply.
There are also multiple genetic abnormalities that predispose humans to CP, including mutations of cationic
trypsinogen, which cause spontaneous production of
trypsin in the acinar cells. To date, no similar genetic
mutation has been identified in dogs, although investigations are still ongoing. Additionally, autoimmune disease
is strongly suspected to occur in cocker spaniels, and
may be similar to the autoimmune form of pancreatitis
identified in people. Obstructive causes of CP are not
common in dogs, and dietary indiscretion is not thought
to be as important a trigger for CP as it is for AP.

­Epidemiology
The true incidence of pancreatitis is difficult to determine, as definitive antemortem diagnosis is often problematic. In one study assessing dogs submitted for
postmortem at a first opinion practice, the prevalence of

CP was 34%, with over half of those classified as having
moderate or marked pancreatic inflammation. Similarly,
inflammation or fibrosis was identified in approximately
50% of dogs in a postmortem study at a referral institution. There appears to be a breed predisposition for
spaniel breeds, particularly cocker spaniels. This may
reflect the dog population in the study region, but anecdotal evidence would support this statement to hold in a
wider dog population. These prevalence studies raise
two major points. Firstly, CP is probably grossly underrecognized due to the difficulties in diagnosing the
condition antemortem. Secondly, histologic changes
­
may not be clinically important, and postmortem studies
may actually overemphasize the importance of CP or the
sensitivity of various tests.
The incidence of AP is similarly difficult to determine,
although it is a condition that occurs worldwide.
Anecdotal reports would suggest that AP is the most
commonly diagnosed emergency presentation of the
gastrointestinal system in dogs. In most reports, middle‐
aged, overweight dogs appear to be predisposed.

­History and Clinical Signs
Acute Pancreatitis
The clinical presentation of AP is initially related to the
development of gastrointestinal clinical signs: vomiting,
anorexia, and abdominal pain. Abdominal pain may be
subtle or difficult to determine initially but can be manifested as severe (e.g. crouching in prayer position and
excessive restlessness). The severity of these clinical signs
along with the duration of onset also determines the findings. Animals may be weak or obtunded and in hypovolemic shock if there is a rapid reduction in circulating
blood volume and vasoconstriction due to systemic inflammation. This spectrum of clinical signs is incorporated in
Table 55.1. Rectal temperature can be increased (due to
inflammation) or decreased (due to shock), and some
dogs may also present with neurologic signs. Roughly one‐
third of dogs will also reportedly have diarrhea or melena.
Co‐morbidities such as diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)
may be present. It is considered probable that DKA develops secondary to overwhelming destruction of the pancreatic tissue; however, it is also possible that the acidotic
state in DKA leads to pancreatitis. However, with preexisting or undiagnosed diabetes, dogs can be expected to
also have a history of polyuria/polydipsia and weight loss.
The systemic nature of severe inflammation also
means that animals may have respiratory signs (due to
develop­ment of acute lung injury and/or pleural effusion), neurologic abnormalities (due to thromboembolic

VetBooks.ir

55 Pancreatitis in the Dog

Table 55.1 Classification of clinical signs into severity categories
Severity of presentation

Mild

Moderate

Severe

Gastrointestinal signs

Vomiting 1–2
times/past 12 hours

Vomiting 4–6 times/past 12 hours;
occasional regurgitation; melena;
hematochezia; no gut sounds auscultated
in 24‐hour period

Vomiting or regurgitation 6 times/past
12 hours, or for longer than 36 hours;
no food for >3 days; plus any of the
following: melena, absent gut sounds 24
hours, hematochezia

Dehydration

Skin tent

Skin tent, weak pulses

Marked skin turgor, prolonged capillary
fill time, injected mucous membranes,
tachycardia, weak/thready pulses

Abdominal pain

May be unsettled
and respond when
abdomen palpated

Decreased response to surroundings,
stretches and looks around at abdomen,
flinches or snaps on abdominal palpation

Non-responsive to stimuli, screams,
cries or snaps when moving or
abdomen palpated

Heart rate (HR)

Tachycardia with no
pulse deficits

Occasional ventricular premature
complexes or sustained HR >180/min

Paroxysmal or sustained ventricular
tachycardia

Respiratory rate

Normal

Dyspnea or tachypnea (>40 breaths/min)

Signs consistent with pneumonia,
pleural effusion

Vascular forces

Normal systolic
blood pressure (BP)
and albumin >18 g/L

Systolic BP <60 or >180 mm Hg or
albumin <18 g/L

Systolic BP <60 and >180 mmHg and
serum albumin <18 g/L

Source: Adapted from Mansfield et al. (2008).

disease), cardiac arrhythmias, and signs associated with
renal failure (oliguria, obtundation).
Local complications can also occur, such as extrahepatic bile duct obstruction (EHBDO); EHBDO may
develop due to physical obstruction of the bile duct by an
enlarged and inflamed pancreas, or due to decreased
motility of the bile duct mediated by local peritonitis.
Regardless, dogs with EHBDO are jaundiced, although as
a complication it generally occurs late in the progress of
disease and often the dog appears to be recovering.
Another local complication is the development of fluid‐
filled regions within the pancreas, often associated with
necrosis (Figure 55.1). These acute fluid collections may
be incidental findings, but often are associated with a sudden increase in abdominal pain. True pancreatic abscessation is extremely unlikely in dogs, and pseudocysts
develop weeks following an acute episode of pancreatitis.
Chronic Pancreatitis
Chronic pancreatitis is generally a milder presentation
than AP. In some circumstances, there may be no associated detectable clinical signs. In other dogs, there may be
a single episode or waxing and waning loss of appetite,
mild vomiting, and abdominal pain. Diabetes mellitus
may occur in conjunction with CP, and so flares of pancreatic inflammation may coincide with periods of insulin resistance. Similarly, CP may be concurrent with
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and the clinical signs of
the latter may predominate.

­Diagnosis
Routine Laboratory Tests
Routine hematology is fairly nonspecific in pancreatitis,
although a stress leukogram is usually present. As AP is a
systemic inflammatory condition, there may also be
changes in other white blood cell concentrations.
Biochemical changes reflect the degree of dehydration
and hypovolemia present (increased total protein,
azotemia, electrolyte derangements, etc.) but are not
pathognomonic for pancreatitis. Total lipase and amylase
activities can be markedly increased in AP, but can also be
normal in severe AP and increased with nonpancreatic
disease. Both renal disease and administration of dexamethasone can increase serum lipase and/or amylase
activities, without primary pancreatitis being present.
Due to the inherent issues with sensitivity of routine
lipase assays, a catalytic assay utilizing a more selective
lipase substrate (1,2‐o‐dilauryl‐rac‐glycero‐3‐glutaric
acid‐{6′‐methylresorufin} ester [DGGR]) has been
recently assessed. The DGGR assay appears to have higher
sensitivity than routine lipase assays, and has similar findings to ELISA‐based measurements of specific pancreatic
lipase concentrations (details of this test are given later).
Often dogs with AP have grossly lipemic serum, and
although this may be a consequence of fat saponification
during the disease, fasting serum cholesterol and triglycerides should be measured 1–2 weeks after recovery to
ensure that hyperlipidemia is not an inciting factor.

593

VetBooks.ir

594

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

(a)

(b)

assay (SNAP‐cPL™, Idexx Laboratories) that shows good
alignment and reproducibility with the laboratory‐based
ELISA.
There have been a number of studies evaluating cPL
for the diagnosis of pancreatitis (Table 55.2). Overall,
cPL should be considered highly specific for pancreatitis.
Sensitivity of the cPL assay appears to be high in animals
with AP, but less so for CP. When interpreting cPL, it
should be remembered that pancreatic inflammation
may be present, but not be the cause of the clinical presentation. The most relevant application of this is when
there are duodenal foreign bodies or septic peritonitis
that can cause “bystander” pancreatic inflammation.
Misdiagnosis in this situation could fail to identify that
surgical correction is required.
Pancreatic elastase (PE‐1) is another enzyme considered to be pancreas specific. There is a commercially
available canine PE‐1 (cPE‐1) ELISA (ScheBo.Elastase
1‐Canine, ScheBo Biotech AG, Giessen, Germany). It
appears that PE‐1 has wide variation in healthy dogs, and
similar sensitivity and specificity to cPL when assessing
dogs with severe AP (see Table 55.2). However, this
premise should be tested in a larger cohort of dogs.
Diagnostic Imaging

Figure 55.1 (a) Ultrasound image of pancreas with large
fluid‐filled lesion (white arrow). (b) Irregular and ill‐defined fluid
collection (white arrow) surrounded by hyperechoic fat
(arrowhead). If either of these were present in a dog with
increasing levels of pain, then percutaneous drainage should
be recommended.

Pancreas‐Specific Biochemistry
Until the past decade, pancreas‐specific enzymes such as
trypsin‐like immunoreactivity or trypsinogen activation
peptide have not been considered useful in diagnosing
either AP or CP. Canine pancreatic lipase (cPL) has been
developed into a commercially available ELISA test
(Spec‐cPL), and is now used widely in veterinary practice. It is thought that cPL is only produced in the pancreas, and is affected less by non-pancreatic disease than
total lipase. There have been some studies that show
clearance of cPL is not affected by acute or chronic
reductions in glomerular filtration. The reference interval for the laboratory ELISA is <200 μg/L in healthy dogs,
with results >400 μg/L considered consistent with a diagnosis of pancreatitis in dogs with compatible clinical
signs. There is also an in‐clinic rapid semiquantitative

Diagnostic imaging is an important component of the
investigation of dogs presenting with signs of abdominal
disease. The major indication for abdominal radiographs
is to rule out the presence of surgical disease such as
intestinal obstruction or gallbladder rupture. The
changes associated with AP are nonspecific on radiographs and include loss of detail in the cranial abdomen,
and on the VD view, pushing of the proximal duodenum
laterally (Figures 55.2 and 55.3).
Ultrasound is generally accepted as the most useful
diagnostic imaging modality to evaluate the pancreas in
clinical practice. Full abdominal ultrasound is recommended to assess for the presence of free fluid or other
diseases. Changes described in CP are fairly vague, and it
is considered that this diagnosis is difficult to make
definitively via ultrasound. Pathognomonic signs of AP
include an enlarged, hypoechoic pancreas surrounded
by bright, hyperechoic fat and mesentery (Figure 55.4).
To date, more advanced imaging modalities such as
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT) are infrequently performed in dogs with AP,
due to the prolonged anesthesia required and the
accepted sensitivity of ultrasound. The use of CT imaging in people is more frequently done, and can identify
infected necrosis and other changes with a high degree
of sensitivity.

VetBooks.ir

55 Pancreatitis in the Dog

Table 55.2 Summary of sensitivity and specificity for various laboratory testing in dogs from various studies
Study

Number of dogs

Method of diagnosis

Analyte assessed

Sensitivity (%)

Specificity (%)

Haworth et al. J Vet
Emerg Crit Care
2014;24(2):135–43

n = 38
AP = 11
Non AP = 26

Clinical evaluation of
dogs presenting with
acute abdominal
disease

SNAP‐cPL

82

59

Spec‐cPL >400 μg/L

70

77

Chartier et al. Vet J
2014;201:385–9

n= 14 AP
n = 19 non‐AP (11 pure/
modified transudate, 1
septic exudate, 2 nonseptic
exudate and 5 hemorrhagic
effusion)

Clinical evaluation

Peritoneal CPL
>500 μg/L

100

94.7

Peritoneal amylase
>1050 U/L

71.4

84.2

Peritoneal total
lipase >500 U/L

92.9

94.7

McCord et al. J Vet
Intern Med
2012;26:888–96

n = 84
AP = 57
Non‐AP = 27

Combination of
clinical and imaging
results

Spec‐cPL >400 μg/L

71.7–77.8

80.5–88

Lipase

43.4–53.6

89.3–92.5

Amylase

52.4–56

76.7–80.6

Mansfield et al. J Vet
Diag Invest
2012;24:312–18

n = 32
Minimal/no inflammation
= 20

Histology

Spec‐cPL >400 μg/L

NA

90

Trivedi et al. J Vet
Intern Med
2011;25:1241–7

n = 70
Mild AP = 56
Moderate‐severe AP = 7
Normal pancreas = 7

Histology

Spec‐cPL >400 μg/L

21 (mild)
71 (mod‐severe)

100

TLI

30 (mild)
29 (mod‐severe)

100

Lipase

54 (mild)
71 (mod‐severe)

43

Amylase

7 (mild)
14 (mod‐severe)

100

Mansfield et al. J Vet
Diag Invest
2011;23:691–7

n = 61
AP = 41
CP = 3
Pancreatic carcinoma = 5
Nonpancreatitis = 12

Histology

CPE‐1 >17.24 ng/mL

61.4 (all)
66 (AP)
78 (severe AP)

91.7

Neilson‐Carley et al.
Am J Vet Res
2011;72:302–7

n = 64
AP = 20
Other disease = 17
Healthy = 27

Histology

Spec‐cPL >400 μg/L

NA

95%

Steiner et al. Vet Ther
2008;9:263–73

n = 22

Gross evidence at
postmortem

Spec‐cPL >400 μg/L

63.6

NA

Lipase

31.8

NA

Amylase

40.9

NA

Steiner et al. J Vet
Intern Med
2001;15:274

n = 11
(Severe AP)

Clinical findings and
histology

Spec‐cPL >400 μg/L

88

NA

Mansfield and Jones
Aust Vet J
2000;78:416–22

n = 42
AP = 15
Non‐AP = 27

Clinical findings and
histology

Lipase >3 × RI

63.6

54.6

Amylase >3 × RI

22.7

78.1

TLI >100 μ/L

37.5

89.3

Source: Adapted from Mansfield (2013).
AP, acute pancreatitis; CP, chronic pancreatitis; CPE‐1, serum canine pancreatic‐elastase‐1; cPL, canine pancreatic lipase (or canine pancreatic
lipase immunoreactivity in earlier studies); NA, not assessed; RI, reference interval; TLI, trypsin‐like immunoreactivity.

595

VetBooks.ir

596

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

(a)

(b)

Figure 55.3 VD radiograph of a dog with acute pancreatitis.
The descending duodenum is pushed laterally (arrow) and there is
decreased contrast in the cranial abdomen.

(a)

(b)

Figure 55.2 Abdominal radiographs of a dog with free fluid
(lateral (a) and VD (b)). The cause of the effusion cannot be
determined by radiographs alone. Fluid analysis and further
imaging is required.

Cytology and Histology
Cytology is not used frequently in evaluating dogs with
AP. However, abdominal fluid analysis should form part
of the work‐up to ensure that a septic or neoplastic process is not missed. Dogs with AP will generally have a
suppurative, non-septic exudate present. A recent study
in a small number of dogs with AP determined that
measurement of cPL in peritoneal fluid had a sensitivity
of 100% when using a cut‐off value >500 μg/L. Caution

Figure 55.4 (a) Ultrasound image of enlarged hypoechoic right
pancreatic limb (arrow). (b) In this ultrasound image, the pancreas
is larger and more heterogeneous in appearance, with
hyperechoic speckling of surrounding fat.

VetBooks.ir

55 Pancreatitis in the Dog

should be applied before relying extensively on this, as
the study had only a few dogs with inflammatory/septic
exudates as comparison.
Aspiration of fluid‐filled collections within the pancreas may have a therapeutic benefit (described later).
Fine needle aspirates (using a 25 G needle) can safely be
obtained from the pancreas and may be beneficial in
some cases of CP. Cytology is generally considered of
marginal utility in AP, as there is often such a large
degree of necrosis and inflammation that the samples
are ­nondiagnostic and/or cellular criteria overlap with
malignancy.
Histologic evaluation of pancreatic biopsy is considered the gold standard for diagnosis of pancreatic pathology. This is seldom obtained in dogs with AP, due to the
morbidity associated with this procedure. The most
common finding in dogs with AP is widespread necrosis
of pancreatic and peripancreatic tissue. In dogs with
milder, more intermittent clinical signs, exploratory
­laparotomy is more commonly indicated. The stomach,
intestines (distal and proximal small intestine), mesenteric lymph nodes, and liver should all be sampled in
addition to the pancreas.
A summary of the diagnostic approach recommended
when dogs present with severe signs compatible with
AP is shown in Figure 55.5.

­Therapy
Acute Pancreatitis
Treatment of AP is generally supportive and nonspecific.
The major “triad” of treatment is IV fluids, analgesia, and
nutritional support. Fluid therapy should be tailored to
the individual dog, with correction of electrolyte losses
and restoration of circulating blood volume and acid–
base balance being of the utmost importance. A recent
study in humans suggested that using alkalinizing fluids
(Hartmann’s solution) produced a better response than
acidifying solutions (saline) and so extrapolation would
suggest that this (or alternatively, lactated Ringer’s solution) would be a good first‐line fluid choice in dogs. The
volume of IV fluids required to correct blood volume
may be higher than can be tolerated, and potentially lead
to pulmonary edema or other signs of volume overload.
In those circumstances, the use of colloid therapy may be
of benefit. There is little to no evidence that using plasma
will be beneficial in dogs with AP unless they have overt
coagulation disorders.
Analgesia is essential in dogs that have AP, even if little
pain is observed. Abdominal pain can be categorized as
mild, moderate or severe (see Table 55.1). The principle
behind analgesia in these situations is to start with the

maximal combination/dose considered necessary for the
level of pain and then titrate down (rather than starting
low and titrating up if ineffective). Ideally, analgesic
­protocols in AP should avoid the use of drugs such as
fentanyl that dramatically reduce gastrointestinal
­motility. However, if pain is not controlled by the recommended protocols, then using fentanyl as a constant rate
infusion (CRI) should be considered. The addition of
methylnaltrexone may mitigate the decreased GI motility in those circumstances.
A partial mu‐agonist such as buprenorphine or full mu‐
agonist such as methadone should be considered as the
baseline therapy (starting at maximum doses and intervals: 10–40 μg/kg q6–8h and 0.1–0.5 mg/kg q4–6h
respectively, then tapering down). If pain is moderate then
ketamine (5–20 μg/kg/min) and lidocaine (25–50 μg/kg/
min) CRIs should be started at the higher dosage end.
Once pain is well controlled, the ketamine should be
reduced first, followed by lidocaine and then tapering of
the opioid. With severe pain, epidural morphine (0.1 mg/
kg q12–24h) or a fentanyl CRI (0.2–0.8 μg/kg/min)
should be given, along with the lidocaine and ketamine
as above. Once pain is controlled, the epidural/CRI is
swapped for intermittent opioid, then all are tapered as
previously described.
If possible, oral gabapentin (10 mg/kg q12–24h) could
also be administered. If there is a sudden relapse of pain,
the pancreas should be reexamined via ultrasound for
the presence of a fluid collection. In people, aspiration of
fluid collections is recommended when they are sterile,
in preference to surgical debridement. Even in infected
necrosis, control with antibiotics is undertaken before
any surgical procedures. As virtually all the fluid collections in dogs will be sterile, and pancreatic surgery is
associated with high morbidity and mortality rates, percutaneous drainage of fluid‐filled areas is advocated for
dogs as well. This can be performed using mild sedation
and fine needle aspiration.
Nutritional support is the third major component of
management. In people and dogs with critical illness,
lack of enteral nutrition has been shown to perpetuate
systemic inflammation as well as leading to mucosal
atrophy and other changes. In mild‐to‐moderate cases of
AP, the current rationale is to start enteral feeding if
there has been no/little enteral nutrition for more than
five days. In severe cases of AP, the earliest possible
enteral nutrition is advocated. Dogs with severe AP can
tolerate esophageal tube feeding, and so surgery or prolonged anesthesia to insert jejunostomy tubes is not
essential. If the animal is moribund or unable to withstand a general anesthesia, then nasoesophageal tube
feeding should be started as soon as possible. Once they
are able to have GA safely, then an esophageal (E) tube
should be inserted. Dogs can still be offered food by

597

VetBooks.ir

598

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Dog presents with clinical signs of acute pancreatitis

Routine clinical pathology (biochemistry, hematology, electrolytes) and
if possible blood gas analysis and urine analysis

Results consistent with specific
metabolic disease

Results NOT consistent with
specific metabolic disease

Further diagnostic testing
and treatment as required

Abdominal radiographs

Evidence of intestinal
obstruction

No specific
abnormalities

Suggestion of
free fluid

Abdominocentesis and fluid
analysis

Septic
exudate

Sterile
exudate

Surgical exploration of abdomen
once animal is considered stable
enough for anesthesia.

SNAP cPL or Specific canine
pancreatic lipase or serum
pancreatic elastase-1 or total
lipase

Abdominal
ultrasound
Evidence of
surgical abdominal
disease

Abnormal pancreas with
remainder abdomen normal on
abdominal ultrasound

No identifiable abnormalities on
abdominal ultrasound

Normal SNAP cPL/cPLI/cPE-1

Abnormal SNAP cPL or increased
cPLI/cPE-1

Unlikely primary pancreatitis. Treat for nonspecific gastrointestinal disease and re-evaluate
if poor response.

Normal SNAP cPL/cPLI/cPE-1

Likely primary pancreatitis. Confirm with pancreatic
cytology if discordant results or repeat ultrasound
examination.

Figure 55.5 A diagnostic algorithm for the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis in the dog. Source: Mansfield (2013). Reproduced with
permission of Elsevier.

VetBooks.ir

55 Pancreatitis in the Dog

mouth, and can be sent home with an E tube in place
if necessary.
The biggest complications associated with interventional enteral nutrition are aspiration pneumonia and
tube site infection. Close attention should be paid to the
tube site to avoid the latter. To avoid regurgitation and
development of aspiration pneumonia, it is not recommended to feed full resting energy requirements (RER)
unless the feeding is extremely well tolerated. Rather, the
first 24 hours should be 25% RER and titrate up slowly
each day. Similarly, there is no evidence that a specific
diet will result in improved outcome or speed of recovery, and as such any balanced convalescent diet for dogs
is generally well tolerated.
Another important aspect of management of AP is to
reduce vomiting and control nausea. Due to the role of
substance P in mediating abdominal pain and vomiting,
maropitant should be considered a first‐line antiemetic
drug. If vomiting is poorly controlled, or the dog appears
to have severe nausea, then additional medications such
as ondansetron (0.5 mg/kg IV then q12–24h) can be
added. There is a theoretical disadvantage in using metoclopramide as it inhibits dopamine in rodent models.
Due to the potential prokinetic benefits of metoclopramide a CRI should still be considered if decreased GI
motility is thought to be contributing to nausea/
inappetence.
There is little to no evidence that administering gastric
acid suppressants does anything to reduce morbidity of
AP in dogs. However, if there is melena or hematemesis
then use of a proton pump inhibitor should be considered. The presence of any systemic complications such
as pleural effusion or ventricular tachycardia should be
assessed and treated as required. Antibiotics are not necessary unless bacterial translocation is considered likely.
The area most likely to undergo investigation in the
future is targeted antiinflammatory therapies and
analgesic agents. Similarly, the use of corticosteroids
­
may be further evaluated, particularly when hypotension
appears to be nonresponsive to fluid therapy.
Follow‐Up

If an inciting cause (such as drug or food) is known, then
this should be removed. Dogs can be discharged with
feeding tubes in place if required, and a low‐fat diet is
currently recommended. This should generally be fed for
1–2 weeks and then the dog should be reevaluated and
fasting serum triglyceride and cholesterol concentration
measured. If these are high, investigations should be
undertaken for underlying causes of hyperlipidemia and
treatment, including diet, continued as appropriate. If
there is no hyperlipidemia, dogs can be transitioned back
to their regular diet. Analgesia may be necessary in the

early stages following hospitalization, and medication
such as tramadol or gabapentin dispensed.
Anecdotally, tramadol may cause inappetence and so
gabapentin may be a better alternative. In people, after a
bout of severe AP subclinical EPI exists for approximately four weeks following resolution. It is not certain if
this occurs in dogs, but it may be therapeutically useful
to supplement pancreatic enzymes for a short period
after discharge. Animals should not be discharged if they
still need antiemetic therapy.
Chronic Pancreatitis
Unfortunately, treatment options for CP are poorly
explored, and the benefit of proposed treatments is
unsupported. It does make sense to look for underlying
causes of CP that can be corrected, such as hyperlipidemia. If there is hyperlipidemia, then an underlying
endocrinopathy should be considered, particularly hypothyroidism. If both triglycerides and cholesterol are
increased, then an inherent defect in lipid metabolism is
more likely. In the absence of an endocrinopathy, treatment should initially consist of feeding a low‐fat diet,
with <15% dry matter as fat. Other treatments such as
omega‐3 fatty acid supplementation (20–30 mg/kg day)
can also be used, but should be gradually introduced as
they can cause gastrointestinal signs in their own right. If
triglycerides (TG) alone are high and do not decrease
with dietary management then gemfibrosil (7.5–10 mg/
kg PO q12h) may be used. Other less well‐established
treatments such as chitin (binds lipids in the diet) and
niacin (to reduce liver TG synthesis) may also be beneficial. For treatment of high cholesterol (with normal TG)
when dietary treatment is ineffective, a statin (HMG
CoA‐reductase inhibitors) may be used. Safety margins
are high for this group of drugs in dogs, and a dosage of
10–20 mg PO once daily is currently recommended for
lovastatin. If the animal is not hyperlipidemic, there is no
evidence for benefit from feeding a low‐fat diet. However,
this is frequently done in practice and if the diet is
well balanced, long‐term feeding of it is unlikely to
cause harm.
If no underlying cause is diagnosed and CP is confirmed or strongly suspected, then the dilemma is
whether to treat with analgesia alone or with additional
antiinflammatory/immune suppression. Ideally, immune
suppression should be used only when there is histologic
confirmation of lymphocytic inflammation within the
pancreas. If the dog is not diabetic, prednisolone is the
drug of choice for both immune suppression and to treat
inflammation/fibrosis, albeit at different dosages for the
different effects. Prednisolone has been removed
from the register of drugs that can potentially cause

599

VetBooks.ir

600

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

­pancreatitis in people, and studies have shown that glucocorticoids do not cause any histologic changes in dogs.
If the dog is diabetic, it is not appropriate to use prednisolone due to increased insulin resistance. Ciclosporin is
a viable treatment option for CP in diabetic dogs, but it is
expensive in medium to larger breeds. Azathioprine has
been implicated as causing pancreatitis in dogs, but this
is a weak association. More importantly, it has not been
shown that dogs with preexisting idiopathic or dietary‐
induced pancreatitis are more likely to develop reactions
to azathioprine.
The pathogenesis of pain in CP is complex and multifactorial. Studies in humans have shown that the degree
of fibrosis is not related to the degree of pain, and that
interaction between the nervous system and inflammatory process is crucial. Major mediators of pain in CP
appear to be calcitonin gene‐related peptide (CGRP) and
substance P, acting through the neurokinin‐1 receptor.
Therefore, during acute bouts of inflammation, treatment with a NK1 receptor antagonist such as maropitant
may be of benefit in multiple ways (antiemetic, reducing
pain and potentially directly attenuating the systemic
inflammatory response). Additionally, the concept of
neuronal plasticity suggests that the longer inflammation has been present, the more severe the pain associated with it will be. The most effective method of
long‐term analgesia that can be administered at home in
dogs is probably tramadol, and/or gabapentin.

­Prognosis
The reported mortality rate for AP in dogs ranges from
27% to 58%. This reported rate may not reflect the mortality in general veterinary practice, as the reports originate from referral centers, and euthanasia for
non-medical reasons (i.e., financial) may also exert an
influence. Even taking these factors into account, there
apparently is a higher mortality rate in dogs with AP than
the 5–15% reported in human studies. Chronic pancreatitis is unlikely to carry a high mortality rate if it occurs
in isolation, but as a co‐morbidity it may exert a negative
prognosis on other co‐existing diseases.

­Conclusion
The pancreas should be considered in a similar light to
the liver, in that many intraabdominal diseases can cause
secondary inflammation and changes within the pancreas. To attribute clinical signs in a dog to pancreatitis,
all other abdominal diseases such as septic peritonitis or
intestinal foreign body obstruction, for instance, should
be excluded. Treatment of acute and chronic pancreatitis
is nonspecific and supportive. This too suggests that
exclusion and management of concurrent or primary
disease are often more important than a definitive diagnosis of pancreatitis in itself.

­Further Reading
Mansfield C. Pathophysiology of acute pancreatitis: potential
application from experimental models and human
medicine to dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2012; 26: 875–87.
Mansfield C. Practical interpretation and application of
exocrine pancreatic testing in small animals. Vet Clin
North Am 2013; 43: 1241–60.
Mansfield C, Beths T. Management of acute pancreatitis in
dogs: a critical appraisal with focus on feeding and
analgesia. J Small Anim Pract 2015; 56: 27–39.
Mansfield C, James F, Robertson I. Development of a
clinical severity index for dogs with acute pancreatitis.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 233: 936–44.

Newman SJ, Steiner JM, Woosley K, Williams DA, Barton
L. Histologic assessment and grading of the exocrine
pancreas in the dog. J Vet Diagnostic Invest 2006; 18:
115–18.
Stevens T, Conwell DL, Zuccaro G. Pathogenesis of
chronic pancreatitis: an evidence‐based review of past
theories and recent developments. Am J Gastroenterol
2004; 99: 2256–70.
Watson PJ, Archer J, Roulois AJ, Scase TJ, Herrtage ME.
Observational study of 14 cases of chronic pancreatitis
in dogs. Vet Rec 2010; 167: 968–76.

VetBooks.ir

601

56
Pancreatitis in the Cat
Craig Ruaux, BVSc (Hons), PhD, MACVSc, DACVIM (SAIM)
School of Veterinary Science, Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand

In the veterinary profession, attitudes to pancreatitis in cats
have undergone a massive shift in relatively recent times.
From an earlier perspective that pancreatitis was an uncom­
mon disease in the cat, recent findings and the introduction
of new diagnostic testing modalities have led to the under­
standing that pancreatitis is actually common in the feline
patient. Pancreatitis may actually be one of the most com­
mon diseases of the domestic cat, and is often an important
co‐morbidity with other diseases. This is particularly true of
diseases of the gastrointestinal tract and liver. The actual
importance of pancreatitis in the overall health of the
domestic cat remains somewhat unclear, in part due to the
very different pathology of most cases of pancreatitis in this
species and the markedly different way in which cats tend to
manifest this disease when compared to dogs.
In large part, this relatively recent change in attitudes to
feline pancreatitis has arisen with the development and
ready availability of much more sensitive and specific diag­
nostic tests for this disease. Advances in the resolution and
availability of ultrasound imaging, new noninvasive diag­
nostic tests for specific markers of pancreatic tissue integ­
rity and increased willingness to obtain pancreatic biopsies
and histopathologic assessment have all been extremely
valuable in advancing our knowledge of this disease.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an overview
of the presenting signs and histories, diagnostic approach
to, and current recommendations for the management of
pancreatitis in the domestic cat.

­Clinical Signs and Symptoms
of Pancreatitis in Cats
History and Physical Examination Findings

A quite remarkable difference between companion ani­
mal species is seen in the way that pancreatitis manifests.
While specific reporting of clinical signs seen in cats

with either suspected or actually confirmed pancreatic
disease is uncommon in the veterinary literature, aggre­
gation of results from several studies has provided data
on clinical signs and owner complaints in 136 cats; these
findings are summarized in Table 56.1.
One remarkable observation from the aggregated data
in Table 56.1 is that the most common clinical sign in
cats with pancreatitis, across a variety of studies span­
ning several decades, is decreased appetite, followed
closely by lethargy. Vomiting and abdominal pain, both
frequent clinical signs of pancreatitis in dogs, were
reported in less than 50% of feline patients. The actual
case outcomes and severities of clinical presentations in
the cats aggregated for Table 56.1 range from mild dis­
ease with “incidental” findings of pancreatic disease
through to objectively severe, life‐threatening or termi­
nal disease. Based on clinical signs alone, there is no way
to distinguish the severity of pancreatic disease or pre­
dict the histopathologic findings if biopsies are to be
taken. While some authors have suggested that chronic
pancreatitis in the cat is a less severe disease, this is prob­
ably an unfounded belief; cats with chronic pancreatitis
can present with objectively severe presenting signs
(most likely associated with an acute worsening of their
disease, or an “acute on chronic” disease presentation).
Given that both decreased appetite and lethargy are
nonspecific signs, and are also common reasons for pres­
entations of feline patients for veterinary care, it is not
surprising that pancreatitis is becoming a much more
common diagnosis in feline medicine. In light of these
data, pancreatitis should be considered a reasonable and
important differential diagnosis for any cat presenting
with vague, nonspecific clinical signs.
Physical examination findings in cats with pancreatitis
are also often unrewarding. Clinical signs such as cranial
abdominal pain and guarding, commonly encountered
in canine patients, are uncommon in cats with diagnoses

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

602

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Table 56.1 Historical and clinical findings in cats with confirmed
pancreatic inflammatory disease

Clinical sign

Frequency (#cats/
total cases reported)

Frequency
(% of cats)

Reduced appetite

113/136

83

Lethargy

105/136

77

Dehydration

88/136

65

Vomiting

58/136

43

Abdominal pain

27/73

36

Icterus

40/136

29

Weight loss

22/96

16

of pancreatitis. This may be due to the tendency of feline
patients to “hide” clinical signs, the relatively subtle
nature of pain manifestation in many cats, and a ten­
dency to interpret struggling or resisting examination as
a normal response on the part of feline patients. Often,
the most important findings on physical examination in
feline patients with pancreatitis are signs and symptoms
of co‐morbid disease (palpably thickened gastrointesti­
nal tract, icterus, poor body condition), or findings that
are important in the assessment of the overall state of
health of the patient (state of hydration, presence of free
abdominal fluid, alterations in body temperature). As
with the histories of cats with pancreatitis, these vague,
diffuse, and nonspecific findings in most cats with pan­
creatic inflammatory disease mean that pancreatic dis­
ease is a reasonable differential diagnosis in essentially
any cat that presents unwell.
Characterization of Pancreatitis in the Cat
Typically, pancreatitis has been divided into acute and
chronic diseases, based on histologic differences in
human and canine patients. Generally speaking, “acute
pancreatitis” is either neutrophilic or hemorrhagic and is
associated with rapid onset of severe symptoms, marked
abdominal pain and potentially life‐threatening acid–
base and electrolyte disturbances. By comparison,
“chronic pancreatitis” is typically associated with fibrous
replacement of pancreatic tissue and the presence of a
lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrate. Although chronic
pancreatitis is being recognized more frequently in
canine patients, most clinicians consider acute pancrea­
titis to be the most common form of the disease in dogs.
In cats, chronic pancreatitis is the most commonly
diagnosed disease following histologic assessment of
pancreatic biopsies. As in humans and dogs, this diagno­
sis is based on the presence of lymphocytic or plasma­
cytic cellular infiltrates and, typically, some degree of
fibrosis. In some studies, >80% of cats with pancreatic

disease show this form of pancreatic infiltrate.
Remarkably, at least one necropsy‐based study of cat
pancreata has suggested that signs of pancreatic inflam­
mation, including lymphocytic‐plasmacytic infiltration
and fibrotic change, are common in cats with no history
suggestive of pancreatic disease.
One problem with the terminology of pancreatitis,
particularly the distinction of acute vs chronic pancreati­
tis, is the implication of differing chronologies of the dis­
ease. This is particularly problematic in the feline patient.
While it is generally safe to assume that cats with longer
histories of recurrent clinical signs such as lethargy,
decreased appetite, and recurrent vomiting do indeed
have chronic pancreatitis, the converse is not necessarily
true. Given the subtle nature of clinical signs and histori­
cal complaints in many cats with pancreatic disease, and
the waxing/waning nature of clinical signs in most
chronic lympho‐plasmacytic diseases, it is not valid to
assume that a cat with a new presentation of relatively
acute clinical signs actually has “acute pancreatitis” as
defined histologically. As discussed earlier, there is no
reliable way to distinguish necrotizing or hemorrhagic
pancreatitis from lympho‐plasmacytic disease in feline
patients. Therapeutic decision making should be based
on assessment of the overall state of health of the patient
on presentation, rather than assumptions that a patient
may or may not have a particular form of the disease.

­Noninvasive Diagnostics for Feline
Pancreatitis
Routine Clinical Chemistries
Routine clinical chemistry and complete blood count
(CBC) evaluations are a critical part of the approach to
any unwell feline patient. In the context of cats with a
suspicion of pancreatitis, the most important aspect of
the routine chemistry panel and CBC is the assessment
of the overall physiology of the patient. There are very
few to no findings on routine clinical pathology panels
that can be considered highly sensitive or specific for
pancreatitis in the cat. One exception to this would be
the “pancreas‐specific lipase” assays that are beginning
to be promoted more heavily in some routine chemistry
panels, and are discussed in more detail later.
In the dog and human patients, traditionally we have
relied on the measurement of serum amylase and lipase
activities to establish a diagnosis of pancreatitis, with the
expectation that these activities will be markedly elevated.
While these tests are admittedly low sensitivity and speci­
ficity in both dogs and people, marked elevations in
patients with compatible clinical signs are at least strongly
supportive of the clinical suspicion of pancreatitis.

VetBooks.ir

56 Pancreatitis in the Cat

In the cat, a long‐standing belief in veterinary medicine
is that amylase and lipase activities have essentially no
diagnostic utility, with unacceptably low sensitivity and
specificity in this species. While there is a large element of
truth to these assertions, these opinions are based on a
limited number of publications that assessed a small num­
ber of cats, and all dated from a period before the veteri­
nary profession came to truly appreciate the very different
manifestations of this disease in the cat. The low specific­
ity reported for these tests may owe as much to false‐­
negative diagnoses based on an incorrect understanding
of the way in which this disease presents in the cat.
Common clinical pathology abnormalities encoun­
tered in cats are related to organ systems that are com­
monly compromised or involved in co‐morbid diseases.
Abnormalities in liver enzyme activities (both alanine
aminotransferase [ALT] and alkaline phosphatase
[ALKP], suggesting both hepatocellular compromise and
cholestasis), azotemia, alterations in acid–base status,
hypocalcemia, and inflammatory leukograms (typically
left‐shift neutrophilia) are all encountered relatively
commonly. Some studies have suggested that marked
hypocalcemia is a negative prognostic factor, likely due
to sequestration of calcium in saponified abdominal fat,
a phenomenon that tends to accompany hemorrhagic
and necrotizing pancreatic pathology.
Specialty Diagnostic Tests
Noninvasive diagnostic testing relies on the use of
marker compounds, detectable in the serum or some
other sample such as urine, that are specific to the organ
of interest and are altered in disease states of that organ.
Ideally, the marker compound will be altered with dis­
ease of the primary organ, but unaltered by changes in
other organ systems or by concurrent medical therapy.
In the case of pancreatic disease, these marker com­
pounds are usually digestive enzymes of some type. The
use of typical amylase and lipase activity assays has
already been discussed. More recent diagnostic tests that
have been investigated include serum concentrations of
trypsin‐like immunoreactivity (fTLI), feline pancreatic
lipase (now offered as the Spec‐fPL™ assay), and activity
tests using more “pancreas‐specific” lipase substrates,
particularly DGGR‐lipase activity.
While trypsinogen/fTLI is pancreas specific, and is
released in conditions of pancreatic disease, the peak
changes in this enzyme are relatively short and soon after
the onset of disease, and some other diseases (specifi­
cally small intestinal disease and severe azotemia) can be
associated with elevations in fTLI without histologic
evidence of pancreatic disease. This combination of
­
transient changes in serum concentrations and minor
alterations with other, nonpancreatic diseases results in

fTLI testing having only moderate sensitivity and speci­
ficity for the diagnosis of pancreatitis in the cat. The
greatest utility of fTLI testing lies in the ruling in or out
of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in feline patients
(see Complications of Pancreatitis in Cats, later).
Serum concentrations of feline pancreatic lipase (Spec‐
fPL) and lipase activity assays using more highly selective
assay substrates both show greater utility than routine
amylase/lipase activities and the fTLI test; these tests are
discussed in greater detail later.
Specific Pancreatic Lipase Test

Feline‐specific pancreatic lipase (fPLI) refers to a par­
ticular protein, a lipase enzyme, synthesized and released
solely by the pancreas in cats. This particular enzyme’s
concentration in serum is measured using the serum
Spec‐fPL assay, available either as a “cage‐side” SNAP
test or via specialty clinical pathology testing. This assay
relies on monoclonal antibodies directed against the
feline protein which are highly species specific. The use
of canine PLI tests with feline samples can result in a
false‐negative rule‐out of pancreatic disease in the cat.
As the fPLI protein is specifically and exclusively
­synthesized in the exocrine pancreatic tissue, the con­
centrations in the serum are dependent on the rate of
synthesis and the “leakage” of the protein into the inter­
stitial space and then the circulation. Conditions associ­
ated with increased cellular leakage (generally, some
form of pancreatitis) are associated with increased serum
concentrations of this protein, so the detection of
increased circulating fPLI protein (i.e., a high Spec‐fPL
test result) is suggestive of pancreatic disease, particu­
larly in cats with compatible clinical signs.
The sensitivity and specificity of fPLI testing have been
investigated in several studies. Reported sensitivities and
specificities for this test are 67–100% and 67–82%,
respectively. In one moderately large study (n = 182 cats)
using the Spec‐fPL assay, the overall sensitivity for this
test was 79%, with a specificity of 82%, for detection of
pancreatitis in this group. Overall, the Spec‐fPL has the
highest reported sensitivity and specificity (at the time of
writing) of any diagnostic modality for the detection of
pancreatitis in the cat.
The use of Spec‐fPL measurement as a prognostic
marker and monitoring parameter for recovery has also
received some attention. Marked elevation of Spec‐fPL
(values >20 μg/L) has been associated with a poorer
prognosis in cats hospitalized with pancreatitis. There
are no data in the literature suggesting that greater eleva­
tions in Spec‐fPL are associated with poorer response to
therapy in cats with chronic pancreatitis, assuming ade­
quate management of co‐morbidities. A much greater
factor influencing response to chronic pancreatitis in
cats is adequate management of chronic enteropathy and

603

VetBooks.ir

604

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

the identification and treatment, if present, of cobalamin
deficiency in these cats.
Pancreas‐Specific Lipase Assays

The lipase activity assays used in most commercial labo­
ratories and bench‐top analytic systems rely on lipase
within the serum sample cleaving a substrate of some
sort; this cleavage then results in a change in the test
solution (such as changing pH or color) that can be
measured, giving a value for lipase activity. There is a
large number of lipase activity substrates that can be
used, and the substrates typically used by high‐through­
put commercial laboratories are different from those
used in the bench‐top systems. Even within bench‐top
systems, there are differences in substrates between dif­
fering manufacturers. For this reason, the comparison of
lipase activity assays between two different systems is
generally fruitless and does not yield any useful data.
Many tissues in the body contain quite high amounts of
lipase. Obviously, the exocrine pancreas is very rich in
these enzymes but other organs, including the liver,
gastric mucosa, and duodenal mucosa, contain lipase
­
activity. These lipases can be released from these other
organs in disease states, and contribute to the total circu­
lating lipase activity. The specificity of a lipase assay for
detection of pancreatic disease thus depends on the speci­
ficity of the substrate used for pancreatic lipase. This sub­
strate specificity varies markedly between s­ ubstrate types.
One substrate with greater specificity for pancreatic
lipase that has undergone some investigation in cats
is 1‐2‐o‐Dilauryl‐rac‐glycero‐3‐glutaric acid‐(6’‐methyl­
resorufin) ester (DGGR). A DGGR‐based clinical chem­
istry assay has been validated for use in feline serum
samples, and the sensitivity and specificity of the test
compared with the use of both Spec‐fPL testing and
abdominal ultrasonography. The DGGR‐based assay had
similar, if slightly lower, sensitivity and specificity to the
Spec‐fPL assay in the assessment of cats with clinical
signs compatible with pancreatitis. In a similar follow‐up
study, the DGGR‐based assay was found to show the best
agreement with both Spec‐fPL and abdominal ultra­
sonography in cats with hypo‐ or mixed‐echoic pancre­
atic parenchyma, findings that are generally considered
consistent with acute pancreatic disease.
Overall, DGGR‐based lipase activity assays likely have
clinical utility in feline patients, and an elevated activity
value in an unwell feline patient should prompt further
assessment for the presence of pancreatic disease.
However, this approach is reliant on the use of this spe­
cific substrate in whichever analytic system is being
employed. Information regarding the actual substrates
used by the various reference laboratories and in‐house
chemistry systems commonly found in veterinary prac­
tice is not readily available at this time.

Pancreatic Biopsy and Histology
Pancreatic biopsy and histologic examination is gener­
ally considered the “gold standard” for the detection of
pancreatic disease, including pancreatitis. Unfortunately,
pancreatic biopsy is still a relatively uncommon part of
the approach to feline patients, for a variety of reasons.
Chief among these is likely cost to the client and the
invasive nature of celiotomy to obtain biopsies. Recently,
however, the use of laparotomy and laparoscopy‐assisted
biopsy techniques has provided a lower cost, less inva­
sive method for obtaining pancreatic biopsies, usually in
concert with liver and intestinal biopsy procedures.
Surgical biopsy of the feline pancreas has been shown
to have a low risk for complications such as postsurgical
pancreatitis, assuming that the patient is adequately
hydrated and hemodynamically stable at the time of sur­
gery. Side‐effects and postsurgical morbidity are uncom­
mon in cats undergoing surgical biopsy of the pancreas
using punch biopsy instruments or crush‐fracture tech­
niques using hemostats. Pancreatic biopsy, particularly
in cats undergoing assessment for gastrointestinal dis­
ease, is justified in many cases and should be considered
part of the routine samples collected during exploratory
celiotomy or laparoscopic exploratory procedures.
While biopsy samples are rightly considered the most
effective way of assessing pancreatic disease, a number of
shortfalls of this technique must be recognized. Even
with laparoscopic procedures, the collection and assess­
ment of histologic samples are still more expensive and
have higher risk to the patient than the use of noninva­
sive testing such as clinical chemistries. In addition,
pathology within the pancreas is often heterogeneous in
distribution, and differing areas may show differing cel­
lular infiltrates or levels of activity. This may lead to
incorrect diagnosis of the overall state of the pancreas
when only a single sample is taken, as is often the case
with laparoscopic biopsies of the pancreas in the cat.
Finally, there is a well‐recognized variability between
individual pathologists with respect to assessment and
description of pancreatic samples. Histologic scoring
systems for pancreatic disease have been proposed and
published, including for the cat, but the use of these sys­
tems is generally limited to research publications and
retrospective case series descriptions. It is uncommon
for histopathologists to report pancreatic biopsy samples
using these scoring systems in veterinary medicine.
Interpretation of Specialized Tests
Interpretation of the specialized tests used for the diag­
nosis of pancreatic disease in cats is sometimes compli­
cated, particularly if the test is part of a broad‐ranging
panel used in the initial assessment of a patient if there
is no clear initial diagnosis being assessed. Part of the

VetBooks.ir

56 Pancreatitis in the Cat

­difficulty of assessing these tests comes from the obser­
vation that we do not truly know the prevalence of pan­
creatic disease in the feline population. While at least
one study suggests that pancreatic pathology is quite
common in the feline population (approximately 60% of
cases necropsied, where the patient was not suspected to
have pancreatic disease), one caveat about this study is
that these were still, largely speaking, unwell cats that
were necropsied. If the true prevalence of pancreatic dis­
ease in the feline population is as high as 60%, then an
unexpected finding of a high Spec‐fPL concentration or
DGGR‐lipase activity on sentinel chemistry panels may
be a true indication of pancreatic disease. While the pan­
creatic disease present may not be an important clinical
finding, this does not mean that this is an incorrect diagnostic finding. This is particularly true when the clinical
chemistry panel is being run on an apparently healthy
patient as part of a health monitoring or wellness
program.
An additional important factor in the interpretation of
these tests is the very variable, and often subtle, clinical
signs and histories of this disease, as previously dis­
cussed. When clinical chemistry panels and Spec‐fPL
tests are being run as part of a broad‐ranging assessment
in a cat that is known to be unwell, but with no clear ini­
tial indication of why, abnormalities in these tests are a
strong indication of likely clinically significant disease. It
is inappropriate to discount these findings in these
patients, and important to consider that pancreatic
­disease is, to all indications, common in the sick cat pop­
ulation and also a common co‐morbid condition with
other diseases.
Diagnostic Imaging
Along with the specialized noninvasive testing methods
discussed above, diagnostic imaging is commonly used
in the assessment of pancreatic disease in the cat. Of the
various methodologies available, high‐resolution
abdominal ultrasonography typically has the greatest
diagnostic yield. It also allows further assessment of
other abdominal organs that may be involved in co‐mor­
bid diseases, such as the hepatic parenchyma, biliary
tree, and intestinal walls.
Plain abdominal radiography, while commonly used
in cats with suspected abdominal disease, has a very
low diagnostic yield in cats with pancreatitis. The pan­
creas is not visible on plain abdominal radiographs, and
changes commonly seen in dogs with pancreatitis
(“ground glass” appearance, loss of local contrast, wid­
ening pyloric angle) are infrequent in cats due to the
differing underlying pathology in most cases. While
abdominal radiography has some possible advantages
in terms of lower cost and greater availability, the very

low diagnostic yield is a contraindication for its use in
most cases.
The increasing availability of high‐resolution abdomi­
nal ultrasonography in companion animal practice has
dramatically improved the use of diagnostic imaging to
characterize pancreatic disease in the cat. Observation
of pancreatic enlargement, hyperechoic mesentery and
abdominal fat, altered parenchymal echogenicity (most
commonly hypoechogenicity or a mixed pattern),
abdominal effusions, pancreatic cysts or pseudocysts,
corrugation of the duodenum, and dilation of the pan­
creatic duct are all considered consistent with pancreati­
tis in cats with consistent clinical signs. These findings
are specific indicators of the presence of pancreatic
pathology, but their sensitivity for accurate diagnosis in
cats with histologically confirmed pancreatitis is quite
variable, with reported sensitivities ranging from ~11%
to 80%. Sensitivity of abdominal ultrasound for the
detection of feline pancreatic disease is highly dependent
on operator skill and equipment resolution. Given the
variable and often low sensitivity of abdominal ultra­
sound examination in the diagnosis of pancreatitis in
cats, this modality cannot be reliably used as a “rule‐out”
test for this disease. However, significant additional
information useful for management of these cases is
often obtained, particularly when screening for co‐
morbid conditions such as cholangitis/cholangiohepati­
tis or the presence of extrapancreatic disease that
could explain the clinical signs. Therefore, abdominal
ultrasonography, carried out by a well‐trained and experi­
enced ­operator, is recommended in all cats where there
is a clinical suspicion of pancreatitis.
In humans, the use of abdominal computed tomogra­
phy (CT) examination is considered highly useful in the
assessment of pancreatic disease. This modality allows
the assessment of pancreatic architecture, presence and
severity of fibrotic change and detection of both com­
mon inciting causes for pancreatitis in humans (such as
gallstones) and other co‐morbid diseases. The utility of
abdominal CT for the assessment of feline pancreatic
disease is much lower than in humans. This is due to
the much smaller mass of pancreatic tissue in the cat,
and less common presence of severe architectural dis­
tortions due to fibrosis. Additionally, abdominal CT
examination of cats typically requires general anesthe­
sia, which may be contraindicated in severely unwell
cats and also leads to significant additional cost. CT
examination has been reported in cats in a small num­
ber of publications; the overall sensitivity and specific­
ity were not higher than those seen with less invasive
testing such as Spec‐fPL or abdominal ultrasonography,
and thus abdominal CT cannot be recommended as a
part of the diagnostic approach to pancreatic disease in
the cat at this time.

605

VetBooks.ir

606

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

­Approaches to Management
of Pancreatitis in Cats
Care of Cats Hospitalized for Pancreatitis
As previously discussed, it is not possible to distinguish
so‐called “acute necrotizing” pancreatitis from chronic
lymphocytic‐plasmacytic pancreatitis in the cat, regard­
less of presenting clinical signs, history or chemical find­
ings. The approach to the management of cats with this
disease is determined by the overall degree of health of
the patient as assessed by initial examination and screen­
ing chemistries. Cats presenting with a suspicion of pan­
creatitis that are showing other signs of systemic illness,
marked abdominal pain, systemic inflammatory response
syndrome (pyrexia, tachycardia, tachypnea), hypother­
mia or hypotension should be considered to have severe
disease, and immediate hospitalization and aggressive
stabilization therapy are recommended. If multiple
abnormalities are detected on routine chemistry panels,
particularly if hypoalbuminemia and/or hypocalcemia
are present, this is a strong indication of severe disease
associated with significant risk of in‐hospital mortality.
Cats with severe disease require careful monitoring,
appropriate fluid therapy, and effective analgesia. In
humans and dogs, severe pancreatic disease is inarguably
painful, and while cats may not show as many overt signs
of pain, such as vocalization or abdominal guarding,
there is no reason to suspect that this disease is not pain­
ful in cats as well. Many of the clinical signs at presenta­
tion of severe cases, such as tachypnea and tachycardia,
resolve rapidly with effective pain control interventions.
Initial screening chemistry panels are important to
assess for other co‐morbid or complicating diseases, par­
ticularly extrahepatic biliary duct obstruction, hepatic
lipidosis, and diabetes mellitus (which may proceed to
diabetic ketoacidosis). Samples should also be drawn for
special diagnostic testing (i.e. Spec‐fPL assay or DGGR‐
lipase). If available, patient‐side SNAP tests for Spec‐fPL
can give initial support to a clinical suspicion of pancrea­
titis, but these tests should not be relied on to rule out
the disease, and measurement of a quantitated value
through a reference laboratory is recommended as soon
as possible. Pending results of specialized diagnostics,
the management of these cases follows typical manage­
ment protocols for acute abdomen/septic shock patients.
The initial aims of therapy are to replace circulating
fluid volumes, restore end‐organ perfusion, and main­
tain organ function. Obtaining effective perfusion of the
pancreas is particularly important, as pancreatic
ischemia is a significant inciting cause for the develop­
ment of necrotizing pancreatitis. With the combination
of aggressive fluid therapy and increased endothelial
“leakiness,” it is critical to monitor total protein and, if

necessary, restore and maintain plasma colloid oncotic
pressure. Colloid fluids, such as synthetic hydroxyethyl
starches, are often highly beneficial in the initial resusci­
tation of these cases. Fresh‐frozen feline plasma can also
be considered, and likely provides oncotic support while
replenishing coagulation cascade proteins; however,
there is little information in the veterinary literature
regarding use of plasma in severe feline pancreatitis
cases. Substantial electrolyte abnormalities, particularly
hypokalemia and hypocalcemia, should be anticipated in
these cats. Supplemental potassium is administered in
combination with crystalloid fluids following routine
guidelines for concentrations based on serial determina­
tion of serum potassium concentrations, typically every
eight hours during the initial resuscitation phase.
Drug Therapy in Feline Pancreatitis
Effective analgesia and control of vomiting are important
aspects of management of severe pancreatitis in all spe­
cies. A selection of medications that are often useful in
the management of pancreatitis in the cat is summarized
in Table 56.2.
Narcotic pain control is typically indicated in cats with
sufficiently severe pancreatitis to warrant hospitaliza­
tion. Transdermal fentanyl patches (25 μg/h) can be very
effective for longer term (up to 72 h) analgesia without
the need for frequent handling and injection in these
patients, but initial therapy with an injectable or sublin­
gual agent (commonly buprenorphine) is necessary as it
can take up to 12 hours for therapeutic fentanyl concen­
trations to be reached. Maropitant, a neurokinin‐1
receptor antagonist, is both an effective antiemetic and
may have antinociceptive effects in the viscera. The com­
bination of maropitant with a 5‐HT3 receptor antagonist,
such as ondansetron or dolasetron, often provides effec­
tive control of vomiting and nausea in these patients with
minimal need for repeated handling during the day.
Together, obtaining adequate analgesia and control of
nausea/vomiting are important for the overall well‐being
of the patient, and increase the likelihood of an early
return to voluntary eating.
Early Nutritional Management
Long‐standing dogma for the management of severe
pancreatitis in humans and canine patients has been
that these patients should be maintained nil per os for
some period, with introduction of food occurring only
after cessation of vomiting for a minimum of 12 hours,
and often 24 hours or more. This attitude is being sup­
planted by early enteral nutrition strategies in both
humans and, more recently, dogs. Preliminary evidence
suggests that early enteral nutrition in these species is

VetBooks.ir

56 Pancreatitis in the Cat

Table 56.2 Medications commonly used in the management of severe pancreatitis in the feline patient
Class

Analgesic

Antiemetic
Antinausea

Antacid

Drug

Mechanism

Main indication

Dose and route

Buprenorphine

Opioid

Acute, severe

0.01–0.02 mg/kg SC, IM, IV, TM

Fentanyl

Opioid

Acute, severe

25 μg/h patch,
5 μg/kg IV bolus, CRI 2–4 μg/kg/h

Butorphanol

Opioid

Acute, severe

0.1–0.5 mg/kg SC, IM, IV

Maropitant

Neurokinin‐1 receptor
antagonist

Acute, severe
chronic

1 mg/kg SC q24h,
2 mg/kg PO q24h

Dolasetron or
ondansetron

5‐HT3 receptor
antagonist

Acute, severe

0.8–1.0 mg/kg IV q24h

Metoclopramide

Dopamine D2 receptor
antagonist

Acute, severe

0.2–0.5 mg/kg PO, SC, IM q6–8h,
1–2 mg/kg/24h CRI

Omeprazole

Proton pump inhibitor

Acute, severe

1.0–1.3 mg/kg PO q12h

Pantoprazole

Proton pump inhibitor

Acute, severe

0.7–1.0 mg/kg IV q12h

Ranitidine

Histamine H2 receptor
antagonist

Acute, severe

0.5 mg/kg PO q12h

CRI, constant rate infusion; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; PO, by mouth (per os); SC, subcutaneous.

associated with shorter ICU and hospital stays, lower
total costs of care, and fewer complications during ini­
tial management. With cats, the potential for develop­
ment of hepatic lipidosis as a complication of severe
pancreatitis and inadequate caloric intake must also be
considered. While currently there is limited informa­
tion in the veterinary literature regarding the use of
early enteral nutrition in cats with severe pancreatitis,
the author uses this modality regularly, and quite
aggressively. In many cats, assisted feeding devices such
as esophagostomy tubes are placed during the first
24–36 hours of hospitalization to achieve early return
to feeding. For both hepatic lipidosis and diabetic
ketoacidosis, a return to caloric intake is critical to their
successful management, and the presence of pancreati­
tis (either as an inciting disease or a complication) does
not alter the importance of a return to positive caloric
balance in these diseases.
Outpatient Management of Cats with
Chronic Pancreatitis
Cats presenting with less severe clinical signs, perhaps
with histories of vomiting, weight loss or other gastroin­
testinal signs but without significant abnormalities on
screening biochemical panels, can typically be treated on
an outpatient basis. In these patients, collection of sam­
ples for specialized testing (Spec‐fPL) is recommended,
but there is less utility to the patient‐side testing, as these
patients will be treated on an outpatient basis in the same
manner regardless of the initial patient‐side test result.
Cats that had originally presented with a suspicion of
severe pancreatitis should also transition to this more

chronic management approach once they are eating vol­
untarily and are able to be discharged.
Cats with a clinical suspicion of chronic pancreatitis
are treated in essentially the same manner as cats with
chronic enteropathies or diagnoses of idiopathic inflam­
matory bowel disease. There is no meaningful way to
distinguish between chronic pancreatitis as a solitary
disease entity and the presence of multiorgan inflamma­
tory disease (so‐called feline inflammatory disease or
“triaditis”). Initially, dietary modification, typically by
use of a novel protein source or hypoallergenic diet, is
suggested. In contrast to dogs, where fat restriction is a
cornerstone of management for most cases of chronic
pancreatitis, fat restriction is not recommended in the
cat due to their high constitutive requirement for both
fat and arachidonic acid intake. Many cats will respond
to dietary manipulation; in those who fail to respond to
dietary manipulation, it is rational to consider antiin­
flammatory or immune modulatory therapies, assuming
that no other co‐morbidities are present that would con­
traindicate the use of these medications.
A common additional finding in cats with chronic
pancreatitis, particularly in those with significant gastro­
intestinal disease accompanying their pancreatic disease,
is the presence of hypocobalaminemia. Cats with hypoc­
obalaminemia (low vitamin B12) are known to be less
responsive to treatment for other diseases, such as
chronic inflammatory bowel disease, if this hypocobala­
minemia is not addressed via supplementation.
Supplementation of cats with cobalamin is straight­
forward, and can be carried out using injectable or oral
supplementation regimes. In some cats, particularly
those with diffuse small intestinal disease, serum folate

607

VetBooks.ir

608

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

­concentrations are also low. Supplementation of cats
with low folate has not been investigated as thoroughly
as cobalamin supplementation, but is also readily
achieved with oral supplement products. Often, initial
supplementation by injection followed by oral supple­
mentation in the home environment provides a good
balance between costs, convenience, and ease of owner
compliance.

­Complications of Pancreatitis in Cats
Given the apparent frequency of chronic pancreatic dis­
ease in the feline population, the occurrence of severe
complications is actually remarkably low. While objec­
tively severe disease in cats presenting with hemody­
namic shock, systemic inflammatory response syndrome
and abdominal pain is life‐threatening and associated
with a substantial risk for mortality if not addressed
appropriately, most cats with chronic pancreatitis require
life‐long management for their disease, but other than
waxing and waning clinical signs, most do not develop
additional complicating diagnoses.
The two most common and important complications
of pancreatic disease in the cat are exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency (EPI) and diabetes mellitus.
Chronic pancreatitis is most likely the most common
cause of EPI in cats. Loss of exocrine tissue due to ongo­
ing inflammation and fibrosis can eventually lead to the
development of clinical signs related to insufficient
digestive enzyme synthesis. In comparison to dogs, and a
recurring theme in feline medicine, the way in which EPI
manifests in cats is different in terms of both history and
clinical signs reported. While in the dog the most com­
mon cause of EPI is an early‐onset pancreatic acinar
atrophy (PAA), in the cat the disease is an end‐result of a
chronic, typically years‐long inflammatory disease. Dogs
with EPI secondary to PAA are usually young and usually
are otherwise healthy, with good to ravenous appetites.
In the cat, there is typically a long history of poor appe­
tite and possible weight loss resulting from the underly­
ing pancreatitis. By the time cats reach an end‐stage of

chronic pancreatitis, they are usually chronically unwell,
and they do not develop compensatory polyphagia. Cats
also are less likely to produce voluminous stools and
frank steatorrhea; this is probably due to the very pro­
longed course of the disease in this species, which allows
other compensatory mechanisms (such as intestinal brush
border enzyme upregulation) to be more effective.
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency should be suspected in
any cat with a history of diagnosed chronic pancreatitis
that then goes on to show worsening clinical signs, particu­
larly weight loss. In some cases weight loss will be the only
additional clinical sign that suggests the onset of EPI.
Diagnosis of EPI in the cat is based on the measure­
ment of serum concentrations of TLI, not Spec‐fPL.
While Spec‐fPL values are almost invariably very low in
cats with EPI, this is also seen in some normal cats,
resulting in an unacceptably low specificity of the Spec‐
fPL assay for the diagnosis of EPI in cats. DGGR‐lipase
activity assays have no diagnostic utility for EPI in cats,
as most cats with EPI show DGGR‐lipase activities that
are indistinguishable from normal cat values.
Diabetes mellitus can develop in cats with chronic pan­
creatitis due to progressive loss of islet tissue with inflam­
mation and fibrotic change. These cats may spend extended
periods as “prediabetic” patients, with reduced glucose tol­
erance. The actual frequency of chronic pancreatitis as a
cause of diabetes mellitus in the cat is unknown, and likely
underestimated, due to the low frequency of pancreatic
biopsy in these cats. The occurrence of diabetes mellitus in
feline patients can significantly complicate their manage­
ment for chronic pancreatitis, particularly if the cat is being
managed with glucocorticoid medications to mitigate
inflammation. Equally, the presence of chronic pancreatitis
in a diabetic cat is a common cause of difficulty in achieving
adequate glycemic regulation, and chronic pancreatitis is
one of the most important diseases to screen for in cats with
diabetes that is hard to regulate. The difficulty of managing
diabetic cats with chronic pancreatitis, and the confound­
ing influence of glucocorticoid therapy on glycemic regula­
tion, makes one of the strongest arguments for early
intervention using predominantly dietary changes in the
management of chronic pancreatitis in the cat.

­Further Reading
Bazelle J, Watson P. Pancreatitis in cats: is it acute, is it
chronic, is it significant? J Feline Med Surg 2014; 16(5):
395–406.
Caney SMA. Pancreatitis and diabetes in cats. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2013; 43(2): 303–17.
Oppliger S, Hartnack S, Reusch CE, Kook PH. Agreement
of serum feline pancreas‐specific lipase and colorimetric
lipase assays with pancreatic ultrasonographic findings

in cats with suspicion of pancreatitis: 161 cases (2008–
2012). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2014; 244(9): 1060–5.
Pratschke KM, Ryan J, McAlinden A, McLauchlan G.
Pancreatic surgical biopsy in 24 dogs and 19 cats:
postoperative complications and clinical relevance of
histological findings. J Small Anim Pract 2015; 56: 60–6
Simpson KW. Pancreatitis and triaditis in cats: causes and
treatment. J Small Anim Pract 2015; 56(1): 40–9.

VetBooks.ir

609

57
Rectoanal Diseases – Medical and Surgical Management
Craig Ruaux, BVSc (Hons), PhD, MACVSc, DACVIM (SAIM)1 and Milan Milovancev, DVM, DACVS‐SA2
1
2

School of Veterinary Science, Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand
School of Veterinary Medicine, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon, USA

Rectoanal diseases are frequent reasons for presentation
of companion animals for veterinary attention. Clinical
signs and symptoms, such as straining, “scooting,” fecal
incontinence, and paradoxical diarrhea, are very distressing to owners. An effective approach to recognition
and management of these diseases relies on a thorough
history and clinical examination, including rectal examination wherever possible. In smaller patients, and those
that resent digital rectal palpation, effective sedation is
needed to allow this examination to proceed. Diseases
involving the distal rectum and perineum are often well
characterized by local examination and palpation, but
the intrapelvic rectum can be difficult to fully assess, as
many important structures (pelvic urethra, cranial
­prostate in larger dogs, intrapelvic lymph nodes) are difficult to reach. Diagnostic imaging of this area is also
challenging in many cases. Contrast‐enhanced CT
examination is the imaging method of choice for many of
these cases.
In this section, a variety of rectoanal diseases is briefly
discussed. For some diseases, medical management is
appropriate, while in others surgical management is the
primary management modality.

­Anal Sac Adenocarcinoma
Clinical Presentation
Incidental finding or visible perianal mass/swelling, tenesmus, polyuria/polydipsia, anorexia or inappetence, lethargy, weight loss, constipation, or posterior weakness.
Pathophysiology
Anal sac adenocarcinoma arises from malignant transformation of the secretory epithelium of the anal sacs.

Diagnosis and Medical Management
In up to a third of dogs, anal sac adenocarcinoma is
­discovered as an incidental finding on routine examination. When clinical signs are present, they may be a result
of the local mass effect (straining to defecate, constipation
due to enlargement of retroperitoneal and intrapelvic
lymph nodes with metastatic disease). In some cases the
primary presenting complaint is polyuria and polydipsia
resulting from loss of concentrating capacity due to hypercalcemia. Routine clinical chemistry panels will often
reveal both total and ionized hypercalcemia, with or without concurrent hypophosphatemia. A finding of hypercalcemia in a dog undergoing assessment for polyuria and
polydipsia should prompt thorough anal sac and rectal
digital examination, using sedation if necessary. With
advanced disease and metastasis to the abdominal lymph
nodes dorsal displacement of the colon may be visible on
plain abdominal radiographs. Abdominal ultrasonography and, if available, computed tomography will usually
have a much greater diagnostic yield than plain abdominal
radiography. On diagnosis, complete pretreatment staging calls for either three‐view thoracic radiographs and/or
computed tomography. Conclusive diagnosis can usually
be obtained by examination of fine needle aspiration
cytology of the mass. In some cases, the cytology may be
interpreted as “hepatoid” but a benign cytologic appearance does not rule out anal sac adenocarcinoma.
Surgical Management
Preoperative patient staging for sublumbar lymph node
and/or pulmonary metastasis is mandatory as this information influences surgical approach (e.g., determines
whether concurrent sublumbar lymph node extirpation
is indicated). Surgical removal of the affected anal sac is
performed via closed anal sacculectomy. The size and

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

610

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

adherence of the mass to the surrounding tissues
­influence the technical difficulty of the surgery. By the
time of diagnosis, most tumors have caused enough distortion and adhesion to the perineal tissues (i.e., external
anal sphincter, rectal wall, caudal rectal nerve) to be
­significantly more challenging than anal sacculectomy
for ­nonneoplastic causes. Removal of involved external
anal sphincter muscle is tolerated with loss of up to two‐
thirds of the circumference of the anus, as well as the
ipsilateral caudal rectal nerve, with most dogs regaining
fecal continence after a variable period of transient
incontinence. Some dogs may have bilateral anal sac
adenocarcinoma, which requires meticulous surgical
­
technique to preserve fecal continence.
The most common complication after surgical excision
of anal sac adenocarcinoma is tumor recurrence, with
rates up to 42–45% reported. Other less common complications include surgical site infection, hypocalcemia,
tenesmus, perianal fistula, and death.
Prognosis
Postoperative adjuvant therapy in the form of chemotherapy and/or external beam radiation therapy is
quickly becoming the standard of care as several reports
have documented prolonged survival in patients receiving multimodal treatment. With surgery alone, reported
median survival times range from 7.9 to 16.4 months. In
dogs receiving postoperative adjuvant melphalan,
median survival time was 20 and 29.3 months in dogs
with and without sublumbar lymph node metastasis,
respectively. Another study combing postoperative radiotherapy with mitoxantrone reported medial overall
survival of 956 days with one‐ and two‐year survival
rates of 87% and 66%, respectively. A large (over 800
dogs) multicenter retrospective study in preparation at
time of writing found prolonged median survival time
(approximately five years) for dogs with sublumbar
lymph node metastasis that were treated with surgery
and chemotherapy, which was similar to the overall
­survival time for dogs without metastasis treated with
surgery alone (J Liptak, personal communication).

­Anal Sac Impaction
Clinical Presentation
Anal sac impaction is one of the most common rectoanal
diseases in companion animal practice, and a very
­common cause for presentation of dogs in particular. The
clinical signs are of tenesmus, “scooting,” excessive licking of the perineum region, and pain on palpation of the

anal sacs (which are distended). Overall, smaller breed
dogs appear to be predisposed to anal sac impaction.
Pathophysiology
Impaction of the anal sacs can occur secondary to a variety of primary causes or inciting disorders. Inadequate
emptying of the anal sacs may occur in obese dogs, dogs
consuming “low‐residue” diets with reduced fecal bulk,
and in dogs with seborrhea (which results in increased
secretion of the sebaceous glands within the anal sacs).
Complications of anal sac impaction can occur, such as
anal gland abscessation.
Diagnosis and Medical Management
In most cases, diagnosis and management of anal sac
impaction is fairly straightforward. Diagnosis is based on
palpation of the enlarged anal sac on routine physical
examination. In many cases, diagnosis and management
are concurrent, as the impacted sacs may be able to be
gently manually expressed. Heavily impacted and painful
glands may require sedation of the patient and irrigation
of the sacs with saline. Uncomplicated cases are
then managed by addressing diet, providing regular
opportunities for the dog to defecate, and client counseling. Sacs that have become abscessed should be cultured and appropriate antibiotic treatment administered.
Uninfected impacted anal sacs do not warrant antibiotic
therapy.
Surgical Management
The decision to proceed with surgical intervention for
anal sac impaction or abscessation is based on failure to
respond to appropriate medical management, including
lancing, flushing, culture and sensitivity testing, use of
appropriate antimicrobials, and prevention of self‐
trauma (i.e., use of an Elizabethan collar). Surgical intervention generally consists of anal sacculectomy and may
be performed unilaterally or bilaterally, depending on
the patient’s condition. When planning bilateral anal
sacculectomy, it may be prudent to separate the two
­procedures by 2–4 weeks to allow any transient neuropraxia‐related fecal incontinence to resolve before
performing surgery on the contralateral side.
Anal sacculectomy for nonneoplastic disease can be
performed using either an open or closed technique.
With either method, the following principles apply:
remove the entire gland such that no secretory epithelium remains in the patient; minimize trauma to the
external anal sphincter muscle and avoid damage to
the caudal rectal nerve (branch of the pudendal n.) to

VetBooks.ir

57 Rectoanal Diseases – Medical and Surgical Management

prevent fecal incontinence; and ligate the anal sac duct
near its opening, removing it en bloc with the gland itself.
These goals are most readily achieved with the patient
positioned in sternal recumbency in a perineal stand
with the tail in an elevated position and an anal purse‐
string suture placed cranial to the opening of the anal sac
ducts. If a closed technique is chosen, the anal sac itself
can be distended with various materials (e.g., yarn, silicone sealant, Foley balloon catheter, plaster of Paris, agar
base gel, dental molds, etc.) to facilitate palpation of
the gland itself during dissection. Closure is typically
performed in two layers; 3‐0 or 4‐0 monofilament
absorbable suture for the subcutaneous tissues and
either similarly sized nylon skin sutures or an intradermal skin closure can be used.

imperforate anus), type III (as with type II but the rectum
ends further cranially), and type IV (terminal rectum and
anus may be normal but there is a discontinuity in the
rectum with a blind pouch within the pelvic canal).
These animals appear normal until 2–4 weeks of age at
which time they become unthrify, anorexic, and restless
with abdominal distension, possibly with perineal
bulging.
Rectoanal strictures appear to be more common in
cats than dogs, but can occur in either species, most typically after trauma (iatrogenic or spontaneous). Clinical
signs may vary depending on the underlying cause, but
include tenesmus, dyschezia, hematochezia, and passing
of ribbon‐like feces. Megacolon is a possible sequel,
especially in cats with chronic partial rectal narrowing
(e.g., due to malunion after pelvic fractures).

Prognosis
The prognosis for patients with anal sac impaction is generally excellent, regardless of whether they require surgical intervention or respond to medical management.

­Atresia Ani and Rectoanal Strictures
Clinical Presentation
Atresia ani is the most common congential rectal/anal
anomaly in dogs (Figure 57.1). Four types are recognized:
type I (stenosis), type II (persistent anal membrane
with the rectum ending immediately cranial to the

Pathophysiology
The functional diameter of the distal colon, rectum or
anus is reduced, due to either congenital (atresia ani) or
acquired anatomic abnormalities.
Diagnosis and Medical Management
Atresia ani may be diagnosed at the time of birth, or in
the neonatal period, with failure of the infant to defecate
and possibly the development of abdominal distension.
Later, adult‐onset disorders are usually presented for
constipation/obstipation, and can have a history of prior
trauma or injury to the pelvis or perianal region.
Surgical Management

Figure 57.1 Type II atresia ani in an 8‐week‐old mixed‐breed
puppy. Note the imperforate anus and absence of rectal lumen.
This particular puppy presented later than is typical for this
disorder due to the concurrent presence of a rectovaginal fistula
that prevented colonic and rectal obstruction. Note also the
abnormalities in vulval anatomy.

Atresia ani type I is treated with gentle bougienage. Type
II and III atresia ani are treated surgically via a vertical
incision at the anal dimple with caudal advancement of
the rectum. The rectum is sutured to the skin at the level
of the anus in two layers using 4‐0 or 5‐0 monofilament
absorbable simple interrupted sutures. Dissection must
be particularly gentle as the tissues are friable and every
effort must be made to preserve the anal sphincter as
well as opening to the anal sacs, both of which are
typically normal and present. Animals with type IV
­
­atresia ani may require an abdominal approach with or
without a pelvic osteotomy to access and anastomose the
rectum.
Treatment chosen for anorectal strictures is dictated
by the severity and location of the stricture. Mild cases
may respond to bougienage, but more severe conditions
may require surgical resection and anastomosis. However,
recurrence of stricture after surgical resection and
­anastomosis, especially in cats, is relatively common.

611

VetBooks.ir

612

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Prognosis
Surgical repair of type I or II atresia ani often results in
long‐term survival and fecal continence. Patients with
type III or IV atresia ani have poorer outcomes and the
prognosis depends on the possibility of reconstructing
the terminal rectum.
Prognosis following treatment for anorectal stricture
largely depends on the underlying cause. Benign causes
may carry a good prognosis but strictures associated
with rectal adenocarcinoma are associated with a more
guarded to poor prognosis. Surgical complications
following rectal stricture resection and anastomosis
­
may include dehiscence with sepsis and/or recurrence of
stricture.

­Constipation, Obstipation, and
Megacolon
Clinical Presentation
Constipation and obstipation are both manifestations
of difficult defecation, and fall within a spectrum of
severities. Constipation is defined as difficult or effortful defecation, but feces is passed after some effort.
Obstipation is a state of more severe constipation, and
may result in intestinal obstruction. Both constipation
and obstipation are the result of disorders in large
bowel motility that slow fecal transit, but an implication of both diagnoses is that there is some degree of
large bowel and rectal motility remaining. Obstipation
should be treated aggressively, and the early use of promotility agents is recommended in many cases, as failure to restore functional motility in these patients can
result in progression to megacolon, a state in which all
large bowel and normal rectal motility is lost. Once
established, megacolon is not effectively treated with
laxative or prokinetic medications, as both of these
families of medications require some degree of intrinsic
motility in order to be effective.
Pathophysiology
Constipation and subsequent obstipation can result
from any disorder or abnormality that slows fecal transit through the large intestine, decreases large intestinal
and rectal motility, or mechanically obstructs passage
of the fecal material to the rectum and anus. Slower
passage of fecal material results in greater dehydration
of the large intestinal content, as water absorption by
the large intestinal mucosa continues unabated.
Progressive overloading of the large intestine will eventually lead to large intestinal atony and flaccid paralysis,

as seen with ­chronically obstructed urinary bladders.
Similarly to the urinary bladder, loss of large bowel
intrinsic motility is almost universally irreversible,
resulting in megacolon.
Diagnosis and Medical Management
A history of unproductive straining or tenusmus, in concert with a readily palpable, heavily feces‐laden large
intestinal loop in the mid to distal abdomen, establishes
a diagnosis of constipation readily. Differentiation of
constipation/obstipation from megacolon can be more
challenging, however. On plain abdominal radiographs,
measurement of the maximal colon diameter:L5 vertebral body length ratio has been suggested as a method to
help differentiate constipation from megacolon. A colon
diameter:L5 length ratio of >1.48 has a sensitivity of
approximately 77% with a specificity of 85% for establishing a diagnosis of megacolon. Similarly, a ratio of
<1.28 is a strong indicator of a normal colon (sensitivity
96%, specificity 87%).
In patients where imaging findings do not suggest the
presence of megacolon, medical treatment for constipation and obstipation is indicated. Particularly for patients
with obstipation, it is critical to clearly indicate to the
animal’s owners that failure to treat effectively may lead
to life‐long, severe consequences.
Most uncomplicated cases of constipation can be
treated with warm water, saline or water‐lubricant enemas. Laxative medications, such as lactulose or emollient, paraffin‐based products, can be trialed. The diet
history should be considered, and addition of indigestible fiber as a bulking agent may be necessary. In patients
with more severe disease, and definitely if constipation
has progressed to obstipation, more aggressive treatment may be required.
Some patients with long‐standing constipation/obstipation can present with quite severe dehydration, electrolyte, and acid–base abnormalities; this is particularly
common in feline patients. Patients presenting with evidence of significant dehydration and fluid deficits should
be stabilized with parenteral fluid therapy, possibly over
24 hours or more, before anesthesia for deobstipation
and enema therapy. In these patients, the dehydration is
more immediately life threatening than the fecal load,
which has typically been present for days to weeks.
Patients with obstipation should be treated with
prokinetic medications after obstipation is relieved.
­
Unfortunately, only a small number of medications is
available that may assist with large intestinal motility.
Two medications with at least some evidence to suggest
they are worth trialing are low‐dose erythromycin and
cisapride.

VetBooks.ir

57 Rectoanal Diseases – Medical and Surgical Management

Figure 57.2 Intraoperative view of a severely distended and
atonic colon in a feline patient with idiopathic megacolon.
Patients in whom constipation and obstipation have progressed
to this degree are best managed via subtotal colectomy.

Failure of medical management for obstipation is
not uncommon, and likely reflects failure to recognize
that the disease has already proceeded to megacolon.
In patients that have proceeded to megacolon, surgical
intervention is warranted (Figure 57.2).
Surgical Management of Megacolon
Megacolon should be treated via surgical subtotal colectomy once clinical signs progress beyond the ability of
medical management to maintain the patient’s quality of
life. This is typically soon after diagnosis, as the condition
is generally progressive and quickly becomes refractory
to dietary modification, laxatives, prokinetics, and/or
enemas. Although surgical treatment is essentially an
intestinal resection and anastomosis, several anatomic
factors combine to make this procedure significantly
more challenging than a typical midintestinal resection
and anastomosis. These include tension at the level of the
ileocecocolic junction, lack of physical space to suture the
aborad intestinal segment due to the bony pubis, a higher
bacterial load within the colon compared to other segments of intestine, potential luminal disparity between
the two segments of bowel to be sutured together, proximity to the ureters, and necessity for specific transection
locations if preserving the ileocolic valve.
Surgical subtotal colectomy should aim to remove as
much of the colon as possible to prevent recurrence.
Some surgeons prefer to preserve the ileocolic valve with
the idea that it may reduce duration of diarrhea postoperatively, as there is some support for this concept in the
published literature. Regardless of whether the valve is
removed or not, a transient period of watery to mucoid

diarrhea postoperatively can be expected, lasting from
several weeks up to three months. Various methods
of anastomosis (end‐to‐end, end‐to‐side, side‐to‐side)
have been described, including hand‐suturing, GIA and
TA stapling devices, transanal or transcecal circular
end‐to‐end anastomotic stapling, and biofragmentable
anastomotic rings. Excellent outcomes have been
reported with all the above methods and the exact technique chosen should depend on the planned resection,
surgeon experience, and equipment availability.
In cases of secondary megacolon due to pelvic canal
narrowing, typically due to malunion following pelvic
fracture, a pelvic osteotomy may be required. Duration
of clinical signs has been associated with outcome, with
cats that have had clinical signs for less than six months
experiencing better resolution of constipation postoperatively. Cases with longer durations of clinical signs may
require a combination of subtotal colectomy along with
pelvic osteotomy to resolve their condition.
Prognosis
The long‐term prognosis after surgical treatment of
megacolon via subtotal colectomy in both dogs and cats
is generally considered excellent, with four‐year survival
rates reported of 90–100%. Patients should be monitored
for potential postoperative complications such as dehiscence with development of septic peritonitis, stricture,
and/or recurrent constipation.

­Perianal Fistulae
Clinical Presentation
Perianal fistulation, as the name implies, is the development of ulcerative, fistulated tissue tracts in the perianal
skin. Owner history generally includes excessive anal
and perianal licking, the presence of foul‐smelling discharge, dyschezia, and tenesmus. Affected dogs are often
extremely painful, and show a “dropped” tail posture.
These patients often resent tail handling during physical
examination, and may need to be deeply sedated or anesthetized to allow full examination. The perianal skin
shows areas of ulceration and draining tract/fistula formation; these fistulas may extend up to 7 cm deep, and
the entire circumference of the anus may be affected
(Figure 57.3). Anal gland impaction and abscess formation are common co‐morbidities, but they are not a
­prerequisite for development of this disorder.
Perianal fistulation can be a devastating disease, with
some dogs showing altered temperament and increasing
difficulty in handling due to ongoing pain.

613

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Figure 57.3 Composite images of the
perineum of an 8‐year‐old spayed female
German shepherd dog with perianal
fistula formation. The left panel shows the
dog at diagnosis, while the right panel
shows progress in resolution of the lesions
at five weeks following commencing
cyclosporin‐A treatment. This dog also has
an ulcerated perianal adenoma at the
12 o’clock position.

VetBooks.ir

614

Pathophysiology
Perianal fistulae are most commonly encountered in the
German shepherd dog, with over 80% of reported cases
being in this breed. Sporadic cases are recognized
in other medium‐ to large‐breed dogs. This disease, in
common with many of the apparently immune‐mediated
gastrointestinal diseases, is most commonly recognized
in middle‐aged to older dogs. In the German shepherd
dog a linkage to specific major histocompatibility complex types has been documented. Recent work has suggested that the underlying genetic and immunologic
defect in these dogs is similar to that underlying perianal
fistula formation in some forms of Crohn disease in
humans. The underlying pathology of this disorder is not
well characterized in either the dog or humans. The disease is generally thought to revolve around inappropriate
inflammatory response to commensal microbes on the
skin or in feces, dietary components, or possibly to a
combination of both immunogens. Approximately 50%
of dogs with perianal fistula formation have concurrent
colitis or both small and large intestinal inflammatory
disease, suggesting the presence of a systemic dysregulation of gastrointestinal immune function.
Treatment Approaches
Both surgical and medical management approaches may
be considered for dogs with perianal fistula formation,
with some cases requiring a combined approach.
The mainstay of therapy, though, remains immune
­modulation with ciclosporin or tacrolimus. If necessary
and indicated, surgical removal of impacted or abscessed
anal glands (see Anal Sac Impaction) and aggressive
resection of fistulated tissue are associated with

­resolution of clinical signs in some dogs, and should be
considered in dogs with deep fistulae and extensive
disease.
Medical management of perianal fistula revolves
around immune modulation therapy. Ciclosporin and
tacrolimus, both of which block early T cell activation,
are the mainstay drugs for medical management of this
disease (Table 57.1). In one study, five of 10 dogs with
anal fistulae treated with topical tacrolimus showed
complete resolution of clinical signs at 16 weeks, while
9/10 showed at least “noticeable improvement.”
Interestingly, most of the dogs that failed to show
­resolution were sexually intact, and neutering/spaying
is recommended as part of the treatment regime if not
previously performed.
At least some dogs will respond to dietary modification following aggressive surgical resection, with one
recent study of 33 dogs reporting 29/33 having complete resolution at one year following surgery when
dogs were exclusively fed a fish‐ and potato‐based
hypoallergenic diet.

­Pseudocoprostasis
Clinical Presentation
Pseudocoprostasis refers to the accumulation of fecal
matter in the hair surrounding the anus. This condition
is recognized in both dogs and cats, typically in long‐
haired breeds. Presenting complaints from owners are
typical of rectal/anal disease, and include unproductive
straining to defecate, tenesmus, dyschezia, excessive
anal/perianal grooming, and a foul odor.

VetBooks.ir

57 Rectoanal Diseases – Medical and Surgical Management

Table 57.1 Drugs commonly used in the management of rectoanal disease in the dog and cat
Agent

Indication

Typical dose

Administration notes

Anti-inflammatory, immune modulating
Predniso(lo)ne

Chronic idiopathic
inflammatory diseases

1–2 mg/kg/day, tapering to
minimum effective dose

Counsel owner that withdrawal from high
doses is risky.

Cyclosporin

Anal fistula

3–5 mg/kg SID

Tacrolimus

Anal fistula

0.1% Topical ointment, cover
affected area SID to BID

Tacrolimus is more expensive than
cyclosporin, but topical use provides greater
cost-effectiveness

Constipation

0.5 ml/kg TID

Cisapride

Constipation, early
megacolon

2.5–5.0 mg/cat TID

Pharmaceutical‐grade cisapride is no longer
marketed, but reagent‐grade material remains
accessible via compounding pharmacies

Prucalopride

Megacolon

Limited data available

5–HT4 receptor agonist, potential replacement
for cisapride

Laxative
Lactulose
Prokinetic

BID, twice a day (bis in die); SID, once a day (semel in die); TID, three times a day (ter in die).

This condition most commonly accompanies or
­follows the presence of diarrhea. Poorly formed stool
accumulates and dries in the perianal hair, resulting in
hair clumping and poor drainage of the underlying skin.
Obstruction of the anal opening and pain due to pulling
action on the hair result in distress on defecation and
often lead to constipation.
Secondary perianal dermatitis is common, and
increases the risk of maggot infestation.
Diagnosis is straightforward, and made entirely by
physical examination. Clipping of the hair surrounding
the anus to remove the dried fecal material is necessary
to allow proper examination of the skin and anal glands,
and is also fundamental to initial treatment.

­Rectal Foreign Bodies
Clinical Presentation
Foreign bodies lodged in the rectum typically present
with signs of constipation, including straining to defecate, tenesmus, and occasionally paradoxical diarrhea.
The owner history may reveal evidence of foreign body
consumption and bouts of vomiting or poor appetite in
the prior several days. Very rarely, linear or penetrating
foreign bodies are found in the rectal area, but most foreign bodies of this type cause signs in the more cranial
segments of the gastrointestinal tract.
Pathophysiology

Treatment Approaches
Clipping of the impacted hair mats and gentle cleaning
of the perianal skin are typically all that is required for
the treatment of uncomplicated cases. Attention to the
cause of underlying diarrhea, and owner counseling to
maintain grooming of the perianal skin and, for more
chronic cases of diarrhea, regularly bathing the patient
are important for longer term management and prevention of recurrence.
More complicated cases, featuring maggot infestation,
deep pyoderma of the perianal skin or anal glad abscesses,
may require additional topical medical or surgical management, as appropriate. The prognosis is good for full
recovery, assuming that owners remain diligent in maintaining effective grooming.

In most cases, the large intestine is obstructed by the
­foreign body, resulting in excessive fecal loading and
constipation signs. Most rectal foreign bodies are objects
(either food or toys/other foreign objects) that have been
voluntarily consumed and pass through the gastrointestinal tract, before accumulating sufficient adherent firm
material to obstruct in the rectum, often just cranial to
the anal sphincter.
Diagnosis and Medical Management
Diagnosis is typically made on physical examination and
palpation of the object. Once detected, most rectal
­foreign bodies can be removed readily using manual distraction and adequate lubrication. The patient should be

615

VetBooks.ir

616

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

deeply sedated or anesthetized for these procedures. In
some cases, foreign bodies can be broken up using rectally passed heavy forceps, aiding their eventual passage.
Surgical Management
Surgical management of rectal foreign bodies is not typically required as nonsurgical removal is almost always
possible. In the event of rectal tears or trauma developing as a consequence of a rectal foreign body, surgical
repair of the defects may be indicated (see Rectal Tears
and Trauma section).
Prognosis
Most rectal foreign bodies are removed with minimal to
no complications and prognosis is excellent.

­Rectal Polyps
Clinical Presentation
Adenomatous rectal polyps are the most common
benign tumor of the rectum. The most common site for
these growths is at the terminal rectum or anorectal
junction. Affected animals present with hematochezia,
tenesmus, dyschezia, and/or diarrhea.
Pathophysiology
In dogs, most rectal polyps are thought to arise as a consequence of long‐standing colonic and rectal wall inflammation. Fibrous proliferation of the submucosa results in
the development of polypoid “proud” intrusions into the
rectal lumen. The mucosa covering the polyps is usually
also dystrophic, raising some concerns that these may be
preneoplastic lesions. There is little support for this
­concern, however, with the great majority of these lesions
being benign.
Diagnosis and Medical Management
Often, the primary presenting sign for dogs with rectal
polyps is hematochezia, usually accompanied by tenesmus, but usually without other overt evidence of constipation. Many rectal polyps are located in the very distal
rectum, 1–3 cm orad to the anal sphincter, and are readily palpable on digital rectal palpation.
Routine diagnostic imaging, including abdominal
ultrasonography, usually has a low diagnostic yield for
these lesions.
Proctoscopy/colonoscopy is very valuable in assessing
these lesions, allowing visualization of the lesion base
and extent for adequate surgical planning, and also to

Figure 57.4 Endoscopic view of a benign rectal polyp in a dog.
A large, semipedunculated mass is visible, and the mucosal
epithelium is mildly disorganized and folded.

assess the remainder of the rectal mucosa and distal
colon, as more than one lesion may be present. The rectum and distal colon are adequately assessed using rigid
proctoscopes, and these instruments may also allow sufficient room for removal of pedunculated lesions using
polyp snares. More complete examination of the entire
colon requires the use of flexible colonoscopes and adequate preprocedural preparation, such as administration
of oral laxative solutions and preanesthetic enemas
(Figure 57.4).
Medical management of rectal polyps can be attempted
via diet modification (increasing indigestible fiber) and
trial treatment with either oral or topical (via foaming
enema) glucocorticoid administration. These strategies
have variable, and usually poor, efficacy. Large polyps
associated with frequent hematochezia and tenesmus
are generally best managed via surgical removal.
Surgical Management
Most benign adenomatous polyps can be surgically
removed via a transanal rectal eversion procedure (also
called a “rectal pull‐out”). Stay sutures are placed cranial
to the lesion and used to prolapse the rectum around the
mass. Metzenbaum scissors or a scalpel blade are used to
resect the mucosa around the base of the tumor down
to the muscularis, avoiding a full‐thickness incision. The
mucosal defect is sutured using monofilament absorbable suture in a single, simple continuous or simple interrupted layer. The mass should always be submitted for
histopathology to confirm a benign tumor. Postoperative
antibiotics are usually not indicated.
Some benign rectal polyps can be more extensive
and warrant a more aggressive surgical approach. See the
Rectal Tumors section for more details.

VetBooks.ir

57 Rectoanal Diseases – Medical and Surgical Management

Prognosis
The prognosis for dogs with benign rectal polyps is good,
but a regular monitoring schedule should be instituted
to assess for recurrence and potentially progression of
disease towards a malignant state. If caught early in
the course of disease, lesions undergoing malignant
transformation treated appropriately (e.g., carcinoma in
situ resected with histologically complete surgical margins) can be successfully treated with good long‐term
survival.

­Rectal Prolapse
Clinical Presentation
Depending on whether only anal mucosa is protruding
or all layers of the terminal rectum are protruding as a
cylindrical mass, rectal prolapse can be classified as
either partial or complete, respectively. Most commonly
occurring in younger animals, prolapse is typically a secondary condition, caused by tenesmus from presence of
parasites, foreign bodies, or urogenital diseases.
Pathophysiology
Rectal prolapse is generally due to excessive straining,
and may be seen in any patient that has an underlying
disease that will result in tenesmus. Rectal prolapses are
most commonly diagnosed in younger animals, likely
reflecting the higher frequency of parasite infestation
and other diarrheal diseases in these patients. Prolapse
can also occur secondary to straining due to constipation, but this is less common than with the diarrheal
diseases.
Following initial prolapse of the rectal mucosa, venous
congestion of the prolapsed tissue will result in swelling.
This swelling may actually increase straining, leading to
a progressive worsening of the prolapse that can proceed
to complete prolapse (Figure 57.5).
Diagnosis and Medical Management
Although the diagnosis of a rectal prolapse may be
straightforward, identification of the underlying cause
may be more challenging. A thorough history and physical exam (including a well‐lubricated digital rectal examination) are essential, with additional diagnostics to
consider including fecal examination, complete blood
count, serum biochemical profile, urinalysis ± culture,
and abdominal imaging.
Initial treatment attempts are directed at lubrication of
the prolapsed segment of rectum with manual replacement via digital pressure. Tissue edema can be reduced

Figure 57.5 Rectal prolapse in a puppy with a history of diarrhea.
Note the prolapsed, swollen mucosa with areas of drying and
early devitalization. This dog was successfully treated with
lubrication, gentle manual pressure to reduce the prolapsed
tissue, and a purse‐string suture.

to aid with reduction by application of a topical 50%
­dextrose solution or live yeast cell derivatives (available
for treatment of human hemorrhoids). An anal purse‐
string suture (nonabsorbable monofilament) is placed
after reduction, tightened around a syringe case inserted
into the anus to prevent overtightening. The suture is
maintained for 3–5 days while the underlying condition
is treated.
Surgical Management
For patients that have failed more conservative treatment as described earlier, or for those with prolapsed tissues that have undergone necrosis, surgical partial rectal
amputation with or without colopexy may be indicated.
Surgical rectal amputation is performed in stages,
using Metzenbaum scissors to resect the prolapsed
necrotic portion of the rectum and anastomosing the cut
section using monofilament absorbable suture in an
interrupted or continuous pattern. The author prefers to
perform this procedure in thirds, to prevent the cranial

617

VetBooks.ir

618

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

end of the cut rectum from retracting prior to suturing.
Three to five stay sutures placed cranial to the proposed
site of resection help maintain exposure. Suturing should
be performed in a single layer, ensuring each bite engages
the submucosa to minimize risk of postoperative dehiscence, leakage, or stricture.
Colopexy may help prevent recurrence of rectal prolapse. In cats failing more conservative management
(purse‐string placement), because of a high rate of rectal
stricture following circumferential rectal amputation,
colopexy is preferred as long as the prolapsed tissue is
considered viable. Two methods of colopexy have been
described: nonincisional and incisional. Nonincisional
colopexy uses two rows of five or six simple interrupted
sutures between the antimesenteric colonic wall and the
left abdominal wall. Incisional colopexy requires the creation of a linear incision in the serosamuscularis of the
colon with a matching incision in the peritoneal lining of
the left abdominal wall with two simple continuous
suture lines joining the two incisions, similar to incisional gastropexy. In either technique, secure purchase
of the colonic submucosa is important to ensure a successful colopexy. No differences have been reported in
outcomes after either colopexy technique.
Prognosis
The prognosis depends on the underlying cause of the
prolapse. Uncomplicated prolapse in young animals,
often associated with gastrointestinal parasitism, is frequently responsive to minor therapeutic interventions
(e.g., purse‐string) and the prognosis can be excellent.
More severe cases have necrosis of prolapsed tissue with
significant underlying co‐morbidities.

Diagnosis and Medical Management
Careful physical examination is the primary method
for diagnosis of rectal trauma. Rectal tears are most
commonly located in the distal (extraperitoneal) portion of the rectum. A complete blood count and serum
biochemistry profile are recommended for patients
suspected of sustaining rectal trauma. Diagnostic
­imaging (ultrasound and/or negative contrast pneumoradiography) can be performed to further characterize
the defect.
Small, partial‐thickness rectal tears will resolve with
medical management. However, larger or full‐thickness
tears require prompt surgical intervention. Medical
treatment with correction of electrolyte abnormalities,
hypotension, and administration of appropriately targeted antimicrobials is important prior to surgery.
Surgical Management
The surgical approach used will depend on the location
and extent of the tear. Transanal rectal eversion with stay
sutures will allow access to distal tears, but larger defects
will require a perineal approach (dorsal or lateral),
­possibly combined with an abdominal approach with or
without pelvic osteotomy. Placement of drains is typically indicated to address perineal tissue contamination.
Secure closure of the rectal wall, typically with monofilament absorbable suture in one or two layers, is of the
utmost importance to resolution of the condition and
ensuring a good long‐term prognosis. Because a perineal
surgical wound is typically heavily contaminated with
feces, it may be partially closed or left open to heal by
second intention.
Prognosis

­Rectal Tears and Trauma
Clinical Presentation
Rectal trauma causing perforation is a relatively rare
condition that may result from pelvic fractures, foreign
objects, iatrogenic causes (e.g., examination, thermometers, enemas, surgery), or penetrating wounds.
Depending on the degree of rectal trauma and duration
of injury, animals may present in varying degrees of
­septic shock and/or rectocutaneous fistulation.

Appropriately managed rectal perforations should heal
with a good prognosis, but the patient may be threatened
by concurrent trauma to other organ systems associated
with the inciting cause of rectal perforation. Therefore,
the prognosis depends on co‐morbidities and aggressive
management of polytrauma patients is recommended.
If dehiscence of the rectal tear occurs, a rectocutaneous
fistula may form which requires reoperation.

­Rectal Tumors

Pathophysiology

Clinical Presentation

Clinical signs develop from contamination of the perineal tissues with feces, leading to abscessation and/or
sepsis. If a perforation occurs cranial to the retroperitoneal reflection, septic peritonitis may develop.

For the purposes of this chapter, rectal tumor is taken to
refer to any neoplastic or hyperplastic process affecting
the rectum or internal anus other than benign inflammatory polyps, which have been described separately.

VetBooks.ir

57 Rectoanal Diseases – Medical and Surgical Management

The clinical signs accompanying rectal tumors are
similar to most other rectal diseases, featuring histories
of straining to defecate and occasionally the presence of
narrow “ribbon‐like” stool due to partial restriction of
the rectal lumen. Hematochezia is variably present,
depending on the involvement of the mucosa. Tumors
such as adenocarcinoma and mucosal lymphoma often
present with histories of hematochezia, while tumors
affecting the muscularis and deeper mural layers, such as
leiomyoma or GI stromal tumors, usually do not feature
hematochezia.
Pathophysiology
Rectal tumors result from neoplastic or hyperplastic
changes in normal tissue of the rectum or anal sphincter. Any of the various tissue types within the rectum
can be involved (mucosa, secretory epithelia, smooth
muscle, lymphoid tissue, etc.), but tumors affecting
other than the epithelia (such as leiomyoma or GIST
tumors) are uncommon. Of all the potential rectal
tumor types, ­adenocarcinoma (possibly resulting from
malignant transformation of rectal polyps) is the most
common.
Diagnosis and Medical Management
Direct digital rectal examination will often reveal the
presence of intrarectal masses, and may allow some
determination of mucosal vs deeper mural location.
Accessibility of mass lesions will depend upon the depth
of the lesion within the rectum, the size of the animal and
examiner’s reach. Effective digital rectal examination
often requires sedation of the patient, particularly with
smaller animals.
Routine diagnostic imaging, such as abdominal radiography, has a low yield in the assessment of rectal
tumors. Abdominal ultrasound examination can also fail
to fully appreciate the size and location of rectal tumors
within the pelvic canal. In patients where rectal malignancies are suspected, a combination of colonoscopy
(allowing biopsy and assessment of the adjacent mucosa)
and abdominal/pelvic CT examination (for staging,
assessment of bone involvement and invasion into other
pelvic organs such as the urethra or prostate) is generally
recommended.
Medical management of nonpolypoid masses in the
rectum is generally fruitless. Dietary change to “low‐residue” diets and use of laxatives such as lactulose will
improve clinical signs in some patients and can allow a
degree of conservative management, but most patients
will require surgical management for the best long‐term
treatment effect and prognosis.

Surgical Management
In preparation for surgery of the rectum, many surgeons
recommend feeding a low‐residue diet for 4–5 days
­preoperatively and avoiding enemas in the three days
preceding surgery. Perioperative antibiotic cover typically consists of cephalosporins but some surgeons
­prefer metronidazole or other agents that may target
colorectal anaerobic bacteria. The need for postoperative antibiotics depends on degree of contamination
­during surgery, but is typically not necessary beyond
24 hours postoperatively.
Rectal surgery can be divided into two general categories: procedures that can be performed from a perineal
or transanal approach and procedures that require an
intraabdominal approach. The first is the simpler and
more commonly performed option. The exact distance
accessible depends on the patient’s size and should be
assessed via digital rectal exam prior to deciding upon
the approach. Transanal rectal eversion (i.e., prolapse;
also called “rectal pull‐out” procedure; Figure 57.6) using
stay sutures allows access to tumors of the distal rectum.
If not circumferential in nature, such tumors may be
removed by scalpel blade and hand‐sewing, or by use of
a thoracoabdominal stapling device. For circumferential
lesions, a transanal rectal pull‐through resection and
anastomosis may be performed.
The author prefers to transect and suture the circumference of the rectum in thirds, preventing the orad segment from retracting too far cranially. A grossly normal
tissue margin of 0.5–1.0 cm is typically feasible with
either transanal rectal eversion or transanal rectal pull‐
through. If larger margins are required based on preoperative diagnostics, a more aggressive surgical approach
is required, as described below.

Figure 57.6 Early intraoperative view of a rectal pull‐through
procedure to remove a large, benign rectal polyp (2 cm diameter)
in a Labrador retriever.

619

VetBooks.ir

620

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Surgical removal of tumors not confined to the distal
rectum is performed via a perineal or anal approach,
which can be combined with intraabdominal dissection
to mobilize the descending colon along with the cranial
end of the rectum. Preservation of the external anal
sphincter muscle may be possible, depending on the
tumor location and extent. Pelvic osteotomy techniques
may need to be employed. This is an advanced procedure used for malignant tumors of the rectum (e.g., carcinoma) and can allow for removal of up to 6 cm of
grossly normal tissue margins en bloc with the primary
tumor, as well as extirpation of regional lymph nodes.
Morbidity (especially fecal incontinence) and mortality
with combined approaches can be significant but dogs

surviving the postoperative period can experience long‐
term ­disease‐free intervals.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends upon the histologic tumor type, margin
status, and staging results. Benign tumors (e.g., adenomatous polyps, in situ carcinomas, leiomyomas) can be cured
with surgical resection. Rectal lymphoma, although rare,
carries a good prognosis following surgery and chemotherapy, with a reported overall median survival time of
1697 days. Canine rectal adenocarcinoma carries a worse
prognosis, with reports ranging from six to 24 months,
depending on staging and completeness of excision.

Further Reading
Bennett PF, DeNicola DB, Bonney P, et al. Canine anal sac
adenocarcinomas: clinical presentation and response to
therapy. J Vet Intern Med. 2002; 16(1): 100–104.
Bertoy RW. Megacolon in the cat. Vet Clin Sm Anim. 2002;
32(4): 901–915.
Colopy‐Poulsen SA, Danova NA, Hardie RJ, et al.
Managing feline obstipation secondary to pelvic fracture.
Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet. 2005; 27(9): 662–670.
Downs MO and Stampley AR. Use of a Foley catheter to
facilitate anal sac remove in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc. 1998; 34(5): 395–397.
Ellison GW, Papazoglou LG. Long‐term results of surgery
for atresia ani with or without anogenital malformations
in puppies and a kitten: 12 cases (1983–2010). J Am Vet
Med Assoc. 2012; 240(2): 186–92.
Emms SG. Anal sac tumors of the dog and their response
to cytoreductive surgery and chemotherapy. Aust Vet J.
2005; 83(6): 340–343.
Harari J. Immunotherapy for anal furunculosis in dogs.
Compend Contin Educ Vet. 2008; 30(2): 69–72.
Harkin KR, Walshaw R, Mullaney TP. Association of
perianal fistula and colitis in the German shepherd dog:
response to high‐dose prednisone and dietary therapy.
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association.
1996; 32(6): 515–520. doi:10.5326/15473317‐32‐6‐515.
Hobson HP, Brown MR, and Rogers KS. Surgery of
metastatic anal sac adenocarcinoma in five dogs. Vet
Surg. 2006; 35(3): 267–270.
Holt PE, Lucke VM: Rectal neoplasia in the dog: a
clinicopathological review of 31 cases. Vet Rec. 1985;
116(15): 400–5.
Kennedy LJ, O’Neill T, House A, et al. Risk of anal
furunculosis in German shepherd dogs is associated with
the major histocompatibility complex. Tissue Antigens.
2008; 71(1): 51–56. doi:10.1111/j.1399‐0039.2007.00964.x.

Klein A, Deneuche A, Fayolle P, et al. Preoperative
immunosuppressive therapy and surgery as a treatment
for anal furunculosis. Vet Surg. 2006; 35(8): 759–768.
doi:10.1111/j.1532‐950X.2006.00220.x.
Lombardi RL, Marino DJ. Long‐term evaluation of canine
perianal fistula disease treated with exclusive fish and
potato diet and surgical excision. Journal of the
American Animal Hospital Association. 2008; 44(6):
302–307. doi:10.5326/0440302.
Misseghers BS, Binnington AG, Mathews KA. Clinical
observations of the treatment of canine perianal fistulas
with topical tacrolimus in 10 dogs. Can Vet J. 2000;
41(8): 623–627.
Morello E, Martano M, Squassino C, et al: Transanal
pull‐through rectal amputation for treatment of
colorectal carcinoma in 11 dogs. Vet Surg. 2008; 37(5):
420–6.
Swiderski J, Withrow S. A novel surgical stapling technique
for rectal mass removal: a retrospective analysis. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc. 2009; 45(2): 67–71.
Trevail T, Gunn‐Moore D, Carrera I, et al.
Radiographic diameter of the colon in normal
and constipated cats and in cats with megacolon.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 2011; 52(2): 516–520. doi:
10.1111/j.1740‐8261.2011.01830.
Van den Steen N, Berlato D, Polton G, et al: Rectal
lymphoma in 11 dogs: a retrospective study. J Small
Anim Pract. 2012; 53(10): 586–91.
Webb CB, McCord KW, Twedt DC. Rectal strictures in 19
dogs: 1997–2005. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2007; 43(6):
332–6.
Williams LE, Gliatto JM, Dodge RK, et al. Carcinoma of
the apocrine glands of the anal sac in dogs: 113 cases
(1985–1995). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2003; 223(6):
825–831.

VetBooks.ir

621

58
Dysbiosis and the Use of Pre‐, Pro‐ and Synbiotics
Jan S. Suchodolski, MedVet, Dr Med Vet, PhD, AGAF, DACVM
College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA

­The Importance of the
Gastrointestinal Microbiota
The intestinal microbiota is the collection of all live
microorganisms (bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and viruses)
that inhabit the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. The word
microflora is often used in older textbooks, but microbiota (from bios, Greek: life) is the technically correct term.
The total microbial load in the intestine is estimated to
represent between 1012 and 1014 organisms, which is
about 10 times the number of cells composing the host
body. Because the majority of intestinal bacteria cannot
be cultured using commonly used plating techniques,
molecular tools (mostly targeting the 16S rRNA gene) are
now the standard for identification of microbiota, and
have improved our understanding of the complex microbial diversity in the intestine. It is estimated that the
intestine harbors several hundred bacterial phylotypes.
The microbiota differs substantially on the species and
strain level in each individual animal yet despite these differences, the metabolic end‐products in the intestine are
similar between individuals. This new insight into the
complexity and individuality of the gastrointestinal
microbiota has increased research efforts to better understand the importance of a balanced microbial ecosystem
for regulation of host immunity in health and disease.
The interactions between intestinal bacteria and the
host immune system are mediated through various
mechanisms, either via direct contact between bacteria
and the innate immune system (e.g., via Toll‐like receptors, NOD2 receptors), or through microbial‐derived
metabolites. These metabolites can be either directly
produced by bacteria (e.g., vitamins, short‐chain fatty
acids [SCFA]), or may be primary host metabolites that
are converted through bacterial enzymes into secondary
metabolites (e.g., conversion of primary to secondary
bile acids, tryptophan into indole). Consequently, many

studies in humans and animals have associated intestinal
dysbiosis, defined as alterations in intestinal microbiota
composition and/or richness, with various disorders
such as inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), granulomatous colitis, obesity, diabetes mellitus, and allergies. For
these reasons, the normalization of dysbiosis appears to
be a prudent therapeutic goal.

­The Gastrointestinal Microbiota
in Healthy Dogs and Cats
We are just beginning to understand the complexity of
the microbiota and are only at a very early stage in our
abilities to properly assess the entire microbiota and its
functions. The microbiota varies along the GI tract, and
there are also clear differences between the mucosa‐
associated and luminal microbiota. Additionally, we are
not yet able to fully assess the interactions between the
microbiota and the host immune system. Several recent
studies have described which bacterial groups reside in
the GI tract of dogs and cats, and some initial work has
been done to understand the metabolic interactions
between microbiota and host.
Studies using traditional bacterial culture estimated
that the bacterial load in the small intestine of healthy
dogs is typically 102–105 cfu/g of small intestinal content,
but can reach as high as 109 cfu/g. In the colon, the number of cultivable bacteria is much higher, with up to
1011 cfu/g. Molecular studies using high‐throughput
sequencing are now the standard for microbiota characterization and have identified many novel and important
bacterial genera that were previously not appreciated in
the canine and feline GI tract.
The predominant phyla in the feces of healthy dogs
are Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, Fusobacteria, and
Proteobacteria. Lower abundance phyla (less than 1% of

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

622

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

the micriobiota) include Spirochaetes, Tenericutes, and
Verrucomicrobia. The Firmicutes can be divided into
several subgroups on a family and genus level. It comprises many phylogenetically distinct bacterial groups.
These groups (e.g., Ruminococcus spp., Faecalibacterium
spp., Dorea), together with Bacteroidetes and
Actinobacteria (i.e., Bifidobacterium) are producers of
metabolites that have direct impacts on host health. For
example, bacteria can utilize complex carbohydrates
(e.g., starch, cellulose, pectin, and inulin) as nutrient
sources, and their fermentation produces SCFA (e.g.,
acetate, propionate, and butyrate). These act as energy
sources for the host, regulate intestinal motility, and are
important growth factors for epithelial cells. SCFA are
also important antiinflammatory molecules, as they
induce immunoregulatory T cells (Treg). Other bacteria‐
derived metabolites, such as indoles (a byproduct of
tryptophan degradation) or secondary bile acids, are also
antiinflammatory, thereby maintaining immune homeostasis and strengthening intestinal barrier function.
The microbiota primes the immune system, aids in the
defense against potential intestinal pathogens, and
­provides nutritional benefits to the host. Bacteria communicate with the host’s innate immune system through
cell‐associated receptors such as Toll‐like receptors
(TLR) and dendritic cells. The resident intestinal microbiota is also a crucial part of the intestinal barrier, due to
the phenomenon of “colonization resistance” which
­protects the host from invading pathogens through competition for oxygen, nutrients, and adhesion sites on the
mucosa.

­The Gastrointestinal Microbiota
in Disease
There is clear evidence that altered microbial communities play a role in the pathophysiology of various d
­ isorders.
Chronic dysbiosis is likely an important environmental
risk factor for development of several chronic diseases in
genetically susceptible individuals. For example, recent
epidemiologic studies in humans have linked antibiotic
administration in early childhood with an increased risk
for development of allergies and obesity. Also, antibiotic‐
induced reductions in gut microbiota diversity were a
risk factor for higher mortality outcomes in allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. These initial
data in humans suggest that dysbiosis is clinically relevant and the correction of dysbiosis would appear to be a
prudent therapeutic goal. However, at this time, there are
still only limited clinical data available to guide specific
treatments for correction of dysbiosis in dogs and cats.
Dysbiosis occurs in various forms; it may be due to
overgrowth of specific pathogens, or due to more general

changes in bacterial groups, and/or changes in the functional and immunomodulatory properties of the gastrointestinal microbiota. All these forms overlap to some
extent.
There are several physiologic mechanisms that regulate microbial colonization in the GI tract. Gastric acid,
bile, and pancreatic enzymes all have antibacterial roles
and eliminate a proportion of ingested organisms.
Intestinal motility is an important regulator of bacterial
adhesion to the mucosa in the small intestine. Microbes
that are unable to adhere to the epithelium will be pushed
to the large intestine, which has a more stagnant motility
and therefore higher bacterial numbers. The ileocolic
valve is a natural barrier that prevents retrograde migration of bacteria from the large to the small intestine.
Any changes in these mechanisms may lead to dysbiosis, but whether this leads to disease will depend on the
susceptibility of the individual, as not every animal
exposed to these risk factors will develop disease. For
example, acid suppression therapy increases gastric and
duodenal bacterial counts in humans, but not all patients
show clinical signs. Similarly, dogs with experimentally
induced exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPI) have
increased bacterial numbers in the proximal small intestine. Rapid diet changes, dietary indiscretion, changes in
the architecture of the intestine, or changes in intestinal
motility (i.e., surgical creation of intestinal loops, short
bowel syndrome, and resection of the ileocolic valve) are
also associated with dysbiosis. The development of dysbiosis may then lead to changes in gastrointestinal physiology that will negatively impact function of the GI tract.
Examples are an altered intestinal barrier with increased
intestinal permeability and direct damage to the intestinal brush border and enterocytes leading to nutrient and
vitamin malabsorption. An overgrowth in specific bacterial groups may lead to increased competition for nutrients and vitamins and to increased deconjugation of bile
acids, resulting in the creation of potentially deleterious
metabolites.
The intestinal microbiota also plays a role in the pathogenesis of IBD. Intestinal inflammation leads to a shift
towards gram‐negative bacteria (i.e., Proteobacteria)
that may perpetuate the disease. Existing dysbiosis may
trigger alterations in the immune system, which in turn
diminish the colonization resistance of the resident
microbiota. Several studies in dogs and cats have
reported increases in Enterobacteriaceae in the GI tract
of dogs and cats, and these are associated with inflammation and altered mucosal architecture. In contrast, a
reduction in some major bacterial groups (i.e.,
Lachnospiraceae, Ruminococcaceae, Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii and Clostridium coccoides subgroups) occurs
in GI disease, suggesting a loss of normal and protective
microbiota in GI disease (Figure 58.1).

58 Dysbiosis and the Use of Pre‐, Pro‐ and Synbiotics

VetBooks.ir

8
6

15
Dysbiosis index

4

log CFU

10

5

2
0
–2
–4
–6

0

–8
Blautia

E. coli

Faecalibact.

Turicibacter

Healthy

IBD

Figure 58.1 Dysbiosis in dogs with IBD. (Left) Several major bacterial groups are decreased in healthy dogs (black) vs dogs with IBD. In
contrast, E. coli is typically increased in IBD. These data illustrate that IBD is associated with loss of normal and protective microbiota.
(Right) The same data are displayed as an dysbiosis index (DI) that summarizes the abundances of these major bacterial taxa as one single
numerical value (a positive number indicates dysbiosis).

These groups are mainly producers of SCFAs and
other immunomodulatory metabolites. Consequently,
decreased fecal propionate, reductions in secondary bile
acids, and a reduction in indole concentrations are
reported in dogs with acute and chronic diarrhea. This
depletion of commensal groups and their respective
immunoregulatory metabolites may impair the ability of
the host to downregulate the intestinal immune response,
and dysbiosis becomes a part of the pathophysiology of
the chronic disease process.

­Therapeutic Approach to Dysbiosis
As outlined earlier, the intestinal microbiota will affect
the health status of the host, and shifts in bacterial groups
have been associated with GI diseases such as antibiotic‐
responsive diarrhea and IBD. Dysbiosis is defined as an
altered composition of the microbiota, yet some disorders may be associated with changes in microbiota function (e.g., reduced SCFA, altered bacterial enzymes)
rather than shifts in microbial communities. These functional changes are difficult to detect, as there is no comprehensive method to assess the entire microbiota,
including its metabolism and its interactions with the
host immune system. The microbiota varies along the GI
tract, and between mucosal and luminal sites. Because
all these factors potentially play roles in the development
of clinical signs, assessment of bacterial changes in intestinal (fecal) samples most often does not reveal the entire
disease process. Nevertheless, it is now better understood which bacterial groups and which metabolites are
commonly altered in GI disease.

The best therapy for dysbiosis is currently unknown.
At this time, therapy is based on empirical approaches
with improvement of clinical signs being the most useful
outcome measure. Due to vast interindividual differences in the intestinal microbiota, it is difficult to define
what constitutes a normal and balanced intestinal ecosystem. Dietary manipulation, the administration of
antibiotics or pre‐ and/or probiotics are common strategies. It is important to note that while such interventions
may cause shifts in the composition of the intestinal
microbiota, these changes are largely individual to each
animal. Clinical experience shows that dietary changes
or antibiotic administration often lead to an improvement in GI signs, although the exact mechanism remains
unclear. Antibiotics can eliminate specific pathogens or
can lead to more general modulations of the intestinal
microbiota. This may result in a lesser burden of stimulating antigens. While in some animals, the use of
­antimicrobials is useful (e.g., animals with ARD), their
use may exacerbate dysbiosis in other GI diseases that do
not respond to antibiotics. Recent epidemiologic studies
in humans have suggested that the chronic use of antimicrobials is a strong risk factor for the development of
asthma, obesity, and diabetes mellitus. Therefore, alternative approaches to antibiotic therapy to treat dysbiosis
are desirable.
Probiotics, Prebiotics, and Synbiotics
Probiotics are currently defined as live microorganisms,
which when administered in adequate amounts confer a
health benefit on the host. Synbiotics are a combination
of probiotics and prebiotics. They are often administered

623

VetBooks.ir

624

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

together to add a growth substrate for the administered
probiotic. Prebiotics are nondigestible food ingredients
(e.g., fructooligosaccharides [FOS] and galactooligosaccharides [GOS]) that are added to diets to stimulate the
growth of native probiotic bacteria. Prebiotics are typically added to diets to enhance the growth of endogenous microorganisms or stimulate their metabolism.
The target groups for prebiotic administration, for example Bifidobacterium spp., were believed to be major bacterial groups in the canine and feline GI tract before the
advent of molecular studies. However, only minor
changes in microbiota are typically induced through
prebiotics, as the administered compounds fulfill only
some of the nutrient requirements for their target
­bacteria, and other essential nutrients remain at growth‐
limiting amounts. In addition, because of the individuality of the microbiota, not every animal will have the same
bacterial strains and enzymes that are needed to utilize
the administered prebiotics. Therefore, only a portion of
animals will respond with increases in the targeted
­bacterial groups. It is also unclear whether the bacterial
groups necessary for prebiotic utilization are present in
animals with dysbiosis. Consequently, there are no published clinical studies that have evaluated prebiotics in
animals with GI disease.
Prebiotics may be useful in stimulating the microbiota
and immune system in healthy animals, but their benefit
in animals with GI disease has not been widely explored.
In contrast, more clinical data are available about probiotics (or synbiotics), and this will be discussed in more
detail below.
Selection of Probiotics
The intestinal microbiota is an important modulator of
the immune system. Administration of specific bacterial
strains as probiotics can potentially mimic the effects of
the normal microbiome. It is important that the clinician
and client understand that every bacterial strain may
­differ substantially in its functional and immunologic
properties. Therefore, not every strain will elicit the
same response, and ideally strains are selected for the
right disease and the right patient based on clinical studies. Information regarding strain designations is critically important in clinical studies, to be able to select the
proper product containing the clinically tested strain.
However, in veterinary practice there are few clinical
data available. There are many commercial products
available containing various strains that have not been
tested in clinical studies.
In the US, probiotics are considered to be nutritional
supplements and, therefore undergo little regulatory
scrutiny. Unfortunately, many commercial products lack
acceptable quality. For example, in one study almost 50%

of products did not list any information about the organisms (i.e., did not provide the strain designation) and
their numbers. Also most products did not contain the
stated numbers of bacteria. Therefore, at this point it is
recommended to only select probiotic products that
have clinical and published data behind them.
There are only a few probiotic strains with extensive in
vitro as well as clinical data (mostly in humans) published
in primary literature (e.g. VSL#3 strains, Lactobacillus
GG, E. coli Nissle, Saccharomyces boulardii). There are
data available based on clinical studies in veterinary
patients for the following products: Enterococcus faecium SF68 (Fortiflora®), Visbiome®, SIVOY®, and
Proviable®.
Currently, selection of bacterial strains for most commercial probiotic products is mostly based on their
­ability to survive the passage through the stomach and
small intestine, their ability to adhere to mucus, and in
vitro immunomodulation. Furthermore, strains are
selected that are on the safety list of the FDA, as these are
approved for human and animal use, and no additional
safety data are necessary. These strains are typically
lactic acid bacteria (Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium,
­
Enterococcus, Streptococcus), as these bacterial genera
were traditionally believed to confer health benefits.
However, due to the complexity of the microbiota, there
is no clear correlation between changes in these bacterial
groups and health and disease. While lactic acid bacteria
are still the most commonly used probiotic strains, in the
future novel products may become available containing
bacterial groups that are more abundant and depleted in
GI disease (e.g., Faecalibacterium, Blautia, etc.).
The actual mechanisms through which probiotic
strains can elucidate beneficial effects are numerous.
Some probiotic strains have been shown to modulate the
immune system, such as enhancing IgA production and
pathogen phagocytosis and stimulating release of antiinflammatory cytokines. Other probiotic strains help to
restore mucosal barrier function. Probiotics can also
help protect the host from pathogenic bacteria through
the production of antimicrobial substances, and through
competitive exclusion of pathogens by preventing
­adhesion, occupying binding sites, or consuming vital
nutrients.
While often probiotics are believed to modulate the
intestinal microbiota, recent studies suggest that they
have no appreciable effect on the overall composition of
the intestinal microbiota, as only minor changes were
observed in fecal samples in healthy as well as diseased
dogs. Rather than changing the entire microbiota, some
strains may adhere to the mucosa and directly communicate with the immune system; this has been shown for
Visbiome strains in dogs with IBD. In order to impart a
health benefit to the host, a probiotic must be able to

VetBooks.ir

58 Dysbiosis and the Use of Pre‐, Pro‐ and Synbiotics

survive passage into the gut, adhere to epithelial cells,
and proliferate within the GI tract. Even those probiotic
strains that fulfill these criteria appear to colonize the GI
tract for only relatively brief periods of time, and are usually eliminated within a few days after the end of administration. Therefore, if the goal of therapy is to have a
long‐term impact on the patient, long‐term daily administration of probiotics in high doses is required.

­Clinical Data on Probiotics
in Veterinary Medicine
In veterinary medicine, we are currently lacking well‐
designed, properly powered studies that have been
reproduced by independent research groups. There are,
however, some promising data on a variety of probiotic
preparations. These include the prevention and treatment of antibiotic‐associated or stress‐related diarrhea
(boarding, traveling, working dogs), and the prevention
and treatment of gastrointestinal signs during periods of
dietary change (weaning in puppies and kittens, new
diets). Recent studies have also shown antiinflammatory
properties of some probiotics in dogs with IBD.
The greatest amount of data is available for amelioration and/or shortening of acute diarrhea. In a large
­double‐blind, placebo‐controlled study of shelter cats,
significantly fewer animals (7% vs 20% in the placebo
group) that received Enterococcus faecium SF68
(Fortiflora, Purina; 2 billion cfu/day) developed diarrhea
for greater than a two‐day duration. Similarly, administration of Bifidobacterium animalis strain AHC7
(Prostora®, IAMS; 100 billion cfu/day) to dogs with acute
idiopathic diarrhea reduced the time to resolution by 2.5
days and decreased the percentage of dogs that required
adjunctive use of metronidazole (38% vs 50% in the
placebo group). Probiotic strains (450 billion cfu/day;
Visbiome, Exegi Pharma) led to lower mortality when
given to puppies with confirmed parvoviral enteritis (90%
vs 70% in the placebo group).
Fewer published studies are available regarding dogs
with chronic enteropathies (CE). A probiotic cocktail
(200–400 billion cfu per dog per day; Visbiome, Exegi
Pharma) has been trialed in dogs with idiopathic IBD.
Clinical activity and histology scores were reduced similarly to dogs treated with standard therapy (prednisone
and antibiotics). Furthermore, the probiotic induced
regulatory T‐helper lymphocytes (FoxP3) and protein
expression that were associated with enhanced mucosal
barrier function. In cats, one published open‐label trial
assessed the use of a multistrain synbiotic product containing lactic acid ­bacteria and a blend of fructo‐ and
galactooligosaccharides (5 billion per day; Proviable‐
DC, Nutramax Laboratories) and reported that 72% of

owners perceived an improvement in their cat’s diarrhea
following a 21‐day course of supplementation.
Generally, it is believed that prophylactic administration of probiotics may be a more successful strategy for
prevention of GI disease. Experimental studies in animal models have consistently shown that probiotic
administration before induction of inflammation has a
higher success rate compared to therapeutic administration. However, this approach is often not practical in
clinical medicine. Also, it is not clear whether long‐term
administration of probiotics to healthy animals is useful. But if trigger episodes for diarrhea are anticipated,
prophylactic administration of probiotics may be prudent. Also, antibiotics induce dysbiosis and may lead to
diarrhea, and this is an area where probiotics may be
especially useful. For example, administration of
Saccharomyces boulardii to dogs with experimental lincomycin‐induced diarrhea prevented the development
of diarrhea, but was not successful in treating diarrhea
once it developed.
Safety of Probiotics
Theoretically, probiotics have the potential to cause systemic infections; they can produce deleterious metabolites and can transfer antibiotic resistance genes.
However, side‐effects are very rarely reported. A limited
number of case reports in humans have shown that
­ robiotics (i.e., Lactobacillus spp.) can potentially transp
locate and cause septicemia in hospitalized patients. A
study in humans with severe pancreatitis found increased
mortality with probiotic therapy. It is currently recommended that probiotics should be used with caution in
immunocompromised patients.
Concurrent Antibiotic Use
Probiotics, like any other bacteria, can be either susceptible or resistant to concurrently administered antibiotics. For the prevention of antibiotic‐associated diarrhea,
antibiotics and probiotics are prescribed concurrently.
Many of the prescribed bacterial groups such as
Lactobacillus, Enterococcus, and Bifidobacterium spp.
are generally resistant to commonly used antibiotics
such as metronidazole and tylosin. Therefore, concurrent administration should be acceptable. For other
­antibiotics, it may be useful to separate antibiotic and
probiotic administration by a few hours if feasible.
Species Specificity of Probiotics
There is some thought that a probiotic should be species
specific (i.e., the probiotic strain has been isolated from

625

VetBooks.ir

626

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

the same animal species that it will be used in). This theory is based on the fact that the intestinal microbiota differs between different animal species. Furthermore, a
host‐specific probiotic may be better adapted to its target organism (e.g., stomach pH, bile acid composition,
adherence to epithelial cells). However, while it is known
that the resident microbiota differs between different
animal species, it has never been demonstrated that

­probiotic effects are species specific. The microbiota
­differs dramatically even within animals of the same species, so the concept of a species‐specific probiotic may
not be entirely accurate. Several in vivo (based on animal
models) and in vitro (based on the adherence to epithelial cells) studies have shown that human and canine
­probiotics are capable of conferring a health benefit to
other animal species.

­Further Reading
Honneffer JB, Minamot Y, Suchodolski JS. Microbiota
alterations in acute and chronic gastrointestinal
inflammation of cats and dogs. World J Gastroenterol
2014; 20: 16489–97.
Janeczko S, Atwater D, Bogel E, et al. The relationship of
mucosal bacteria to duodenal histopathology, cytokine
mRNA, and clinical disease activity in cats with
inflammatory bowel disease. Vet Microbiol 2008; 128: 178–93.

Minamoto Y, Otoni CC, Steelman SM, et al. Alteration of
the fecal microbiota and serum metabolite profiles in
dogs with idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease. Gut
Microbes 2015; 6: 33–47.
White R, Atherly T, Guard B, et al. Randomized, controlled
trial evaluating the effect of multi‐strain probiotic on the
mucosal microbiota in canine idiopathic inflammatory
bowel disease. Gut Microbes 2017; 8: 451–66.

VetBooks.ir

627

59
Diagnosis and Management of Chronic Enteropathies
Karin Allenspach, Dr Med Vet, PhD, Diplomate ECVIM-CA
College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA

­Definition
Chronic enteropathies (CE) are a group of idiopathic intestinal disorders characterized by chronic persistent or recurrent gastrointestinal (GI) signs, with histologic evidence of
inflammation in the lamina propria of the small intestine,
large intestine, or both. The diagnosis of CE is one of exclusion and a full diagnostic work‐up needs to be done to rule
out all known causes of GI inflammation. Currently, endoscopic evaluation and histopathology of intestinal biopsies
is the only way to definitively diagnose CE. Although the
exact etiology of CE is unknown, it is widely accepted that
the pathogenesis involves a complex interplay among host
genetics, the intestinal mucosal immune system, the environment, and the intestinal microbiota.

­Classification of Chronic
Enteropathies
Chronic enteropathies are classified according to the
inflammatory cell present and the area of intestine
affected, the most commonly encountered CE being
lympho‐plasmacytic enteritis in both dogs and cats.
Eosinophilic enteritis is thought to be the second most
common CE, while granulomatous enteritis is rare.
Neutrophilic infiltration is also rare in both canine and
feline inflammatory gastrointestinal disease.
Clinically, CE patients can be classified retrospectively
depending on their response to treatment. The most
common recommendation for these patients is to apply a
sequential approach to treatment, with the goal of identifying groups of dogs that respond to a certain treatment. Those responding entirely to an elimination diet
or a hydrolyzed diet are diagnosed as food‐responsive
diarrhea (FRD). Those responding to antibiotics are classified as antibiotic‐responsive diarrhea (ARD), and CE

patients that do not fall into either of these two categories and require immunosuppressive medication to control their clinical signs are commonly classified as having
steroid‐responsive diarrhea (SRD). As patients with SRD
have, ideally, undergone a thorough work‐up to exclude
other known causes for intestinal inflammation, these
patients can also reasonably be diagnosed as having
­idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease, or IBD.
Certain breeds are highly susceptible to the development of specific unique forms of inflammatory enteropathies; examples include the immunoproliferative
enteropathy of basenjis, the protein‐losing enteropathy
(PLE) and protein‐losing nephropathy (PLN) complex in
soft‐coated wheaten terriers, IBD with PLE in Norwegian
lundehunds and granulomatous colitis in boxer dogs.

­Etiopathogenesis
In the last few decades, the study of human IBD and animal models of this disease has led to significant advances
in our understanding of the pathogenesis of CE in companion animals. These studies have shown that the
pathogenesis is complex, involving an overly aggressive
cell‐mediated response due to the loss of tolerance to
antigens of the commensal microbiome and food
­antigens in genetically susceptible hosts (Figure 59.1).
Genetics
The heritability of human IBD is not fully understood.
Genome‐wide association studies have revealed over 200
loci that are variably associated with the development of
the disease. It is therefore believed to be an autoimmune
disease with polygenetic inheritance. Most loci that have
been found to play a role in the pathogenesis of human
IBD can be traced to proteins in the innate immunity
pathways, as well as some involved in autophagy and

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

628

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease
Microbiome dysbiosis, commensal
bacteria expressing flagellin act as
triggers of inflammation (E.coli)

Dog with CE

Mutated TLR5, TLR4, NOD2
IL-1 beta
Regulation
of antibacterial
peptides

Hyper-responsiveness to flagellin:
mucosal inflammation
with recruitment of inflammatory cells:
IL-1 beta increased, IL-10 decreased

Naïve T-cell

Figure 59.1 Current hypothesis of
pathogenesis of CE in dogs. Genetic
mutations in pattern recognition receptors
of the innate immune system, such as
Toll‐like receptors, render the intestinal
immune system hyperresponsive to
commensal bacteria. This leads to danger
signals being transferred to T cells in the
lamina propria, resulting in increased
production of proinflammatory cytokines
such as IL‐1‐beta and decreased
production of anti-inflammatory
cytokines, such as Il‐10. This in turn leads
to microbial dysbiosis, which intensifies
the trigger for further inflammation.

Th-? cell

Th17 cell pathways. These pathways are at the center of
gut mucosal immunology, and have led to the discovery
of novel biologic treatment options in people with IBD.
The mode of inheritance of CE in companion animals
is also incompletely understood, and may differ between
dogs and cats and across breeds. A number of breed predispositions have been described in canine CE, thus
strongly supporting a role for host genetics. However,
few causal genetic defects have been identified to date.
Using candidate gene analysis, polymorphisms in certain pattern recognition receptors of the innate immune
system (such as Toll‐like receptor [TLR] 4 and TLR5)
were shown to be significantly associated with CE in
German shepherd dogs (GSDs). In addition, the same
polymorphisms in TLR5 were associated with IBD in a
heterogeneous population of dogs consisting of 38 different breeds. However, as in human IBD, it is likely that
defects in multiple genes involving several regulatory
pathways are needed to bring about disease. Therefore,
further genetic studies such as genome‐wide association
are needed in both canine and feline IBD to highlight the
complex pathogenesis of this disease.
The Intestinal Mucosal Immune System
The concept that immunoregulation is impaired in
patients with CE is supported by observations of
increased numbers of immunoglobulin‐producing
plasma cells and T cell subsets in canine and feline IBD.
Inflammation seen in CE is thought to result from the
inappropriate cytokine production by these different T
cell subsets. In people, Crohn disease (CD) is associated
with a Th1 and Th17 cytokine profile and ulcerative

­colitis (UC) with a Th2 profile, whereas in dogs there is a
mixed Th1 and Th2 profile, with no specific bias towards
one or the other. Th17 cells seem to play an important
role in human IBD, with interleukin (IL)‐17 and IL‐22
being highly expressed in the intestinal mucosa. However,
in dogs, Th17 cell cytokines were not found to be ­elevated
and therefore are believed to be of minor importance.
One newer study identified that an innate cytokine, IL‐1‐
beta, was expressed at higher levels in canine FRD cases,
and decreased after successful treatment with d
­ ietary
measures. More studies are needed to investigate this
important pathway in canine CE. In cats, the inflammatory infiltrate has been shown to be associated with
increased IL‐1, Il‐8, and IL‐12 expression, and correlated
with clinical severity of disease and mucosal adherence
of bacteria, especially Enterobacteriaceae, E. coli, and
Clostridium spp.
Other immunologic components may also play a role
in the inappropriate inflammation seen in a subset of
dogs with CE. Indeed, one study demonstrated that
CD11c‐positive dendritic cells (DCs) were significantly
decreased in the intestinal mucosa of dogs with IBD.
DCs are important in regulating the immunologic
­balance and are responsible for eliciting either an inflammatory or a tolerant immune response to an antigen.
Thus, a decrease in the number of DCs in the inflamed
mucosa of dogs with CE may explain the exaggerated
inflammation seen in this disease.
The Intestinal Microbiota
The importance of commensal bacteria in the pathogenesis of human IBD has been well documented in animal

VetBooks.ir

59 Diagnosis and Management of Chronic Enteropathies

models. Chronic intestinal inflammation does not
develop in mice reared in germ‐free environments. In
addition, the role of luminal bacteria in the pathogenesis
of human IBD is strongly supported by the fact that clinical symptoms improve following intestinal washes and
antibacterial treatment. Similarly, a subset of canine IBD
patients (ARD patients) respond solely to antibiotics
with subsequent relapse of clinical signs on withdrawal.
This notion, in addition to recent discoveries of genetic
mutations rendering pattern recognition receptors
hyperresponsive to bacteria in the intestinal lumen,
makes it likely that the microbiome plays an important
role in canine and feline CE as well.
In recent years, investigation into the microbiome of
the intestine has moved away from bacterial culture, but
has used molecular methods such as polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) to determine the variety and species present in the sample. Using such molecular methods, the
microbiome of people with IBD was found to be of
decreased complexity compared to samples from healthy
controls. Similarly, the species richness in the duodenal
lumen of dogs with IBD is reduced. Some species are also
found to be significantly over‐ or underrepresented compared to healthy controls, such as a reduction in members of the phyla Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes, whilst
there is an abundance of E. coli. Dogs with CE also exhibit
a dysbiosis, with an abundance of members belonging to
the Enterobacteriaceae family. In addition, dogs with CE
have significantly higher number of clones belonging to
Proteobacteria and a significantly lower abundance of
Clostridia. Therefore, the compositional changes of the
microbiota seen in CE emphasize the role of bacteria in
this complex disease and may well contribute to ongoing
inflammation.

­Epidemiology
Few larger studies of CE in dogs are available which can
be used to predict treatment responses in clinical cases.
One larger study, with over 70 cases, has shown that
about 60% of cases seen in a referral population are FRD,
and that these dogs go into remission very quickly, within
about 10–14 days of starting dietary intervention. FRD
dogs also seemed to be more commonly younger, large‐
breed dogs with colitis signs. The other groups in this
study consisted of about 30% of dogs that responded to
steroids, and about 10% that were steroid resistant and
needed rescue treatment with cyclosporin. A newer
study comprising over 200 dogs at another referral center
confirmed these findings, with about 65% of dogs in the
FRD group, 16% in the ARD group, and 19% in the SRD
group. Outcome was significantly better in FRD groups
at various time points over a year after diagnosis, and the

worst outcome was seen in the ARD group. The latter
was probably due to relapses being very common in ARD
dogs, as their clinical signs invariably flare up when antibiotics are discontinued. Furthermore, clinical severity
indices were lowest in the FRD groups and serum
­albumin concentrations were lowest in the SRD groups,
which are known predictors for outcome.

­History, Clinical Signs,
and Diagnostic Work‐Up
Faced with a small animal patient exhibiting signs of possible intestinal disease, the first differentiation should be
to establish whether it is an acute or chronic disease.
Diarrhea, vomiting, dehydration, weight loss, lethargy,
and melena can all be signs of small intestinal disease.
The disease is acute if the signs have been present only
for a few days, but if disease persists for more than three
weeks and/or is intermittently present for more than
three weeks, it is defined as chronic.
The next step in taking a thorough history is to determine whether the animal shows signs of small intestinal,
large intestinal or mixed diarrhea (Table 59.1).
Diagnostic Work‐Up of Chronic Small
Intestinal, Large Intestinal or Mixed Diarrhea
Once the clinical signs have persisted for more than
three weeks, more work‐up is required in order to investigate the correct diagnosis. In chronic cases, it is more
common for systemic, nongastrointestinal problems to
cause the signs, and therefore the first diagnostic steps
must be directed at excluding these extragastrointestinal
causes (Box 59.1).
The use of clinical severity indices such as the Canine
Chronic Enteropathy Clinical Activity Index (CCECAI)

Table 59.1 Differentiation of small intestinal and large intestinal
diarrhea according to clinical signs
Small intestinal

Large intestinal

Volume

xxx

x

Mucus

–

xxx

Frequency

x

xxx

Tenesmus

–

xxx

Dyschezia

–

xxx

Weight loss

–

xxx

Vomiting

x

x

General condition

xxx

–

629

VetBooks.ir

630

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Box 59.1 Causes of intestinal disease
Causes of chronic small intestinal disease
Extragastrointestinal (metabolic) causes
Hepatic disease (portosystemic shunt!)
●● Hyperthyroidism (cats)
●● Addison disease (dogs)
●● Renal insufficiency
●● Pancreatic
●● Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPI)
●● Chronic pancreatitis
●●

Gastrointestinal causes
Giardia infection, Tritrichomonas infection (cats)
●● Chronic partial obstruction
●● Lymphangiectasia
●● Neoplasia: lymphosarcoma
●● Food intolerance/food allergy
●● Chronic enteropathies/inflammatory bowel disease
–– Eosinophilic
–– Lympho‐plasmacellular
●●

Causes of chronic large intestinal disease
Gastrointestinal causes
●● Giardia infection, Tritrichomonas infection (cats)
●● Chronic partial obstruction
●● Neoplasia: adenocarcinoma, lymphoma
●● Polyps
●● Food‐responsive diarrhea
●● Chronic enteropathies/inflammatory bowel disease:
–– Eosinophilic
–– Lympho‐plasmacellular
–– Granulomatous

is recommended for all patients at the time of work‐up
(Box 59.2).
These indices are easily calculated by adding up severity of clinical signs and can give valuable prognostic
information. A CCECAI of >12 has been shown to be
associated with a much worse clinical prognosis. In these
cases, an abbreviated clinical work‐up with endoscopy
being scheduled earlier, as well as early aggressive treatment, may be indicated.
The diagnostic assessment of chronic gastrointestinal
inflammation involves exclusion of other potential
causes of the gastrointestinal signs, and thus a full diagnostic work‐up needs to be done to rule out all known
causes of extragastrointestinal inflammation first.
Commonly, this involves complete blood cell count,
serum biochemical analysis, urinalysis, and fecal analysis
for helminth and protozoal parasites (such as Giardia; in
addition Tritrichomonas in cats should be considered).

Further blood tests are indicated if none of the following
tests shows any abnormalities: trypsin‐like immunoreactivity to exclude exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (Spec‐cPL, Spec‐fPL for
dogs and cats respectively) to assess the possibility of
pancreatic disease, ACTH test or basal cortisol concentration to exclude hypoadrenocorticism and cobalamin
concentrations to assess the absorptive function of the
distal small intestine. Total T4 and FeLV/FIV should also
be assessed in cats. Abdominal ultrasound will be most
helpful to determine whether the small and/or large
intestine is affected and if there are any mass lesions that
need surgical intervention rather than endoscopic evaluation. In the case of PLE, specific findings on ultrasound,
such as speckles in the mucosa, can also be useful additional information.
If the results of these tests do not point to an obvious
cause for the clinical signs and the patient is stable (i.e.,
has a normal appetite, good attitude, not lethargic, no to
minimal weight loss, normal serum protein concentration with no intestinal thickening on diagnostic imaging) then a well‐conducted therapeutic trial with an
elimination diet or hydrolyzed diet for at least two weeks
can be performed. If there is no response to a trial within
two weeks after starting the diet, it is unlikely that
the patient is suffering from food‐responsive disease
(food allergy or food intolerance). Intestinal biopsies for
histopathology are collected from those patients that fail
to respond to empirical therapy or that are showing
worsening of their clinical signs. Most patients with
chronic enteropathies can be diagnosed by obtaining
endoscopic biopsies, as long as at least 12–15 biopsies
from the duodenum, ileum, and/or colon are taken. It is
important to realize that good‐quality biopsies are critical in order for histopathology to be useful, so more than
10 biopsies per site are usually recommended to make a
diagnosis. In some rare cases, a diagnosis of lymphoma
can be missed if no full‐thickness biopsies are obtained,
especially in cats and if the ileum has not been sampled.

­Serum and Fecal Markers of Disease
Serum Albumin Concentrations in Dogs
Decreased serum albumin concentrations have been
identified as a negative prognostic indicator in both retrospective and prospective studies of canine IBD. PLE
accounts for the loss of albumin through the gut mucosa
in severely affected dogs with IBD. PLE in dogs can be
associated with severe lympho‐plasmacytic IBD, intestinal lymphoma, or, rarely, primary lymphangiectasia.
One study described 12/80 (16%) dogs with hypoalbuminemia and 4/80 (5%) dogs with panhypoproteinemia.

VetBooks.ir

59 Diagnosis and Management of Chronic Enteropathies

Box 59.2 Canine Chronic Enteropathy Clinical Activity Index (CCECAI)
Attitude/activity
0 = normal
1 = slightly decreased
2 = moderately decreased
3 = severely decreased
Appetite
0 = normal
1 = slightly decreased
2 = moderately decreased
3 = severely decreased
Vomiting
0 = normal
1 = mild (1× per week)
2 = moderate (2–3× per week)
3 = severe (>3× per week)
Stool consistency
0 = normal
1 = slightly soft feces or fecal blood, mucus or both
2 = very soft feces
3 = watery diarrhea
Stool frequency
0 = normal
1 = slightly increased (2–3× per day)
2 = moderately increased (4–5× per day)
3 = severely increased (>5× per day)
Weight loss
0 = none
1 = mild (<5%)
2 = moderate (5–10%)
3 = severe (>10%)
Albumin levels
0 = albumin >20 g/L
1 = albumin 15–19.9 g/L
2 = albumin 12–14.9 g/L
3 = albumin <12 g/L
Ascites and peripheral edema
0 = none
1 = mild ascites or peripheral edema
2 = moderate amount of ascites/ peripheral edema
3 = severe ascites, with pleural effusion and peripheral edema
Pruritus
0 = no pruritus
1 = occasional episodes of itching
2 = regular episodes of itching, but stops when dog is asleep
3 = dog regularly wakes up because of itching
Score:
Total score 0–3
Clinically insignificant

Total score 4–5
Mild disease

Total score 6–8
Moderate disease

Total score 9–11
Severe disease

Total score ≥12
Very severe disease

631

VetBooks.ir

632

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Seven of these 12 dogs were eventually euthanized due
to intractable IBD, identifying decreased serum albumin concentrations as one of the major risk factors
associated with a poor outcome. In another recent prospective study, 12/58 (21%) cases initially presented
with hypoalbuminemia. Of these 12 dogs, seven were
panhypoproteinemic with severe hypoalbuminemia
(mean albumin level 1.1 g/dL) and three of those were
eventually euthanized. However, it is important to note
that relatively mild reductions in serum albumin
(>2.0 g/dL) were already associated with an increased
risk of refractoriness to treatment. At this level, most
patients will not yet show any clinical signs of hypoalbuminemia, such as ascites, peripheral edema, or pleural effusion, but are already at risk of euthanasia because
of intractable disease.
Another study found that severely hypoalbuminemic dogs that had failed to improve on immunosuppressive doses of steroids were successfully treated
with cyclosporin. This suggests that early aggressive
treatment in hypoalbuminemic dogs may potentially
decrease mortality rates in severely ill animals. Serum
albumin concentrations can also be a good measure of
monitoring such patients, as improvement of serum
albumin concentrations above 2.0 g/dL usually indicates treatment success, even if clinical improvement
has been seen ­earlier in some of these cases. It is
therefore recommended to serially evaluate serum
albumin concentrations every 2–3 weeks in order
to assess when treatment can be tapered off or
discontinued.
Serum Albumin Concentrations in Cats
There is not much published information available
regarding serum albumin concentrations in cats with
chronic intestinal disease. PLE as a clinical syndrome
likely does not exist in cats, as clinical signs such as
ascites and peripheral edema do not usually occur in cats
with hypoalbuminemia due to intestinal disease. In addition, the hypoalbuminemia seen in such cases is usually
mild. However, there is accumulating evidence that cats
with chronic intestinal disease and decreased albumin
serum concentrations may have concurrent pancreatic
disease.
In one recent retrospective study, cats diagnosed with
IBD and serum feline pancreatic lipase (Spec‐fPL) concentrations ≥12.0 μg/L had a lower median serum albumin concentration than cats with IBD and a normal
Spec‐fPL concentration. Further analysis in this study
did not identify hypoalbuminemia as a predictor of negative outcome on survival.
Therefore, hypoalbuminemia in cats with chronic
intestinal disease should prompt the clinician to measure

Spec‐fPL concentrations and/or to perform abdominal
ultrasound examination in order to evaluate any concurrent pancreatic disorders. Depending on the severity of
the hypoalbuminaemia, the clinician’s approach to
­treatment might be altered.
Serum Cobalamin Concentrations in Dogs
and Cats
Serum cobalamin concentrations should be measured in
any small animal patient with chronic intestinal disease.
As cobalamin is absorbed in the ileum, decreased serum
cobalamin concentrations are most commonly seen
when this part of the small intestine is affected. However,
absorption of cobalamin also involves intrinsic factor,
which in dogs and cats is mainly produced in the pancreas. This is the reason why most small animals with
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency will have low serum
cobalamin concentrations. Furthermore, serum cobalamin concentrations have been shown to be a negative
prognostic factors in dogs with CE. If cobalamin serum
concentration is below the reference range, the risk for
later euthanasia increases to a factor of 10. It is therefore
important to supplement dogs with hypocobalaminemia
while they undergo treatment for IBD, as this risk of
euthanasia can be reversed by supplementation.
Serum cobalamin concentration has long been known
to be an important negative prognostic factor in cats
with chronic enteropathies. The prevalence of decreased
serum cobalamin concentrations in cats with chronic
gastrointestinal signs has been reported to be 16–60%. In
cats, it has also been reported that cobalamin supplementation can improve clinical signs regardless of the
underlying diagnosis and even if given as the sole treatment for their disease. It is therefore recommended that
cats with chronic intestinal disease be supplemented
with cobalamin regardless of whether a specific cause for
the disease can be identified. Recent studies have also
shown preliminary data indicating that cobalamin can be
given orally to supplement deficiencies. However, large
amounts have to be given by this route of administration
and concentrations decreased much more rapidly after
discontinuation of oral treatment, compared to injectable forms.
Supplementation Recommendations
for Cobalamin
Supplementation of cobalamin should be given parenterally (SC) as a weekly injection for at least six weeks.
Exact dosages are not reported, as it is a water‐soluble
vitamin and cannot be overdosed. For tested recommendations, please visit the website of the Texas GI lab
(http://vetmed.tamu.edu/gilab).

VetBooks.ir

59 Diagnosis and Management of Chronic Enteropathies

Canine Pancreatic Lipase
Canine pancreatic lipase (now measured with the Spec‐
cPL assay) has recently become available as a commercial test and is useful in the assessment of possible
pancreatitis in dogs. However, it can also be elevated in
dogs with a primary diagnosis of CE. In a retrospective
study of 50 dogs with IBD, clinical signs, age, serum
lipase and amylase activities, albumin and cobalamin
concentrations, abdominal ultrasound examination, histopathologic review of intestinal biopsies, management
of IBD, and follow‐up in dogs with CE were evaluated.
Sixteen dogs with increased cPL and 32 dogs with normal cPL values were compared. No significant differences were found in clinical activity score, serum amylase
activity, serum lipase activity, serum cobalamin concentration, serum albumin concentration, abdominal ultrasound scores, and histopathology scores for IBD. There
was also no difference in the frequency of steroid treatment between the groups. Interestingly, dogs with elevated Spec‐cPL had a higher risk of a poor follow‐up
score and were significantly more likely to be euthanized
at follow‐up.
These data suggest that elevated Spec‐cPL in canine
IBD identifies a subset of these patients that could also
have chronic subclinical pancreatitis. In patients which
have been diagnosed with CE and also have elevated
Spec‐cPL without overt imaging evidence of acute pancreatitis, it is recommended to discuss treatment
options for IBD that will also treat possible autoimmune pancreatitis. The author has had anecdotal success with cyclosporin at 5 mg/kg SID for eight weeks in
such cases.

levels may also be hampered by increases of CRP related
to diseases other than IBD.
Fecal Alpha‐1‐Proteinase Inhibitor
Fecal alpha‐1‐proteinase inhibitor (alpha‐1‐PI) can be
used as a test for dogs in which the clinician suspects
PLE but clinical signs are not overt. Alpha‐1‐proteinase
inhibitor is a plasma protein of similar size to albumin. If
the intestinal mucosal barrier is compromised and loss of
protein into the intestinal lumen occurs, alpha‐1‐PI is
lost at approximately the same rate as albumin. Unlike
albumin, however, its proteinase inhibitor properties
protect alpha‐1‐PI from being degraded by intestinal
proteases. Therefore, it is able to persist throughout the
intestinal transit and is passed undamaged in the feces,
in which it can then be measured.
Prompt diagnosis of PLE in a patient with IBD is
important, as hypoalbuminemia is a risk factor for a negative outcome and the cause should be treated aggressively in order to improve survival. The alpha‐1‐PI assay
is especially valuable in a patient with intestinal disease
that also suffers from concurrent renal or hepatic disease. In these patients, measurement of fecal alpha‐1‐PI
can help assess which portion, if any, of the protein loss
can be attributed to the intestine. This test is so far only
available at the Texas GI lab and ideally, three consecutive freshly collected, frozen fecal samples should be submitted in order to improve the accuracy of the test. This
means that fecal alpha‐1‐PI is to date not a useful test for
practitioners outside North America.

C‐Reactive Protein

Polymerase Chain Reaction for Antigen
Receptor Rearrangement from Intestinal
Biopsies

C‐reactive protein (CRP) is a serum acute phase protein
that can be elevated in many different diseases. In people with IBD, several indices of clinical disease activity
incorporate measurements of CRP. In dogs, a similar
correlation between the Canine IBD Activity Index
(CIBDAI) and CRP serum concentrations has been
found in one large study incorporating 58 dogs. CRP
was elevated when compared to normal in 28 of the 58
dogs in this study, which had CIBDAI scores above 5
(which represents mild to moderate disease activity). In
these dogs CRP decreased significantly after successful
treatment.
In another study, CRP did not seem to be very helpful,
as it was only elevated in 6/21 dogs with CE. Based on
available published data, it is possible that CRP is useful
as an additional assessment tool in severely ill patients,
even though a large percentage of dogs with IBD do not
show any elevations in CRP. Interpretation of elevated

Polymerase chain reaction for antigen receptor rearrangement (PARR) amplifies the highly variable T or B
cell antigen receptor genes, and is used to detect the
presence of a clonally expanded population of lymphocytes. This test has been advocated to be useful when
applied on endoscopic biopsies if a diagnosis of intestinal
lymphoma is suspected but not confirmed by conventional histopathology. It is, however, important to note
that dogs with CE can in up to 20% of cases have biopsies
which test positive for clonality. The test therefore needs
to be evaluated as an additional measure to help with the
differentiation of intestinal lymphoma versus CE, but
should not be used as the sole differentiating factor or
even the gold standard. Other tests that can help with
this question are immunohistochemistry for B and T
cells, abdominal ultrasound and possibly fine needle
aspirates of enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes, if they are
present.

633

VetBooks.ir

634

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

Perinuclear Antineutrophilic Cytoplasmic
Antibodies
Perinuclear antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibodies
(pANCA) have been useful in the diagnosis of human
IBD for decades. These antibodies are serum autoantibodies similar to antinuclear antibodies (ANA), which
seem to be more specific for intestinal disease than ANA
in dogs. They are detected by indirect immunofluorescence assays where a typical pattern of perinuclear staining of canine granulocytes can be seen.
In the first study which assessed the possible clinical
usefulness of pANCA in dogs with IBD, sensitivity for
pANCA was 0.51 and specificity ranged between 0.56
and 0.95. pANCA proved to be a highly specific marker
for CE in dogs when the group of dogs with chronic diarrhea of other causes were tested against the group of
dogs with CE (specificity 0.95). This is in agreement with
reports from human medicine that show a specificity of
up to 94% for pANCA when distinguishing between IBD
and healthy controls as well as patients with non‐IBD
diarrhea. Furthermore, when pANCA were tested in a
group of dogs with FRD versus SRD, a positive pANCA
titer was significantly associated with FRD.
The pANCA assay could therefore provide valuable
help to the veterinarian presented with the clinical picture of a dog with chronic diarrhea and possible IBD. If
the result is positive, a food‐responsive chronic enteropathy is highly likely, but if the result is negative, CE
cannot be excluded.
pANCA also seem to be associated with the syndrome
of familial protein‐losing enteropathy in soft‐coated
wheaten terriers (SCWTs). pANCA were detectable in
the serum of dogs on average 1–2 years before the onset
of clinical disease and were highly correlated with
hypoalbuminemia. This test could serve as a useful
adjunct for this specific disease in SCWTs as an early
screening test.
Care must be taken in interpreting a positive pANCA
test result if other inflammatory or immune‐mediated
diseases are present in the dog. A recent study showed
that many dogs with various vector‐borne diseases or
immune‐mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA) were positive for pANCA. Unfortunately, this test is not commercially available yet, but could become one of the standard
tests for work‐up of CE in the future.
Calprotectin and S100A12
Calprotectin and S100A12 are calcium‐binding proteins
that are abundant in the granules of neutrophils and
macrophages. In people with IBD, serum and fecal concentrations of these proteins have been found to be
increased compared to healthy people. In addition, fecal

concentrations of calprotectin correlate very well with
clinical disease activity in children with IBD.
An immunoassay for measurement of canine calprotectin in serum and fecal samples is now available, and it
was shown that a serum calprotectin concentration of
≥296.0 μg/L as a cut‐off had a sensitivity of 82.4% and
specificity of 68.4% for distinguishing dogs with idiopathic IBD from healthy dogs. However, calprotectin
concentrations were not significantly correlated with the
clinical severity, serum C‐reactive protein concentration,
or severity of histopathologic changes. The clinical usefulness of this test when used in serum or fecal samples
still needs to be confirmed in prospective studies.
Immunohistochemistry for P‐Glycoprotein
on Intestinal Biopsies
P‐glycoprotein (p‐gp) is a transmembrane protein functioning as a drug‐efflux pump in the intestinal epithelium. Human patients with IBD who fail to respond to
treatment with glucocorticosteroids express high levels
of p‐gp in lamina propria lymphocytes.
So far, two research groups have evaluated p‐gp expression in biopsies of dogs with CE. In one study, duodenal
biopsies from 48 dogs were evaluated by immunohistochemistry. The dogs treated with prednisolone showed a
significantly higher p‐gp expression in lamina propria
lymphocytes after treatment compared with expression
before treatment. In contrast, the group treated solely
with an elimination diet showed no difference in p‐gp
scores before and after treatment. Moreover, a statistically significant association between refractoriness to
steroid treatment and high p‐gp expression was found in
the steroid treatment group. In another recent study, p‐
gp expression was compared between dogs with CE and
healthy controls, and was found to be higher in duodenal
epithelial cells of dogs with CE compared to control
dogs. These results indicate that epithelial and lamina
propria lymphocyte expression of p‐gp is upregulated in
dogs with CE, and they are even higher after prednisolone treatment. In addition, high p‐gp expression could
indicate possible multidrug resistance and should be
taken into account when dealing with dogs who have
failed steroid treatment before.
Genetic Testing
Over the last decade, numerous genes have been found
to be associated with an increased risk of development
of IBD in human beings, many of them implicated in the
innate immune response in the intestine. In dogs, it has
always been obvious to clinicians that IBD could have a
genetic component. This is particularly evident in breeds
like the boxer, which is predisposed to granulomatous

VetBooks.ir

59 Diagnosis and Management of Chronic Enteropathies

colitis, and the German shepherd dog (GSD), which is
predisposed to CE. Several mutations in TLR4 and TLR5
were found to be significantly associated with an
increased risk of development of CE. In a follow‐up
study, we were also able to show that peripheral blood
cells of dogs carrying the mutation are hyperresponsive
to flagellin, which is the natural ligand for TLR5. This
proves for the first time that a genetic mutation implicated in the pathogenesis of dogs with IBD has functional consequences on the protein level. Taken together,
these findings make it very likely that TLR5 mutations
are causally associated with canine IBD. Genetic testing
for these polymorphisms could become important for
breeders and practitioners in the future. However, it is
likely that in multifactorial disease like IBD in dogs,
other factors such as other genetic mutations and environmental factors will also play a major role in the
pathogenesis of the disease.

­Work‐up and Diagnostic Tests:
Abdominal Ultrasound, Endoscopy,
and Histopathology
Diagnostic Imaging
Ultrasonographic study is the preferred imaging tool for
the investigation of animals with GI disease. The whole
of the intestinal tract can be examined and the wall thickness measured. Although CE may cause focal or segmental changes, it does not always induce changes that can
be detected ultrasonographically, so intestinal biopsy is
required to confirm the diagnosis. Neoplastic infiltration
is more often focal, shows more severe thickening, and
causes loss of wall layering when compared to inflammatory disease. In addition, lymph nodes tend to be larger
and more involved in neoplastic disease. However, the
overlap in the sonographic appearances of inflammatory
and neoplastic infiltration makes definitive diagnosis
­difficult, requiring histopathology for differentiation.
Histology and World Small Animal Veterinary
Association (WSAVA) Scoring of Intestinal
Biopsies
Sampling of intestinal biopsies is considered to be an
essential step to exclude neoplastic causes and confirm
the presence of intestinal inflammation. However, the
interpretation of intestinal biopsies is difficult and subject to controversy. In several recent studies looking at
conventional histologic interpretation of intestinal
biopsy samples, no correlation of clinical activity with
histologic grading either before or after therapy was
found. In addition, total lymphocyte counts as well as the

number of infiltrating CD3 cells in the lamina propria
cannot be used as markers for clinical activity of disease,
as there is no difference in cell counts before and after
treatment.
These findings suggest that the type and degree of histologic infiltrates in canine IBD may not be as helpful as
in human medicine, where the clinical scores correlate
very well with the histologic grading. Therefore, a new
grading scheme for the histologic interpretation of endoscopically obtained biopsies from dogs and cats with IBD
has recently been published by the WSAVA working
group. The findings in this study suggest that microarchitectural changes seem to be much more important
than cellular infiltrates when assessing histologic severity of disease. However, so far, there is limited information on how well this new grading system correlates with
clinical disease. This notion was recently confirmed in a
prospective study including 20 dogs with FRD. A second
endoscopy was performed in these dogs after six weeks
of dietary treatment, and WSAVA scoring was the same
as before treatment. However, when looking at electron
microscopic changes, mitochondrial and brush border
changes indicated mucosa healing which was not obvious on light microscopy. In one retrospective study, the
interpathologist variability was still very high even when
using the picture guide from the original publication. In
addition, it is of concern that the only parameter that
correlated with clinical disease was the presence of lymphangiectasia and hypoalbuminemia.
Currently, there is lack of consensus between pathologists when using the WSAVA histopathologic guidelines
for intestinal biopsies, and studies have demonstrated
that these scores correlate poorly with clinical severity.
Therefore, it is likely that additional criteria need to be
assessed when scoring intestinal biopsies and further
studies are needed to determine other immunologic
components that are dysregulated in animals with CE.

­Treatment and Prognosis
Inflammatory bowel disease patients that have mild to
moderate clinical disease activity and normal serum
albumin concentration are first treated sequentially with
a dietary and antibiotic trial. If they fail to respond to
either of these trials, immunosuppressive therapy is initiated (see following paragraphs).
FRD: Diet
A positive response to a dietary trial allows the patient’s
CE to be classified as FRD, a term which includes both
dietary allergy and intolerance. The main options for a
dietary trial include switching to a diet which leads to

635

VetBooks.ir

636

Section 6 Gastrointestinal Disease

antigenic modification (e.g., novel protein source or protein hydrolysate). Whichever type of diet is chosen, it
must be palatable and introduced in gradually increasing
amounts over 4–7 days. In dogs with FRD, a clinical
response is usually observed within 1–2 weeks of changing the diet. One study demonstrated that dogs that
respond to diet tended to be younger and had higher
serum albumin concentrations and predominantly signs
of large bowel diarrhea than dogs that did not respond to
diet. FRD is highly prevalent among dogs with IBD (at
least 60–70%) and a favorable response to elimination or
hydrolyzed diets within two weeks has been shown to be
associated with a very good prognosis over one year after
diagnosis. It is important to note that in the studies that
show these good outcome measures, the dogs were kept
on the diet for at least 12 weeks after diagnosis before
they were switched back to their original diet.
ARD: Antibiotics
An antibiotic trial typically involves oral administration
of tylosin, 10–15 mg/kg q8h, oxytetracycline 20 mg/kg
q8h, or metronidazole 10 mg/kg q12h. A positive
response suggests ARD. The dog is typically maintained
on antibiotics for 28 days; if signs recur after stopping
then long‐term antibiotic therapy with tylosin 5 mg/kg is
used orally every 24 hours. In a recent large retrospective
study where all dogs were sequentially treated, only 16%
of dogs were ARD. All ARD dogs relapsed shortly after
discontinuation of the antibiotics was attempted, making
long‐term management of these patients difficult. An
additional decision‐making factor may be the increasing
problems with antibiotic resistance in our dog populations, making justifications of long‐term treatment with
antibiotics difficult. There is also accumulating evidence
that antibiotic treatment has long‐lasting effects on the
intestinal microbiome, which may lead to lasting dysbiosis and in itself could amplify inflammation in the intestine. Many of these patients will therefore need steroids
or other immunosuppressives to control their clinical
signs long term.
Anti-inflammatory and Immunosuppressive
Therapy
Patients that do not respond to a diet or antibiotic trial
are usually administered oral prednisolone 2 mg/kg
every 24 hours that is tapered over an eight‐week period.
However, as the side‐effects of glucocorticoids are usually more marked in large‐ than small‐breed dogs, azathioprine may be combined with glucocorticoid
treatment at a faster taper in dogs weighing more than
30 kg. If there is poor response to immunosuppression or
a relapse is seen after tapering, then consider oral

­cyclosporin at 5 mg/kg every 24 hours for 10 weeks. A
response to prednisolone has been shown in up to only
50% of dogs with CE, so if more severe disease is present
or severe side‐effects of steroids are anticipated, other
immunosuppressives can be an option. Many steroid‐
refractory canine CE cases can be rescued by cyclosporin
single therapy. In cats, use chlorambucil 2–6 mg/m2
q24h with prednisolone if there is inadequate response
to glucocorticoid treatment alone. Hematologic parameters should be monitored regularly if chlorambucil is
used. If the patient responds then the medication can be
tapered gradually, starting with the steroid, to an q48h
dosing regimen.
Budesonide is a glucocorticoid medication that has
been preliminarily shown to be successful in the treatment of canine IBD. However, hypothalamic‐pituitary‐
adrenal suppression and development of a steroid
hepatopathy have been demonstrated in dogs, so the
hepatic fist‐pass effect of this drug in dogs may not be as
great as in human beings. An optimal dose has not yet
been determined, although anecdotally a dose of 1 mg/
m2 every 24 hours orally has been recommended. The
response rate to budesonide was shown to be similar to
the use of prednisolone (about up to 60%), and it should
therefore be reserved for dogs that are known to respond
to steroids but suffer severe side‐effects. Some dogs will,
however, still develop side‐effects of steroid administration while on budesonide, so owners should be warned
about this. Sulfasalazine (20–50 mg/kg q8h for 3–6
weeks) and related drugs are often used in dogs when
IBD is limited to the large intestine. However, as side‐
effects include keratoconjunctivits sicca, tear production
should be monitored regularly.
Treatment of Patients with Severe Protein‐
Losing Enteropathy
Protein‐losing enteropathy is a recognized complication
in a subset of CE cases and a low serum albumin concentration has been shown to be a poor prognostic indicator
for CE. Patients with albumin concentrations below
1.5 g/dL are at risk of developing ascites, pleural effusion,
and subcutaneous edema. Many of these patients will
succumb to the disease within the first 1–2 months of
starting prednisolone treatment. As some studies have
shown better outcome with single‐therapy cyclosporin
at 5–10 mg/kg PO SID, this latter regime may be a better
option for many of these patients. One recent study has
also shown that the combination of prednisolone and
chlorambucil was superior to prednisolone and azathioprine for survival. Evaluation of hemostatic function in
these patients is recommended to ascertain if hypercoagulability has developed as a consequence of enteric
protein loss. Concurrent therapy with ultra‐low-dose

VetBooks.ir

59 Diagnosis and Management of Chronic Enteropathies

aspirin (0.5 mg/kg) or other platelet inhibitors is recommended in these patients in order to prevent thromboembolism. In addition, the use of elemental diets and
partial ­parenteral nutrition may be indicated in some
dogs with severe PLE.
It is worth mentioning that some PLE patients can fare
relatively well with dietary treatment alone, and there are
some studies that show that Yorkshire terriers may be a
subgroup of dogs developing PLE which can be solely
diet responsive. In such cases, it is indicated to try a ­low‐
fat diet first, and wait before adding in immunosuppressive treatment for 1–2 weeks.
Finally, these patients may also be at risk of complications associated with intestinal biopsy by laparotomy, so
plasma transfusion, human albumin infusion or synthetic
colloid may be indicated during anesthesia for endoscopy.
Adjunctive Therapy
The use of probiotics in people with IBD has led to some
promising results, although there is still an insufficient
number of large, multicenter, randomized, double‐blind,
placebo‐controlled trials that investigate the efficacy of

probiotics in human IBD. Similarly, only one randomized, placebo‐controlled trial investigating the use of
E. faecium probiotics in canine FRD as an adjunctive
treatment has been performed so far. No additional
effect could be demonstrated in the group of dogs receiving probiotics. More studies are needed to be able to
make recommendations for the use of probiotics in cats
and dogs with CE (see also Chapter 58).
Prognosis
One retrospective study demonstrated that only 26% of
canine CE cases progress to complete remission, with
intermittent clinical signs remaining in approximately
half of cases, and 4% were completely uncontrolled, with
13% being euthanized because of poor response to treatment. This suggests that the prognosis of CE patients
can be poor. The main negative prognostic indicator for
CE was identified to be hypoalbuminemia in dogs.
Clearly, more prospective treatment trials are necessary,
especially in the severely affected and hypoproteinemic
animals, in order to improve long‐term survival in these
cases.

­Further Reading
Allenspach K, Rüfenacht S, Sauter S, et al.
Pharmacokinetics and clinical efficacy of cyclosporine
treatment of dogs with steroid‐refractory inflammatory
bowel disease. J Vet Intern Med 2006; 20(2): 239–44.
Allenspach K, Wieland B, Gröne A, et al. Chronic
enteropathies in dogs: evaluation of risk factors for
negative outcome. J Vet Intern Med 2007; 21(4): 700–8.
Day MJ, Bilzer T, Mansell J, et al. Histopathological
standards for the diagnosis of gastrointestinal
inflammation in endoscopic biopsy samples from the
dog and cat: a report from the World Small Animal
Veterinary Association Gastrointestinal Standardization
Group. J Comp Pathol 2008; 138(Suppl 1):S1–43.
Janeczko S, Atwater D, Bogel E, et al. The relationship of
mucosal bacteria to duodenal histopathology, cytokine
mRNA, and clinical disease activity in cats with
inflammatory bowel disease. Vet Microbiol 2008;
128(1–2): 178–93.

Minamoto Y, Otoni CC, Steelman SM, et al. Alteration of
the fecal microbiota and serum metabolite profiles in
dogs with idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease. Gut
Microbes 2015; 6(1): 33–47.
Simmerson SM, Armstrong PJ, Wünschmann A, et al.
Clinical features, intestinal histopathology, and outcome
in protein‐losing enteropathy in Yorkshire Terrier dogs.
J Vet Intern Med 2014; 28(2): 331–7.
Washabau RJ, Day MJ, Willard MD, et al. Endoscopic,
biopsy, and histopathologic guidelines for the evaluation
of gastrointestinal inflammation in companion animals.
J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24(1): 10–26.
Worhunsky P, Toulza O, Rishniw M, et al. The relationship
of serum cobalamin to methylmalonic acid
concentrations and clinical variables in cats. J Vet Intern
Med 2013; 27(5): 1056–63.

637

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

639

Section 7
Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

641

60
Approach to the Patient with Liver Disease
Emma O’Neill, BSc, BVSc, PhD, DSAM, DECVIM-CA, MRCVS
School of Veterinary Medicine, University College Dublin, Dublin, Eire

The liver plays a central homeostatic role within the
body, involved in the orchestration of a vast array of
­metabolic pathways. The metabolic functions performed
include carbohydrate, protein and lipid metabolism,
drug metabolism, vitamin storage and activation, endocrine hormone metabolism, removal of endogenous and
exogenous toxins (e.g., ammonia) along with excretory,
digestive, and storage functions (e.g., iron, copper,
­glycogen, triglyceride). The liver is also the site of synthesis of albumin and the majority of clotting factors and
plays a key role in immune surveillance.
The liver’s position, between the gastrointestinal tract
and the systemic circulation, aids its roles in digestion,
detoxification, and immune surveillance. However, it
also leaves the liver vulnerable to injury from drug or
toxin exposure and prone to the secondary effects of
­dysfunction at other sites in the body. The normal liver is
typically functioning with significant reserve capacity
(approximately 70–80%), providing an important
buffer should an animal sustain liver injury. In addition,
the liver has a huge regenerative capacity, affording the
­animal significant ability to recover from injury.
All of these features of liver function have an important
impact on the clinical presentation of animals with liver
disease. Symptoms of liver disease typically only become
apparent once the reserve capacity of the liver has been
exceeded, hence diseases may remain subclinical for long
periods of time, with animals presenting later in the disease process. The vast array of liver functions is reflected
in the wide variety of possible clinical symptoms. The
early clinical signs typically observed include intermittent anorexia, polyuria/polydipsia, vomiting, and lethargy, all nonspecific signs that could be referable to other
body systems. More specific clinical signs, such as jaundice or ascites, tend to occur later in the disease process.
For example, jaundice occurs in only approximately 20%

of dogs and 30–40% of cats with hepatobiliary disease
and hence, although more specific, it is an insensitive
indicator of hepatobiliary disease. The aim when
approaching patients is to maintain a clinical suspicion of
liver disease, particularly in patients with vague, waxing
and waning signs, from a breed with known
­predispositions to hepatobiliary disease. The important
challenge when approaching these patients is to diagnose
the disease early in its course in order to provide a chance
to intervene before the disease becomes too advanced
and irreversible.
Hepatobiliary diseases rarely present with clinical features pathognomonic for a particular disease. However,
there are distinct groups of clinical signs that can be
appreciated to occur, reflecting important pathophysiologic mechanisms involved in liver disease. In view of
this, a basic understanding of these mechanisms is helpful in order to understand both the clinical presentation
of patients and the choice of tests to used diagnose them.

­Pathophysiology of Important Clinical
Presentations of Liver Disease
Cholestasis
Cholestasis is the term used for impaired bile flow, which
can result from a wide variety of intra‐ and extrahepatic
causes. Normal bile production starts with canalicular
bile formation. The active secretion of bile salts by hepatocytes into the bile canaliculi results in a large osmotic
gradient and secondary movement of water, which in
turn drives bile flow. The bile flows sequentially along
the biliary tree through bile ductules, various ducts and
then finally into the common bile duct. Throughout this
passage, it is modified by secretion and reabsorption of

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

642

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

fluid and inorganic solutes. The bile ducts contribute
substantially to this bile formation and flow, with secretion of bicarbonate, chloride, and water. Approximately
50% of bile is released immediately into the gastrointestinal tract, while the remainder is stored and concentrated
in the gallbladder. Intrahepatic cholestasis disrupts this
bile flow mainly at the level of the hepatocytes, their canaliculi or the bile ductules, in the periportal zone (zone 1)
of the liver lobule, whereas extrahepatic cholestasis
results from obstruction of the common bile duct. In
both of these situations, significant hepatic reserve and
compensatory changes have the net result that, typically,
overt clinical signs of cholestasis, such as icterus (jaundice), only result from diffuse liver pathology or severe
impairment of the common bile duct flow.
Intrahepatic cholestasis occurs commonly to varying
degrees in most clinical cases, with various proposed
mechanisms involved. Damage to tight junctions separating the bile canaliculi from blood sinusoids can result
from endotoxemia, sepsis, some Leptospira infections or
following an adverse drug reaction. At the cellular level,
swollen hepatocytes may directly obstruct bile flow
through canaliculi or bile ductules. In addition, necrosis
of hepatocytes may disrupt hepatic architecture, allowing communication between canaliculi and sinusoidal
lymph or blood, aided by the inherent biliary pressure.
Physical obstruction to bile flow from lobules can occur
with any processes causing accumulation of tissue
(inflammatory, neoplastic or collagen) in portal or periportal regions. This obstruction can occur at any level in
the biliary tree with any process disrupting the normal
architecture, for example in cirrhosis or with metastatic
tumors. Extrahepatic cholestasis is far less common,
with important causes including biliary or pancreatic
adenocarcinoma, duodenal disease or pancreatitis causing blockage of the duodenal papilla.
Cholestasis can be recognized clinically in several ways
which can be helpful to consider when approaching a
clinical case. Severe cholestasis results in icterus. Less
severe cholestasis can be recognized in varying degrees
on the biochemistry panel. This is discussed further in
the section on biochemical evaluation, but it is important to be aware of the frequency with which some degree
of cholestasis occurs in a wide variety of liver disease.
Icterus
Icterus (or jaundice) is the yellow discoloration of tissues
resulting from hyperbilirubinemia and the build‐up of
bile pigments (Figure 60.1).
Bilirubin is the major bile pigment and is the normal
end‐product of the catabolism of hemoproteins, a broad
group of molecules including hemoglobin, myoglobin,
and many enzymes located within the liver, (e.g.,

Figure 60.1 Canine eye showing jaundiced sclera.
Source: Photograph courtesy of Sheila Brennan.

cytochromes). Senescent or damaged erythrocytes are
removed from the circulation by cells of the mononuclear phagocyte system located within the spleen, liver,
and bone marrow. These cells break down hemoglobin
and release unconjugated, hydrophobic bilirubin into the
circulation where it is carried, reversibly bound to albumin, to the liver for clearance. The hepatocytes take up
the bilirubin and conjugate it, predominantly with glucuronide, to aid solubility for biliary excretion. This conjugated bilirubin is released into the intestine where it is
not reabsorbed but is either excreted unchanged or
degraded by intestinal bacteria to urobilinogen and then
the stercobilins (brown fecal pigments).
Hyperbilirubinemia results from disruption of this
normal production and/or processing of bilirubin
and can be considered to result from three broad
mechanisms.
Prehepatic causes where there is increased production
of bilirubin in excess of the hepatic capacity for excretion, for example severe hemolytic anemia.
●● Hepatic causes where there is impaired uptake, conjugation, and excretion of bilirubin as a result of marked
cholestasis. As described in the section on cholestasis,
extrahepatic causes such as sepsis can also result in
intrahepatic cholestasis due to cytokines directly
inhibiting bilirubin transport.
●● Posthepatic
causes reflect reduced excretion of
­bilirubin due to disruption of bile flow within the
extrahepatic bile ducts.
●●

VetBooks.ir

60 Approach to the Patient with Liver Disease

Portal Hypertension
Portal hypertension is abnormally high pressure within
the portal circulation, the result of increased blood
flow or resistance within the portal circulation or a
combination of the two. It is an important consequence
of a ­variety of clinical conditions, including liver disease, and is associated with significant morbidity and
mortality. The development of multiple acquired
­
portosystemic shunts (MAPSS) and ascites with or
­
without hepatic encephalopathy (HE) are important
sequelae of the condition and are essential to recognize
clinically from a diagnostic, prognostic, and treatment
perspective.
In health, the portal blood flow to the liver supplies
75–80% of liver blood supply through a low‐pressure
system. The portal pressure is kept low and relatively
constant, despite variations in portal blood flow, by a
large sinusoidal reserve capacity and the ability to adapt
the blood flow as necessary to maintain compliance. In
disease, changes in this compliance alter the inherent
resistance to blood flow and hence the portal pressure.
These changes may be static, in the form of structural
changes such as fibrosis, or dynamic, such as increased
production of inflammatory mediators and vasoconstrictor agents along with reduced production of
­vasodilator agents. In most cases, there will be a combination of these processes occurring progressively with
activation of hepatic stellate cells and progressive injury.
In addition, splanchnic vasculature tends to undergo
progressive vasodilation, as a result of many of the
­vasoactive agents released, further aggravating portal
hypertension due to increased portal blood flow.
Ascites
An important consequence of significant portal hypertension is ascites. Starling’s law describes that the net
movement of fluid between compartments is proportional to the balance between the relative hydrostatic and
oncotic pressures in each region. Hence, the forces keeping fluid within the vascular space become imbalanced,
with portal hypertension tending to favor fluid movement into the interstitium. Ascites develops once this
fluid movement exceeds the capacity of the local lymphatic system. This situation is exacerbated by splanchnic vasodilation, which lowers the effective circulating
blood volume due to pooling of blood. Over time, compensatory cascades, including the renin‐angiotensin‐
aldosterone system, sympathetic nervous system and
antidiuretic hormone release, produce blood volume
expansion, further favoring the formation of ascites.
Hypoalbuminemia and reduced oncotic pressure also
tend to favor net fluid movement and the development

of ascites, although typically this does not occur until
albumin concentrations are below about 1.5 g/dL. These
levels would be unusual for patients with liver dysfunction, occurring only with severe disease. A situation that
happens more frequently in patients with liver disease is
that a moderately reduced serum albumin (1.8–2.2 g/dL)
occurs in combination with portal hypertension,
­resulting in exacerbation of the ascites.
Acquired Portosystemic Shunts
As portal hypertension reaches a threshold level, small
embryonic vessels open up within the omentum and
mesentery, allowing blood flow between the portal
­circulation and the vena cava. These acquired portosystemic shunts (APSS) may initially lower the portal venous
pressure, but this effect is quickly mitigated by increased
portal blood flow. The clinical importance of these APSS
is that they result in a c­ ollateral circuit that effectively
short‐circuits the liver. The net result is the delivery of
toxins from the gastrointestinal tract directly into the
systemic circulation. These toxins can trigger the vomiting center, causing nausea, vomiting, and inappetence.
Clinical signs of HE may also develop.
Hepatic Encephalopathy
Hepatic encephalopathy is a clinical syndrome of brain
dysfunction occurring secondary to liver dysfunction.
It is a fairly common cause of morbidity and potentially mortality in dogs with liver disease, occurring
less frequently in cats. The clinical signs of HE can be
quite variable, with early signs being quite nonspecific, for example, apathy or reduced alertness. In
more advanced cases, circling, head pressing, altered
mentation, salivation, seizures, stupor, and coma may
occur (Figure 60.2).
The reserve capacity of liver function is such that,
­typically, HE only develops when there is concurrent
significant impairment of parenchymal liver function
­
and portosystemic shunting, a situation that can occur in
patients with congenital or acquired portosystemic
shunts (PSS). More rarely, HE can result from fulminant
hepatic failure or inborn errors of ammonia metabolism.
In cats, an obligatory requirement for arginine to allow
normal function of the urea cycle means that arginine
deficiency in this species (e.g., the result of anorexia) can
also result in HE.
The pathogenesis of HE is complex and likely multifactorial. Normally, the liver removes neurotoxic substances
from the portal circulation, preventing their delivery to
the brain in the systemic circulation. HE develops
with failure of this mechanism, the resultant delivery of
toxins triggering neurotransmitter dysfunction and a

643

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

Coagulopathy

VetBooks.ir

644

Figure 60.2 Dalmatian showing head pressing as a manifestation
of hepatic encephalopathy.

constellation of potential clinical signs ranging in severity from apathy and reduced awareness to coma and
unresponsiveness. The most commonly implicated toxin
in HE is ammonia, although there are some cases where
the plasma ammonia concentration is normal or only
slightly raised despite signs of HE. Other potential
triggers that have been studied include mercaptans,
­
manganese, systemic inflammation, altered gamma‐
aminobutyric acid (GABA, an inhibitory neurotransmitter), benzodiazepine receptor signaling and altered
catecholaminergic signaling due to changes in branched
chain aromatic amino acid profiles. Whatever the
­underlying cause, the overall result is a disruption of
brain function, typically leading to waxing and waning
clinical signs.
Gastroduodenal Ulceration
Patients with hepatobiliary disease are predisposed to
gastric and duodenal ulceration for a number of reasons.
Portal venous hypertension is an important risk factor
resulting in vascular stasis and venous congestion, which
together increase the risk of mucosal ulceration due to
reduced mucosal blood flow and secondarily reduced
bicarbonate and mucus secretion. This risk is further
increased in anorexic animals or those exposed to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs or potentially corticosteroids. Gastrointestinal ulceration and bleeding is an
important consideration in any patient with HE that
suddenly deteriorates or in any patient with liver disease
that becomes more subdued or develops a reduced
appetite.

The liver is involved in the manufacture of the majority
of the coagulation factors, including fibrinogen (factor I),
prothrombin (factor II) and factors V, VII, IX, X, XI, and
XIII. The site of factor VIII production is controversial,
but it is likely that the liver plays an important role in its
production. It is also the site of the vitamin K‐dependent
activation of factors II, VII, IX, and X and protein C. In
addition to this, the liver is involved in the clearance of
activated clotting factors and the production of clotting
factor inhibitors (e.g., antithrombin and alpha‐1‐antitrypsin) and fibrinolytic proteins such as plasminogen.
Hence, in liver disease there is the potential for disrupted
production of coagulation factors and their inhibitors
along with impaired clearance of both activated coagulation factors and the products of the fibrinolytic system.
The extent of the resulting abnormalities reflect the
severity of the underlying liver disease, ranging from
individual factor deficiencies to disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
A study of 42 dogs with histologically confirmed liver
disease demonstrated that one or more coagulation
abnormalities was present in 57% of the dogs. These
abnormalities ranged from single factor deficiencies in
four of the dogs to DIC in three dogs. An older study suggested a figure of 93% of dogs with liver disease having
abnormal coagulation parameters, although this study
involved more severely affected cases. A study of 45 cats
with liver disease showed that 98% of the cats had one or
more abnormality detected. What is important to recognize clinically is that, whilst spontaneous hemorrhage
may be rare in animals with hepatic disease, hemostatic
abnormalities occur commonly. Hence, the clinician
needs to exercise caution when considering interventional diagnostic procedures and a coagulation profile
should be performed in all such cases.

­Signalment
Patient signalment is very important when approaching
the patient with hepatobiliary disease. There are a variety of known or suspected breed predispositions to
hepatic disease which can be helpful to consider, particularly in view of the occult nature of many cases of early
liver disease. Congenital portosystemic shunts (CPSS)
have worldwide breed predispositions including Irish
wolfhounds, cairn terriers, Labrador retrievers, dachshunds, Yorkshire terriers, Australian cattle dogs, Maltese
terriers, and miniature schnauzers. In cats, the condition
is seen most frequently in mixed‐breed cats, although
Persian and Himalayan breeds are also overrepresented.
Additionally, copper‐associated hepatitis has been

VetBooks.ir

60 Approach to the Patient with Liver Disease

described in several breeds, including the Bedlington terrier, Dalmatian, Doberman pinscher, Labrador retriever,
West Highland white, and Skye terriers. A recent study
documented breeds at risk of developing chronic hepatitis in the UK (see Chapter 64). These included three
breeds in agreement with a previous, older study from
Sweden: the American and English cocker spaniel,
Doberman pinscher and Labrador retriever, and additionally highlighted an increased risk in the cairn terrier,
English springer spaniel, Great Dane, and Samoyed.
However, it should be recognized that the gene pools in
different countries can vary, such that certain breed characteristics and predispositions may be more regional.
In addition to the breed, the age at onset of clinical
signs can be very helpful in aiding diagnosis of some
hepatobiliary conditions. For example, animals with
CPSS typically present at a younger age. This has classically been described to be less than 1 year of age, although
increasingly older dogs seem to be recognized, presumably as clinicians are looking more widely for the condition. There have been reports of increasing numbers of
miniature schnauzers not being diagnosed until they are
over 7 years, presenting with only mild signs. Reports
looking at the age and gender distribution of dogs presenting with chronic hepatitis have shown the mean age
at diagnosis to be approximately 8 years when all breeds
were considered together, although some breeds tended
to present at a younger age (e.g., English springer spaniel). In general, females are overrepresented, although
again there are occasional breeds where this does not
appear to be the case.

access to toxins and a history of any recent drug administration are extremely relevant. The clinician should
maintain a high index of suspicion whenever a patient
develops new clinical signs within four weeks of starting
a new drug. There are many known potentially hepatotoxic drugs, common examples being phenobarbital
and itraconazole, but most drugs have the potential
for an idiosyncratic reaction in an individual patient.
Consumption of a hepatotoxin is also possible, such as
certain mushrooms, xylitol (contained in sugar‐free
sweets) or even herbal/dietary supplements that the
owner might be administering.
Hepatobiliary disease can result in a very broad range
of clinical signs reflecting both the sheer variety of functions the liver performs and the central role it plays in
many metabolic and detoxifaction pathways. This central role means that hepatic disease can result in the secondary dysfunction of other organs, as in HE. It also
places the liver in a position where it can itself become
secondarily affected, for example with hyperadrenocorticism or hepatic lipidosis. The net result is that the clinician needs to be alert to this when approaching a case,
aiming to first decide if hepatobiliary disease could be
present in an animal but then, importantly, whether this
represents a primary or secondary phenomenon. These
key ­questions sound very straightforward, but they can
be challenging to address in many patients and will be
reconsidered as different aspects of the investigation of
liver disease are explored.

­Diagnosis
­History and Clinical Signs
A thorough history with good attention to detail is key to
approaching any clinical case. This is particularly pertinent with potential hepatobiliary cases for a variety of
reasons. As outlined in the introduction, the large
hepatic functional reserve means that in order to diagnose diseases before there is significant, irreversible loss
of healthy liver tissue, the clinician needs to identify
cases with subtle and often vague clinical signs.
Symptoms such as anorexia, vomiting, lethargy or mild
polyuria/polydipsia, which are often waxing and waning,
should alert the clinician that liver disease is a potential
differential diagnosis. The onset of clinical signs may
­initially appear acute in nature but careful discussion
with the owner might elucidate a more chronic background than initially described. Box 60.1 summarizes
clinical signs that may be observed in animals with
liver disease.
The potential for toxin exposure should always be considered so a detailed description of the animal’s potential

Biochemical Evaluation
The employment of clinical pathologic testing is central
to the approach to animals with hepatobiliary disease.
In many cases, recognition of abnormal test results often
provides the first indication that liver disease may be
present. It is not uncommon to detect high liver enzyme
activities as the only abnormality on preanesthetic or
health screens, prompting further investigation. In addition, as outlined above, in view of the typical presentation of hepatobiliary cases, it is important to use clinical
pathology to aid in the diagnosis is liver disease early on
in the disease process. Often at this stage the clinical
signs may be vague and nonspecific with clinical pathology aiding greatly in the decision making and further
defining of such cases.
The laboratory evaluation of hepatobiliary patients has
several broad aims: to determine/confirm the presence
of hepatobiliary disease and assess hepatic function, to
aid in distinguishing primary or secondary hepatic
disease and to contribute to diagnostic planning or
­

645

VetBooks.ir

646

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

Box 60.1 Clinical signs and clinical examination findings that may occur in animals with liver disease
Vague signs
Vaguely “off form”
Lethargy
Signs related to gastrointestinal tract
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Anorexia
Weight loss
GI bleeding ‐ melena
Signs related to cholestasis
Jaundice
Acholic feces ‐ with complete extrahepatic biliary
obstruction
Signs related to hepatic encephalopathy
Vague signs of dullness
Alterations in behavior
Ptyalism – particularly in cats
Head pressing
Disorientation
Stupor
Seizures
Vague neurologic signs, seizures or syncope may occur
with hypoglycemia
Signs relating to CPSS
Hepatic encephalopathy signs (see above)
Stunting
Microhepatica

Dysuria – relating to ammonium biurate urolithiasis
Hematuria – relating to ammonium biurate urolithiasis
Copper‐colored iris (some cats)
Signs relating to disorders of hemostasis
Gastrointestinal bleeding ‐ melena
Increased bleeding from invasive procedures
Signs relating to the urinary tract
Polyuria/polydipsia
Discolored urine – jaundice/hematuria
Dysuria (see above)
May have prolonged recovery from sedation/general
anesthesia
Clinical findings
Poor body condition score
Mucous membrane pallor
Abdominal discomfort – organomegaly, abdominal
distension, inflammation (hepatic/peritonitis/
cholecystitis)
Pyrexia – with some inflammatory, infectious or
neoplastic causes
Ascites ‐ relating to portal hypertension, hypoalbuminemia, biliary peritonitis or neoplastic effusion
Hepatomegaly +/‐ irregularity of liver margins – with
infiltration, some inflammatory conditions
Skin lesions may be seen with hepatocutaneous
syndrome (superficial, necrolytic dermatitis)

­monitoring response to treatment. Occasionally, diagnostic testing may allow definitive diagnosis of hepatobiliary disease although more typically, it acts as a piece
within the overall jigsaw. The biochemical tests directly
utilized in the evaluation of liver disease comprise the
liver enzymes and liver function tests, which appraise
impaired metabolic function or synthetic capacity.
However, evaluation of the full hematology and biochemistry panel is important to gain insight into the
­animal’s general health. This aids clarification of the likelihood of another disease process that may either be the
cause of a secondary hepatopathy or represent an additional consideration in patient management.

enzymes. They are located mainly on hepatobiliary
membranes and are markers of cholestasis or drug
induction (see later). In general, the liver enzymes are
sensitive indicators of liver disease or injury but are not
specific. There are far more animals in which elevated
liver enzyme activities are detected than actually have
clinically significant liver disease. This lack of specificity
arises from a combination of the susceptibility of the
liver to secondary or “reactive” disorders, the ability of
certain hormones or drugs, such as corticosteroids, to
induce production of particular liver enzymes and the
presence of isoenzymes within tissues other than liver.
The clinical interpretation of the significance of liver
enzyme elevations is challenging and must always be
considered in the context of the patent, its history, and
the full clinical pathology results.
It is important to realize that the liver enzymes do not
offer any indication of liver function. In an animal with a
primary hepatopathy, the magnitude of hepatocellular
enzyme release may broadly relate to the number of
hepatocytes affected, particularly in the acute setting.
However, in view of the regenerative capacity of the liver,
the magnitude offers no prognostic information. It is also

Enzyme Markers of Liver Disease

The liver enzymes evaluated can be divided into two
main groups dependent on their cellular location and
clinical utility. Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and
aspartate aminotransferase (AST) are the two most commonly measured markers of hepatocellular injury and
are found primarily within the hepatic cytosol. Alkaline
phosphatase (ALP) and gamma‐glutamyl transferase
(GGT) are the most commonly measured biliary

VetBooks.ir

60 Approach to the Patient with Liver Disease

important to appreciate that in severe chronic disease,
such as cirrhosis, the liver enzyme release may be
minimal due to reduced hepatic synthetic capacity.
­
In addition, the serial evaluation of serum enzyme
­activities can be more useful than a single time point in
determining the importance of liver enzyme elevation
and the likely prognosis in a patient. It is generally considered a favorable sign if values continue to fall gradually after a single liver insult whereas ongoing persistent
elevation may indicate a chronic hepatopathy and the
requirement for further investigation.
The serum enzyme activity at any point in time is
dependent on the overall hepatic activity of the enzyme
or the capacity for de novo synthesis (in response to cholestasis or drug induction), the serum half‐life of the
enzyme, and the cellular location of the enzyme (determining the ease of release of the enzyme, e.g., “leakage”
of cytosolic enzymes). These factors vary not only
between different enzymes but also between species, as
will be discussed below. Hence, it is important to ensure
species‐specific criteria are being used when interpreting the values in a given patient. When evaluating the
liver enzymes, it is important to consider the pattern of
enzyme increase (hepatocellular or cholestatic), the
magnitude of this change and the temporal pattern of the
enzyme changes over time. For example, are they
decreasing gradually, fluctuating or progressively
increasing? The reference intervals for liver enzymes
vary considerably between laboratories due to different
assay methods. In view of this, it is more appropriate to
consider the magnitude of increase in relation to the
upper limit of the reference interval when comparing
values between labs.
Hepatocellular/Leakage Enzymes

Alanine aminotrans­ferase is a cytosolic enzyme that is
released into the serum from hepatocytes with increased
hepatocyte membrane permeability or following hepatocellular necrosis. This enzyme is considered to be a sensitive indicator of hepatocellular injury in dogs and cats
and is also considered to be the most liver‐specific
enzyme in these species. Although ALT is also found in
cardiac and skeletal muscle and the kidneys, this is not
generally of clinical significance as the isoenzymes found
in these other locations either have short half‐lives or are
present at low concentrations. However, occasionally
severe muscle injury can result in ALT elevation.
The half‐life of ALT in the dog is controversial, with
reports ranging from about six hours to 2.5 days. What is
clear is that the half‐life is considerably shorter in the cat,
with the result that smaller elevations are far more clinically significant in this species. The highest increases in
ALT activity, in either species, are seen during acute
hepatic inflammation or necrosis, the magnitude of

­elevation, in this setting, being roughly proportional to
the number of hepatocytes affected but providing no
insight into the severity of injury or its reversibility.
Rapid elevations in enzyme activity occur following
changes in hepatocyte membrane permeability.
Following experimental toxin administration, values
rise sharply within 24–48 hours, peaking at values up to
100 times normal within approximately five days and
then falling back to normal within 2–3 weeks. In general,
with hepatic injury, a reduction in the enzyme activity of
approximately 50% every 2–3 days would be viewed as a
good prognostic sign. Elevated ALT activity can also
occur with cholestasis due to the damaging effect of
accumulated bile acids on hepatocyte membranes. The
elevations that occur in this setting are typically more
gradual in onset and are not as dramatic overall. Certain
drugs can also result in ALT enzyme increases, for
­example anticonvulsant drugs or corticosteroids. These
elevations tend to be dose dependent but also show considerable inter individual variation. The elevations seen
with phenobarbital administration would typically be
within the 4–5‐fold range compared to a 10‐fold or
higher elevation occurring in animals with hepatotoxicity. However, the results need to be interpreted in light of
the overall clinical picture and in combination with liver
function evaluation where there is any concern.
The interpretation of ALT elevation in the clinical setting frequently poses a diagnostic challenge. Persistent
elevations of ALT are characteristic of canine chronic
hepatitis and can be the only abnormality noted on a
blood panel in animals in the early stages of the disease.
Hence, elevations in excess of twice the upper limit of the
reference range occurring over 1–2 months are potentially significant and should not be disregarded. However,
frequently up to five‐fold elevations in ALT are observed
in dogs with primary gastrointestinal diseases such as
inflammatory bowel disease or pancreatitis. In addition,
hemolytic anemia or cardiovascular disease can cause
significant elevations in ALT secondary to hypoxia.
Endotoxemia or sepsis can cause secondary hepatic
changes, as can many endocrinopathies. These examples
demonstrate the limitations of ALT; while it is very sensitive for the detection of hepatocellular insult and hence
cases with potential primary hepatopathies, it is equally
sensitive for the detection of secondary hepatopathies
and “reactive” liver changes occurring in response to
other systemic illness or drug exposure. In view of this,
the clinician should interpret ALT activity in combination with the remainder of the clinical biochemistry,
knowledge of the animal’s breed and history along with
maintaining an awareness of the potential interference of
extrahepatic disease.
Aspartate aminotransferase is also a marker of hepatocellular damage within the group of “leakage” enzymes,

647

VetBooks.ir

648

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

having a predominantly cytosolic location within hepatocytes. However, there is in addition a mitochondrial
fraction, comprising about 30% of the total hepatic
enzyme activity, which is only released during hepatocellular necrosis. The half‐life of AST is about 4–20 hours
in the dog and one hour in the cat. In general, in acute
liver injury, elevations of AST mirror those of
ALT although the overall values tend not to be as high
(10–30‐fold increases in the dog and up to 50‐fold in the
cat). Following the insult, the AST values should return
to normal more quickly than ALT reflecting its shorter
half‐life. Hence, it has been suggested that persistent
AST elevation in this setting is a poor prognostic sign. In
cats, AST has been shown to be more sensitive than ALT
for the detection of hepatobiliary diseases, with sensitivities reported to be approximately 83% and 76% sensitivity respectively in one report. Elevations in AST also
occur with skeletal muscle disease so any elevation
occurring in the absence of ALT elevation should be
cross‐referenced with creatinine kinase measurement to
exclude this possibility. In general, most biochemical
profiles offer only one hepatocellular enzyme measurement, typically ALT, and the measurement of AST in
addition to this is unlikely to offer a marked clinical
advantage.
Biliary Enzymes

Alkaline phosphatase is a membrane‐bound enzyme that
has been shown to have a high sensitivity (85%) but low
specificity (51%) for the detection of hepatobiliary disease in dogs. The converse is true for cats, with reported
values of 48% sensitivity and 93% specificity. These performances reflect differences in the half‐lives and overall
enzyme activity in the two species along with differences
in the isoenzymes and their potential for induction (discussed further later).
In dogs and cats, there are a variety of tissues known to
exhibit ALP activity, including intestinal mucosa, renal
cortex, placenta, liver, and bone. There are two genes
encoding ALP in the dog with post-translation modifications resulting in different isoforms of the enzyme. The
tissue nonspecific ALP gene is responsible for the transcription of liver ALP (L‐ALP), bone ALP (B‐ALP), and
kidney ALP (K‐ALP), whereas the second gene encodes
intestinal ALP (I‐ALP). An additional isoenzyme, glucocorticoid‐induced ALP (G‐ALP), is important in the dog
and is thought to represent a post-translational modification of I‐ALP. In the dog, the total serum ALP (T‐ALP)
measured on clinical biochemistry profiles reflects the
combination of L‐ALP, B‐ALP, and G‐ALP; other isoenzymes fail to contribute to this measurement due to a
combination of their short half‐life and/or low overall
tissue activities. In the cat, T‐ALP comprises L‐ALP and
B‐ALP due to a lack of G‐ALP in this species, although

placental isoenzyme has also been detected late‐term
in this species.
An appreciation of the contributions of these isoenzymes is important when interpreting biochemistry
results. For example, B‐ALP increases with osteoblastic
activity and hence its contribution to T‐ALP varies with
age. In view of this, in young growing animals T‐ALP is
approximately twice the normal adult reference range
purely as a result of increased B‐ALP. In addition, elevations may occur in adult dogs with active bone lesions,
such as osteomyelitis or osteosarcoma, but these are
rarely more than five‐fold increases. Where there is concern in interpretation, it may occasionally be helpful to
look at an additional enzyme, such as GGT, with no bone
isoenzyme, to clarify the situation. The isoenzyme that
causes far more problems for interpretation is G‐ALP, as
discussed later.
Liver ALP is found predominantly within the periportal zone of the liver, bound to hepatocyte canalicular and
sinusoidal membranes. The serum activity of this enzyme
is increased in response to cholestasis (intra‐ and extrahepatic) and induction of de novo synthesis. ALP is
released into the circulation by enzyme‐induced solubilization from the hepatocyte membranes, a process that is
enhanced by bile salts and hence increases with cholestasis. In the latter situation, accumulated bile salts also
induce production of L‐ALP, significantly enhancing the
resultant increase in serum ALP activity. The half‐life of
L‐ALP is approximately 70 hours in the dog and six hours
in the cat. This short half‐life in the cat, combined with a
lower ALP activity in feline liver, is important practically.
Clinically significant elevations of ALP activity in the cat
are considerably smaller than those seen in the dog. Cats
with hepatic disease may have ALP elevations two‐ or
three‐fold higher than normal as opposed to dogs where
values are often more than four‐ or five‐fold normal. This
situation, in combination with the lack of G‐ALP enzyme
in the cat, results in the far lower ­sensitivity of ALP for
liver disease in the cat (48%) but enhanced specificity
(93%). In view of this, the interpretation of ALP elevation
in dogs and cats differs considerably.
In dogs, ALP induction occurs in response to endogenous and exogenous corticosteroids and phenobarbital.
The response to corticosteroids is rapid (increased ALP
mRNA within 24–48 hours) and may occur following
oral, topical (including ear/eye preparations) and parenteral exposure, with elevations in serum enzyme activity
persisting for up to six weeks after exposure has ceased.
In addition, a vacuolar hepatopathy, with glycogen accumulation within hepatocytes, occurs with exposure to
excessive corticosteroid levels. This too may contribute
to ALP elevation by generating intrahepatic cholestasis.
The overall ALP elevations can be dramatic and complicate the interpretation of ALP activity in the dog. G‐ALP,

VetBooks.ir

60 Approach to the Patient with Liver Disease

as outlined earlier, is the product of the I‐ALP gene. As
with L‐ALP, the hepatocyte is the site of de novo synthesis of G‐ALP, with membrane accumulation and elution
occurring in the same way. Exposure to endogenous or
exogenous corticosteroids results in G‐ALP induction
and hence increased serum activity. It was hoped that
measurement of the distinct isotypes of ALP within
a serum sample would aid the interpretation of serum
T‐ALP, but this has not been found to be the case
­clinically. While normal dogs have low G‐ALP (<15%
T‐ALP) and dogs exposed to corticosteroids have much
higher G‐ALP, the specificity of G‐ALP for corticosteroid exposure is low. Elevations in G‐ALP are observed in
dogs with primary liver disease, diabetes mellitus, and
other chronic illnesses. G‐ALP synthesis is also induced
in addition to L‐ALP by phenobarbital.
In a published series of 270 dogs with histopathologically confirmed hepatobiliary disease, the most marked
elevations of T‐ALP were documented in dogs with
cholestasis (median 10‐fold increase) followed, in order
of magnitude, by steroid‐induced hepatopathy, chronic
hepatitis, and hepatic necrosis (all medians approximately six‐fold increase or slightly less). Periportal injury
tends to result in more marked increases in T‐ALP activity than centrilobular pathology. Hepatocellular and
­biliary carcinomas have also been documented to show
increases in serum ALP activity, as have some nonhepatic tumors. Metabolic diseases with fatty infiltration of
the liver, such as diabetes mellitus and hepatic lipidosis,
are also associated with significant elevations in ALP. In
general, extrahepatic causes of ALP elevation are less
important in the cat and corticosteroid‐induced ALP
elevations do not occur in this species. As with ALT, the
level of ALP elevation observed does not correlate with
the underlying disease process and persistent elevation is
a source of more concern than a single abnormal value.
Elevations of ALP, like any clinical pathology test, must
be interpreted in the context of other laboratory findings
and in light of the patient’s signalment and history.
For example, Scottish terriers are known to have higher
ALP activities than other breeds with an, as yet, poorly
characterised ­underlying cause.
Gamma‐glutamyltransferase is also a membrane‐
bound biliary enzyme. The serum GGT activity is largely
derived from liver sources of the enzyme, with increased
activity resulting from, as with ALP, de novo synthesis or
increased elution from biliary membranes in response to
cholestasis. In general, GGT elevations parallel rises in
ALP. GGT also shows corticosteroid induction but,
unlike ALP, has no bone isoenzyme and shows less
induction with phenobarbital administration.
The relative diagnostic performances of GGT and ALP
were compared in a study of 270 dogs with confirmed
hepatobiliary disease. GGT was found to be more

­specific for liver disease than ALP (87% compared to
51%), but it showed considerably less sensitivity (46%
compared to 85%). In this study, it was suggested that the
diagnostic value of the enzymes could be increased by
considering the two enzymes in series, first looking at
ALP and then GGT. In this setting, the positive predictive value and specificity were improved without a major
decrease in the negative predictive value. The specificity
of increased ALP and GGT activity used in this series
was 91%. When comparing the relative performance of
the two enzymes in cats, the converse is true: GGT is
more sensitive but less specific than ALP. In a study of
54 cats with hepatic disease, the sensitivity and specificity of GGT were found to be 83% and 67% respectively,
compared to 48% and 93% for ALP. There was, however,
one notable exception to this situation. In cats with
hepatic lipidosis, ALP is more sensitive than GGT, with
the latter within the reference interval or only mildly
elevated in a number of cases.
In summary, the measurement of ALP is probably
preferable to GGT in the dog but the converse is true for
the cat. However, there are likely to be some additional
benefits from the measurement of both enzymes.
Markers of Liver Function
Plasma Proteins

The liver is the exclusive site of albumin production and
hence liver disease is an important differential diagnosis
to consider in an animal with hypoalbuminemia. The
liver’s reserve capacity for albumin production is large
and the half‐life of albumin in the circulation is in excess
of a week. In view of this, hypoalbuminemia tends to
occur in animals with chronic hepatic disorders, such as
cirrhosis, or with , where liver synthetic capacity is
severely compromised. Hence, serum albumin measurement is a relatively insensitive measure of hepatic insufficiency. In addition to this, hypoalbuminemia is not
specific for hepatic disease. It can occur with protein‐
losing enteropathies and nephropathies, exudative skin
conditions, vasculitis, third space loss, acute blood loss,
and secondary to inflammation, reflecting albumin being
a negative acute‐phase protein.
The liver produces alpha‐ and beta‐globulins, whereas
lymphoid cells produce gamma‐globulins, meaning
that the liver is not the exclusive source of the globulins
measured on a biochemistry profile. Whilst hepatic synthetic failure may result in hypoglobulinemia, reflecting
the liver’s role in production, more commonly hyperglobulinemia occurs with acquired liver disease. This can
result from a variety of causes including an underlying
inflammatory disorder with enhanced gamma‐globulin
production, the generation of increased quantities of
acute phase reactants (within the alpha‐ and beta‐­
globulin fractions) or as a result of systemic immune

649

VetBooks.ir

650

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

stimulation following decreased antigen clearance by
Kupffer cells. It is important to note that in some cases,
the globulin elevation may be sufficient to mask hypoalbuminemia if only the total protein concentration is
measured on a blood panel.
Coagulation Factors

The role of the liver in the production of coagulation
­factors and the frequency with which coagulation parameter abnormalities occur were discussed earlier. As with
albumin, whilst reduced coagulation factor production
can result from hepatic synthetic failure, it is an insensitive indicator of dysfunction. In addition, the overlap
between the liver’s role in factor production, activation
and clearance, along with fibrinolysis, make interpretation of the results of hemostatic testing challenging.
From a clinical perspective, the evaluation of a coagulation profile is important in any patient suspected to have
liver disease that is scheduled to have further invasive
diagnostic procedures, such as a liver biopsy.
Protein Catabolism

The liver produces urea from ammonia, releasing it into
the systemic circulation for renal excretion. The serum
urea concentration may be close to or below the reference interval in patients with hepatic insufficiency, PSS,
and urea cycle abnormalities. Reports have suggested
that approximately 65% of dogs and cats with PSS
have low blood urea levels, reflecting reduced synthetic
capacity. However, as with other tests, this finding is not
specific to liver disease. Serum urea concentrations may
also be decreased by diuresis and medullary wash‐out,
malnutrition or a protein‐restricted diet. Conversely,
gastrointestinal bleeding can result in a disproportionately high serum urea concentration relative to serum
creatinine and should alert the clinician to this possibility
if observed on biochemistry results.
The catabolism of dietary amino acids and urea by
bacteria within the gastrointestinal tract produces
ammonia, which is normally cleared from the portal circulation by the liver. The bulk of this ammonia is then
converted within the liver to urea during the urea cycle.
In view of this, hyperammonemia can result from hepatic
insufficiency, portosystemic shunting or dysfunction of
the urea cycle. The latter group includes rare genetic
cycle abnormalities, cobalamin deficiency or arginine
deficiency (cats). The large reserve capacity of the urea
cycle makes hyperammonemia a relatively insensitive
test of liver function. The measurement of blood ammonia concentration is far more sensitive for the detection
of acquired and CPSS, which effectively short‐circuit the
liver, with reported sensitivities ranging between
80–100% in dogs and just over 80% in cats. These values
are increased further by the measurement of postprandial

blood ammonia levels, with one paper showing
­sensitivities of 81% and 91% in pre‐ and postprandial
samples. The reported sensitivity of ammonia for the
detection of hepatocellular dysfunction in this paper
was 36%, highlighting its limitation.
Another paper compared the diagnostic utility of
plasma ammonia and fasting serum bile acids in the
diagnosis of PSS in dogs. They found bile acids to be a
little less sensitive, but considerably less specific than
ammonia measurement, although the use of postprandial samples would have been likely to improve the sensitivity (see later). With adjustment of the cut‐off value
for the ammonia level to 75 μmol/L, the sensitivity and
specificity for the detection of congenital or acquired
PSS were optimized at 92% and 98% respectively.
Hence, it can be very useful for the diagnosis of these
conditions.
One of the limiting factors for ammonia measurement
is the sample handling requirements. Samples should be
collected immediately onto ice, the plasma separated
from erythrocytes rapidly and the assay performed
within 30 minutes, rendering measurement in a practice
setting challenging. This problem is further compounded
by the fact that the results of dry chemistry tests have
frequently been shown to be unreliable. More recently,
however, point‐of‐care analyzers have become increasingly available, offering a viable, more reliable option.
Carbohydrate Metabolism

The liver plays a central role in variety of pathways
involved in carbohydrate metabolism, but from a diagnostic standpoint, the main assay relating to these functions is blood glucose. Hypoglycemia can occur with
liver ­disease, although again this is a very insensitive test
reflecting the significant reserve capacity for glucose
production. Some cases of CPSS can present with hypoglycemia, as can animals with severe hepatic compromise such as massive hepatic necrosis or severe c­ irrhosis.
Hepatic neoplasms can occasionally result in hypoglycemia due to either the release of insulin‐like factors (e.g.,
IGF‐2) or excessive glucose consumption. Glycogen
storage diseases and rare congenital hepatic enzyme
deficiencies can also result in hypoglycemia, as can a
variety of extrahepatic diseases. Hence hypoglycemia is
neither sensitive nor specific for the identification of
hepatic disease.
Lipid Metabolism

The liver is involved in a variety of metabolic pathways,
with the synthesis of cholesterol and lipoproteins most
relevant from the point of view of laboratory results.
The serum cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations
observed in animals with liver disease vary considerably
from normal to increased or decreased. Since these

VetBooks.ir

60 Approach to the Patient with Liver Disease

analytes are also affected by a variety of other extrahepatic causes, neither test offers utility as a specific
marker for liver disease. They are, however, useful in
contributing to the overall clinical picture and may aid
in the identification of relevant extrahepatic illnesses.
Hypercholesterolemia occurs with severe hepatic
insufficiency or in animals with congenital or acquired
PSS, but can occur with a variety of conditions, including
gastrointestinal disease and hypoadrenocorticism.
Hypercholesterolemia may occur with cholestasis, but
again is not specific for liver disease as it can occur
with endocrinopathies, protein‐losing nephropathies,
pancreatitis, and primary hyperlipidemias. A mild
hypertriglyceridemia may occur with cholestasis.
In addition, hypertriglyceridemia has been associated
with a proportion of dogs with biliary mucoceles.
Others

Bilirubin metabolism was discussed in an earlier section.
From a diagnostic standpoint, it is helpful to consider the
potential causes of hyperbilirubinemia by dividing the
causes into prehepatic, hepatic, and posthepatic. The former can be quickly identified by significant anemia and
enhanced erythrocyte breakdown and once excluded, the
presence of hyperbilirubinemia becomes far more specific
for liver disease than many of the other clinical pathology
analytes. Despite this, bilirubin measurement still has
important limitations. As with other parameters, it is still
a relatively insensitive measure of hepatic insufficiency,
becoming elevated only once significant hepatic reserve is
exhausted, for example with end‐stage cirrhosis patients.
In addition, hyperbilirubinemia does not distinguish
between primary and secondary hepatopathies. Sepsis
can cause significant cholestasis and hyperbilirubinemia,
and many of the causes of posthepatic jaundice are extrahepatic, such as pancreatitis and pancreatic or duodenal
neoplasia. In cats, hyperbilirubinemia is a more sensitive
indicator of hepatobiliary disease than it is in dogs, reflecting the increased proportion of liver diseases in the cat
that involve biliary disease.
When approaching a patient with hyperbilirubinemia,
having excluded prehepatic jaundice, the next stage is to
try to establish whether hepatic or posthepatic pathology
is most likely. Evaluation of the remainder of the biochemistry panel is important to establish if there are
other features suggestive of hepatic insufficiency, for
example hypoalbuminemia, and to examine the hepatic
enzyme activities. Typically, with posthepatic jaundice
there is dramatic elevation of the cholestatic liver
enzymes, more so than the hepatocellular leakage
enzymes, hypercholesterolemia and no evidence of
hepatic insufficiency. However, the picture is often not
clear‐cut, with hepatocellular enzyme activities increasing in patients with posthepatic cholestasis over time

due to the toxic effects of accumulated bile salts, and
markers of hepatic insufficiency unchanged due to their
lack of sensitivity. Abdominal ultrasound is the next step
in examining such a patient, and is typically the most
useful method to distinguish between hepatic and posthepatic jaundice (see later). In some patients, the distinction between hepatic and posthepatic disease is blurred
with their presentation involving components of each,
for example cholangitis.
Bile Acids

Bile acids are steroid acids that are a normal constituent of
bile and function in fat digestion within the intestine. The
two primary bile acids, cholic and chenodeoxycholic, are
synthesized in the liver from cholesterol and are then conjugated, mainly with taurine, before being excreted in bile
for release into the gut or storage in the gallbladder. These
conjugated bile acids are ionized at intestinal pH and
function in fat digestion by aiding the formation of
micelles. Intestinal bacteria metabolize some of the primary bile acids to the secondary bile acids, deoxycholic
and lithocholic acid, within the gut lumen. Once in the
ileum, primary and secondary bile acids bind to specific
receptors, allowing their reabsorption and enterohepatic
circulation. This system sees a maximum of approximately
5% fecal loss per day of bile acids, with the remainder
returned to the liver in the portal circulation for removal
and reexcretion. The daily losses are replaced by liver
manufacture of new bile acids, maintaining a constant bile
acid pool in the normal animal. This low‐level replacement is not affected by reduced liver function.
This enterohepatic circulation of bile acids forms the
basis of the serum bile acid assay, a dynamic liver function
test. The rationale for this test is that reduced liver function
or impairment of the enterohepatic circulation, due to
either reduced biliary excretion or disruption of the portal
circulation, results in elevation of the serum bile acid concentration measured in peripheral blood. The indications
for its use are in the diagnosis of PSS and the assessment of
liver function in cases where liver disease is suspected but
hyperbilirubinemia is not present. The latter is a less sensitive indicator of hepatic dysfunction; once hyperbilirubinemia is present in a patient, the measurement of serum
bile acids offers no further information.
A fasted serum bile acid is obtained after a 12‐hour fast
and assesses enterohepatic circulation in the fasted state.
A postprandial sample taken two hours after feeding provides an endogenous challenge. The rationale for the latter is that feeding stimulates gallbladder contraction with
release of stored bile and hence increased quantities of
bile acids for enterohepatic circulation, thus providing an
additional challenge for the assessment of liver function.
It has been shown that a proportion of PSS cases have
results within the reference interval for fasting bile acids

651

VetBooks.ir

652

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

but abnormal results on a postprandial sample. However,
rather than the postprandial sample specifically providing additional information over the fasting sample, use
of the paired pre‐ and postprandial samples together
increases the overall sensitivity of the test. The postprandial bile acid value may be the lower of the two values in some cases, potentially reflecting factors such as
gallbladder contraction during the fasting period,
incomplete gallbladder contraction, delayed gastric
emptying, altered intestinal motility, and decreased bile
acid absorption. When interpreting these paired samples, the higher value should be interpreted. Most veterinary laboratories utilize enzymatic fluorimetric or
spectrophotometric methodologies for the assay, which
means that lipemia and hemolysis can affect the results.
The reference intervals provided by individual labs vary
based on their individual methodology but are generally
very approximately <5 μmol/L and <10 μmol/L for pre‐
and postprandial values, respectively. However, some
normal animals have values within these intervals,
­necessitating adjustment of the cut‐off values used for
interpretation.
Serum bile acid assays (SBA) represent one of the
more sensitive measures of liver function available at
this time. Their utility relies on the fact that they give
an indication of liver function whereas liver enzymes
offer markers of liver insult or drug induction. In general, the lower sensitivity of bile acids for the detection
of hepatobiliary disease makes them poor screening
tests. They are more appropriately employed as a function test to evaluate patients prescreened by routine
biochemistry, with the aim of identifying those patients
in whom a liver biopsy should be considered. One
exception to this situation is their performance in
patients with PSS. Sensitivity of 100% for the detection
of PSS in cats and dogs has been quoted using cut‐off
values of 20 μmol/L and 25 μmol/L respectively, for
postprandial samples. The sensitivities noted in these
papers for the identification of other causes of hepatic
dysfunction were considerably lower than these values,
as has been noted elsewhere.
The values gained for SBA provide no indication of the
underlying cause of hepatic dysfunction, do not differentiate between primary and secondary hepatopathies, and
provide no information about disease severity or overall
prognosis. An early paper identified 100% specificity for
the presence of histopathologic abnormalities on hepatic
biopsies using cut‐off values of 20 μM/L for preprandial
and 25 μM/L postprandial samples. These results were
gained in a highly prescreened population, suspected by
experts to have liver disease based on clinical findings
and routine clinical pathologic testing. Hence, the prevalence of hepatobiliary disease in this population was
high. This fact affects the test performance considerably

and should be remembered when tests are being utilized
in very different clinical situations. When SBA have been
present on biochemistry panels and used more as screening tests, some spurious high values have been observed
in animals with no other evidence of liver disease.
Research suggests that these values may relate to bacterial overgrowth and the measurement of increased concentrations of deconjugated bile acids in some patients.
In other animals, extrahepatic disease is likely to be
resulting in high values and secondary hepatopathies.
The point is that care must be taken to consider the
context in which test results are gained; the specificity of
the test will be lower in a population with a lower prevalence of hepatobiliary disease. Using increased cut‐off
values for the assay will increase the specificity of the
test, but this is usually at the expense of sensitivity.
Values above 40 μmol/L are more likely to indicate
­primary hepatic dysfunction unless underlying causes
such as hyperadrenocorticism are identified. In view of
this, the author typically takes this value as more indicative of the need for further evaluation, such as a liver
biopsy. However, values between 20 and 40 μmol/L represent an important “gray‐zone” and warrant critical evaluation in relation to the patient, its clinical signs, and the
potential for extrahepatic causes. The evaluation of pre‐
and postprandial samples may aid clarification, if not
already performed, and the test should be repeated after a
period of time where there is any uncertainty. It should
always be remembered that the test, while helpful and
better than most measures of liver function, still has limitations. Where there is persistent liver enzyme elevation
over time, even without elevation of SBA, a liver biopsy
may well be indicated on a case‐by‐case basis (see later).
Patients with values in the “gray‐zone” with clinical signs
suggestive of liver disease or those without clinical signs
in which elevations persist with no other explanation are
also likely to warrant a liver biopsy. The measurement of
urine bile acids has been investigated but does not appear
to offer particular advantage over the SBA.
Hematology
Mild to moderate anemia is common in patients with
liver disease. The more common causes include anemia
of chronic disease and gastrointestinal bleeding. Acute
bleeding following liver biopsy, rupture of neoplasm or
hepatic rupture, resulting from trauma or pathologic
processes such as peliosis or hepatic amyloidosis, can
also occur, as can hemostatic disorders. Morphologic
changes in erythroctes (poikilocytes) are seen in some
dogs with chronic liver disease. These include irregularly
speculated cells, or acanthocytes and target cells, both of
which are thought to result from altered phospholipid
­ eoplasia
metabolism. In addition, microangiopathy with n

VetBooks.ir

60 Approach to the Patient with Liver Disease

or DIC may result in the generation of schistocytes.
A frequent finding in dogs with CPSS is microcytosis,
thought to reflect altered iron metabolism.
There are no specific leukocyte changes seen with liver
disease. An inflammatory leukogram may occur with
any inflammatory, infectious (e.g., leptospirosis) or neoplastic process. In one report, 16 out of 36 dogs (44%)
with chronic hepatitis were found to have an inflammatory leukogram. Thrombocyte changes may also be seen
in dogs with liver disease, although again the changes are
nonspecific. Thrombocyte counts may be reduced in
animals with DIC and significantly lower thrombocyte
counts were reported in dogs with chronic hepatitis and
cirrhosis.
Urinalysis
Ammonium biurate crystals have been reported to occur
in 40–70% of dogs with CPSS and may provide an early
clue to diagnosis in such patients, although they are not
a specific finding. Bilirubinuria can also be an important
finding. Since cats have a high renal threshold for bilirubin and their renal tubules do not make bilirubin, its
presence is always significant in this species. In dogs,
lower levels of bilirubin are a normal finding, particularly
in male dogs. High levels suggest hemolytic or hepatobiliary disease and discolored urine may be one of the
first reasons an owner seeks veterinary attention for a
jaundiced pet. Urine specific gravity may be reduced in
animals with CPSS and hepatic insufficiency in line with
the observed polyuria/polydipsia in these cases.
Serology
Dependent on the geographic location, serologic testing
for a variety of infectious agents may be appropriate, for
example Leptospira, Neospora, Toxoplasma, Rocky
Mountain spotted fever, Dirofilaria, Ehrlichia, and
­systemic mycoses.
Genetic Tests
The deletion mutation that causes copper hepatotoxicosis in the majority of Bedlington terriers has been identified and is now available as a genetic test for the disease
in this breed (www.vetgen.com). This test is run alongside a previously identified linkage marker to identify
any dogs in the breed that are affected by copper toxicosis but do not have this specific deletion mutation.
The occurrence of many chronic hepatopathies in specific breeds and the recognition of inheritance patterns
in some of the breeds make it likely that more genetic
tests will become available as the genetic bases of these
diseases are identified.

Newer Tests
There are a variety of newer assays being investigated,
for example, 13C‐labeled galactose breath test for
­assessment of liver function and serum protein C for
the ­
differentiation of portal vein hypoplasia without
­portal hypertension (formerly known as microvascular
­dysplasia) from PSS.
Summary of the Interpretation of Clinical
Pathology
As discussed, there is no one clinical pathology finding
that defines a specific diagnosis of hepatobiliary disease
in dogs and cats. The clinician needs to interpret all the
tests together in the context of the patient and its clinical
presentation. Consideration of patterns of abnormalities
in the clinical pathology tests rather than individual tests
in isolation can be helpful in increasing or decreasing the
index of suspicion of different conditions, as outlined in
Table 60.1. Once this type of interpretation has been
considered, the use of diagnostic imaging allows further
refinement and direction towards either the pursuit of
potential extrahepatic causes of the animal’s signs and
laboratory findings or more specific hepatic testing such
as cytology or biopsy.
Diagnostic Imaging
Diagnostic imaging is a very important component of
the investigation of a patient with suspected hepatobiliary disease, typically performed in combination with
clinical pathology evaluation. Imaging can aid directly in
the identification of hepatobiliary disease and the presence of any extrahepatic conditions that may be of
­relevance or directly contributing to the generation of
secondary hepatopathies. In some situations, imaging
may allow direct identification of the specific cause of
the hepatobiliary disease, for example congenital PSS,
although more typically it adds pieces to the overall clinical picture being built up for a given case. In some situations, prognostic information may be contributed, for
example the finding of a very nodular and irregular liver
in a dog suspected to have cirrhosis.
Abdominal ultrasound is particularly useful in guiding the approach to jaundiced patients, as outlined
earlier, and the identification of biliary tract abnormalities such as biliary mucoceles or cholecystitis. It
can also be ­helpful to establish if hepatic lesions are
localized or generalized within the parenchyma and to
provide guidance in gaining targeted biopsies or bile
samples as indicated. Further detail on imaging in the
investigation of hepatobiliary disease is covered in
Chapter 61.

653

VetBooks.ir

Table 60.1 Typical examples of use of pattern recognition in clinical pathology for canine liver disease
ALT

Acute hepatitis/ Rapid ++ to +++
hepatic necrosis

ALP

Bilirubin

Serum bile acids

Ammonia

Slower, + to ++

N to +++ with the
latter in severe cases

N to +++ depending
on overall severity

N
N to ++
depending on
overall severity

Glucose

Other

May be low with
fulminant disease

N to ++ but
insensitive

Usually N
N early in disease. More
likely to decrease with
later disease and often
poor prognostic indicator

+ to +++
More sensitive than
bilirubin

N to ++
Latter occurs
late in disease
process

Reduced

Hypoglycemia with May have low serum
urea. May see
end‐stage disease.
poikilocytes
Poor prognostic
indicator

N

Fasting samples may
be N to ++
Postprandial samples
typically ++ to +++

+ to +++
Postprandial
sampling
increases
sensitivity

Frequently reduced

May be low

Microcytosis frequent
finding in dogs.
Ammonium biurate
crystaluria common

+++

++ to +++

Increased but
measurement not
indicated with
jaundice

N

N

N

Hypercholesterolemia

N to ++
The latter
occurring with
chronicity

+ to ++

N

N
N
May see mild
increase if significant
cholestasis

N

N

N to ++

N to ++

May see jaundice if
biliary carcinoma.
Other tumor types
infrequently cause
jaundice

N most commonly
but may be +

Most
commonly N

Most commonly N

Occasionally
hypoglycemia with
large hepatomas

May see
hypercalcemia with
lymphoma

Usually N
but + to ++ possible
with vacuolar
hepatopathy

Usually N

N

May also have mild
hyperglycemia

May also be
hypercholesterolemia

N

N

N

N

Chronic
hepatitis

Persistent + to ++
Persistent + to
++ possible. May May fluctuate over time
fluctuate over
time

N to ++ possible but N to ++
the latter only occurs
with late‐stage
disease

Cirrhosis

N to ++

N to ++

N to +++ increased
with disease
progression

Congenital
portosystemic
shunts

N or +

N or +

Biliary tract
obstruction

N to ++
The latter
occurring with
chronicity

Nonobstructed
biliary tract
disease
Hepatic
neoplasia

Glucocorticoids + to ++ typically.
Marked
interindividual
variation
Benign nodular
hyperplasia

Albumin

N
+ to ++ Marked
interindividual variation.
Typically
disproportionate increase
in ALP compared to ALT

Usually N or
+ to +++
minimal increase

N

N Within the reference interval.
+ Mildly increased.
++ Moderately increased.
+++ Markedly increased.
Scottish terriers and Siberian huskies are noted to have elevated ALP activities compared to the general reference interval for all breeds.
ALP, alkaline phosphatase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase.

May see poikilocytes.
One report 44%
inflammatory
leukogram

VetBooks.ir

60 Approach to the Patient with Liver Disease

Cytologic and Histopathologic Evaluation
in Liver Disease
The results gained from diagnostic imaging and clinical
pathology testing do not typically provide a definitive
diagnosis in patients with liver disease, except in cases
such as CPSS. The gold standard for diagnosis in these
patients is usually histopathologic evaluation of a liver
biopsy. The liver biopsy can provide a definitive diagnosis in some situations, for example neoplasia. In other
cases, while a specific diagnosis may not be made, the
biopsy provides important information about the pathologic reaction pattern observed, including the location of
lesions, cell types involved, and the chronicity of the
changes. This information is invaluable in guiding therapeutic intervention and providing prognostic information. In addition, follow‐up biopsies offer an important
guide to the clinician when assessing the response to
therapy. Cytologic evaluation of samples may be considered in some situations and is discussed below. In general, liver histopathology offers significant diagnostic
advantages over cytologic samples.
Cytologic Evaluation

It is possible to gain cytologic samples from liver patients
by performing percutaneous ultrasound‐guided fine
needle aspiration of liver parenchyma or bile by cholecystocentesis. Percutaneous aspiration of ascitic fluid
can also provide useful information. These techniques
are minimally invasive and are associated with a low risk
of complications. The clinician should exercise caution
when approaching patients with hemostatic disorders,
although the risk is far less with a fine needle aspiration
compared to liver biopsy.
In general, the indications for fine needle aspirates of
hepatic parenchyma are the same as those outlined later
for liver biopsy. However, the main disadvantage of fine
needle aspirates and cytologic evaluation is the limited
diagnostic accuracy of this approach. The sample size
gained provides a limited number of cells to evaluate,
hemodilution may cloud interpretation and in addition,
no morphologic information about the lesion is provided, as it is with histopathology.
Studies that have compared results gained with fine
needle aspiration and histopathology have generally
shown poor concordance rates. One study evaluated
56 dogs and 41 cats and showed agreement between fine
needle aspirates and histopathology in approximately
30% of dogs and 50% of cats. The greatest agreement was
seen with vacuolar hepatopathies, largely accounting for
the higher accuracy in cats. However, this category also
had a high rate of misdiagnosis as the primary underlying lesion was missed on cytologic examination in many
cases. Since hepatic lipidosis in cats is frequently a sequel

to an underlying disease rather than a primary diagnosis,
this would place important limitations on cytology as a
sole means of diagnosis. With diffuse or focal neoplastic
disease, aspirates can prove useful; for example, a diagnosis of lymphoma may alleviate the need for a biopsy.
However, this is not the case in all situations; the
­differentiation of nodular hyperplasia and hepatoma is
not possible cytologically. In addition, the performance
for canine inflammatory liver diseases is generally poor.
This relates to both the importance of liver architecture
in the categorization of the diagnosis (e.g., chronic
­hepatitis versus cirrhosis) and the chances of missing
inflammatory cells where there are areas of fibrosis.
Occasionally, infectious agents such as histoplasmosis
can be diagnosed by fine needle aspiration.
Overall, the clinician must be aware of the limitations
of fine needle aspirates of liver parenchyma and regard
them more as a contributor of information rather than
providing a definitive diagnosis in most situations. The
main advantages are the safety aspects in high‐risk
patients and the general requirement for only limited
sedation. They can also be performed quickly, contributing to patient planning and even a final diagnosis in some
cases.
Cytologic evaluation of ascitic fluid in combination
with analysis of the total protein content and cell count
allows determination of the nature of the ascites, for
example whether it is a transudate, modified transudate
or exudate. In general, accurate categorization of the
ascites aids in diagnostic planning by narrowing
down the potential differentials considered in a case. For
example, demonstration of an exudate with a bilirubin
concentration greater than twice that of the serum would
suggest bile peritonitis and should prompt surgical intervention. More frequently with liver disease, a modified
transudate is obtained, resulting from portal hypertension and increased hepatic lymph leakage.
Bile cytology can also provide important information
where clinical signs are suggestive of cholestasis or gallbladder abnormalities are detected ultrasonographically.
These samples can be gained by cholecystocentesis
either percutaneously by ultrasound guidance or directly
during laparoscopy or laparotomy. The finding of bacterbilia and/or neutrophils within the bile supports a diagnosis of bacterial cholecystitis, or cholangitis if there is
histopathologic evidence to support hepatic changes. In
addition to cytologic evaluation, anaerobic and aerobic
bacteriologic culture of bile should be performed. In the
author’s experience, bacteria are evident within bile far
more frequently than inflammatory cells and occasionally provide evidence of a bacterial etiology in patients
where bile culture proves negative due to antibiotic
administration. In other patients, bacterial culture may
be positive in the absence of any cytologic abnormalities.

655

VetBooks.ir

656

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

In general, bacteriologic culture of bile yields far more
positive results than culture of liver parenchyma.
Histopathologic Evaluation
Indications

As discussed earlier, the laboratory tests for liver disease
rarely identify a specific etiology. Having employed clinical pathology and ultrasonography as diagnostic tests to
identify potential liver disease, evaluation of a liver
biopsy aids the provision of a diagnosis and prognosis
and in guidance of therapeutic intervention. In general, a
liver biopsy is indicated in the following circumstances.
Asymptomatic patients with persistent, serial elevations in liver enzyme activities.
●● Asymptomatic patients with abnormal hepatic function tests (e.g., fasting serum bile acid or postprandial
serum bile acid).
●● Where hepatic parenchymal abnormalities are identified ultrasonographically.
●● Where there is unexplained hepatomegaly.
●● To assess response to therapeutic intervention.
●● Evaluation of animals with potential breed‐specific
hepatopathies.
●● Any animal with progressive signs of liver disease.
●●

It is important to recognise the potential for the occurrence of liver enzyme elevation and secondary “reactive”
hepatopathies as a result of extrahepatic causes.
Consideration of and, if appropriate, evaluation for the
presence of potential extrahepatic causes, such as hyperadrenocorticism in dogs, hyperthyroidism in cats and
gastrointestinal or pancreatic disease, is important
before pursuing a liver biopsy, particularly where only
liver enzyme elevation is noted on a biochemistry panel.
The consideration of more than one liver enzyme activity, evaluation of results on more than one occasion and
performing a liver function test, such as pre‐ and postprandial bile acids, can be helpful to clarify the situation
where there is any doubt.
Prebiopsy Considerations

When planning liver biopsy, there are several important
factors to consider, including risk to the patient and the
type of biopsy procedure to be used. The main types of
biopsy approaches available are ultrasound‐guided needle biopsy, laparoscopic biopsy, and surgical biopsy. The
most important potential complications of liver biopsy
are hemorrhage, trauma to adjacent organs, and infection, the relative risks of which vary with the technique
used and are discussed further later.
It is important to evaluate the overall clinical stability
of a patient and hemostatic function prior to obtaining a
liver biopsy. The circulatory status and potential for
hemorrhage should be considered in addition to how

well the animal will tolerate sedation or general anesthesia. The latter is particularly a consideration in patients
with signs of HE where medical management to stabilize
the patient prior to more invasive procedures is often
necessary. A minimum database to screen hemostatic
function should include a platelet count, prothrombin
time (PT), and partial thromboplastin time (PTT). The
measurement of buccal mucosal bleeding time (after
establishing a normal platelet count on a blood smear) is
also recommended due to some reports of increased
complications due to primary hemostatic abnormalities
(platelet dysfunction) rather than secondary hemostatic
(coagulation factor) abnormalities. Measurement of
fibrinogen along with fibrin degradation products (FDPs)
and D‐dimers to assess for increased fibrinolysis might
also be considered. However, it should be noted that
there is often poor correlation between coagulation
parameters and major complications at liver biopsy.
Although there is little veterinary literature published in
the area, one study suggested that a platelet count below
80 × 109/L, a PTT more than 1.5 times the reference
interval in cats and a PT above the reference interval in
dogs were all associated with an increased risk of minor
complications in animals undergoing ultrasound‐guided
needle biopsies.
Some clinicians suggest administration of vitamin K 24
hours prior to biopsy in all cases. It is certainly appropriate to treat any patients with prolonged coagulation
screens, as administration has been shown to improve
clotting times in many patients. The administration of
vitamin K to all hyperbilirubinemic patients, particularly
cats, is probably prudent in view of the role of bile in the
adsorption of fat‐soluble vitamins and the insensitivity
of PT and PTT in detecting bleeding diatheses. The use
of fresh‐frozen plasma to deliver coagulation factors to
patients with mildly increased PT and PTT is also an
option. Following a liver biopsy, it is essential that
patients are closely monitored over at least 12 hours for
clinical signs of postbiopsy hemorrhage. Evaluation of
heart rate, mucous membrane color, abdominal size, and
mentation is important. Measurement of total protein
and packed cell volume does not provide useful information when monitoring for acute hemorrhage.
Ultrasound‐Guided Biopsy

Ultrasound‐guided biopsies involve the use of a cutting‐
type needle which is ideally automated or semiautomated. These are spring‐loaded needles similar to the
manual Tru‐cut style and help when coordinating operation of the ultrasound probe with one hand and the
biopsy gun with the other. The fully automated devices
initially fire the inner part of the needle containing the
biopsy channel and then the outer cutting device rapidly
afterwards. The semiautomated ones allow the operator

VetBooks.ir

60 Approach to the Patient with Liver Disease

to position the inner part of the needle and then fire the
outer section. There are advantages to each type but the
semi-automated ones probably offer greater accuracy in
positioning the needle for more precise sampling. There
are reports of increased risk of fatal complications when
using the fully automated Tru‐cut biopsy needle in cats
so its use in this species is not recommended.
The advantages of ultrasound‐guided biopsy are the
less invasive nature of the procedure compared to laparotomy and the need for sedation rather than general
anesthesia in most patients. Multiple sites may be sampled along with the additional advantage of targeting
potentially abnormal areas identified ultrasonographically. The relatively low cost to the owner and reduced
recovery times are also beneficial. However, there are
significant limitations to the technique. The risk of hemorrhage is important and is greater with this technique
than with laparotomy or laparoscopy where there is
more scope for both the detection of hemorrhage and
intervention where necessary. Large‐volume ascites is a
contraindication for this type of biopsy technique as it
may increase the risk of significant hemorrhage.
Microhepatica is also a contraindication due to the risk
of inadvertent damage to other tissues.
Another important limitation of Tru‐cut style biopsies is the small sample size and hence the diagnostic
accuracy of samples gained. A study looking at biopsy
samples from 98 dogs and 26 cats compared the results
gained by three different pathologists evaluating two
needle biopsies (18 gauge automated string‐triggered
needle) and a wedge biopsy from the same animal. All
three pathologists agreed on the morphologic diagnosis
for a given patient 44% of the time using needle biopsies
and 65% of the time when relying on evaluation of the
wedge biopsies. Overall, the results gained from the
needle biopsies concurred with those gained from
the wedge biopsies in only 47% of dogs and 50% of cats.
The discordance rate increased still further when
patients with inflammatory or vascular disease or those
with significant fibrosis were considered separately.
The use of a 14 or 16 gauge needle rather than an 18
gauge needle is likely to increase the accuracy of diagnosis by increasing the average number of portal triads
sampled. However, the risk of hemorrhage is increased
with increased needle size. The use of a 16 gauge needle
for dogs and 18 gauge for cats is often most practical,
taking a larger number of needle biopsies (3–5) from
multiple sites so that the risk of missing a lesion due to
patchy distribution or small sample size is further
reduced. Despite this approach, with the ultrasound‐
guided approach there is often a tendency to biopsy a
more limited number of liver lobes than with surgical
approaches due to the limitations of access and ease of
imaging.

Surgical Biopsy

A wedge biopsy gained at laparotomy is another method
for obtaining a liver biopsy. This may be performed by
performing a random biopsy from the edge of a liver lobe
using a guillotining suture or in a more directed way in an
abnormal area using transfixing ligatures or a biopsy
punch (see surgical texts for more detailed information
about biopsy method). This approach offers the advantage
of the clinician being able to grossly examine the liver and
extrahepatic biliary tract along with other intraabdominal
organs that may impact the liver, for example the pancreas
and duodenum. There is also the option to biopsy other
organs and gain bile samples for cytology and culture.
Multiple, large biopsies may then be taken from areas the
clinician identifies to be abnormal, potentially finding
smaller lesions that may not have been apparent at ultrasound. This significantly reduces the problems of sampling error and allows samples to be gained from multiple
liver lobes. This approach is not affected by liver size and
allows attention to hemostasis with use of direct manual
pressure and/or topical hemostatic agents (e.g., Gelfoam®).
The main disadvantages of surgical biopsies are the more
invasive nature of the procedure, the increased recovery
time, and requirement for general anesthesia. The cost to
the owner is also significant.
Laparoscopic Biopsy

Laparoscopic biopsy of the liver affords many of the
advantages of surgical liver biopsies but is far less invasive
and allows faster patient recovery. The clinician is able to
grossly inspect the entire liver and extrahepatic biliary system, again taking bile samples as indicated. Surrounding
structures can also be examined and in some cases biopsied, although the latter is more straightforward with laparotomy. The biopsy samples are taken using specially
designed forceps and can be taken easily from multiple
regions with clear visualization allowing attention to
hemostasis. As with laparotomy, local pressure, hemostatic agents or electrocautery may be employed to limit
any hemorrhage. The sample size gained is good, again
reducing problems with sampling error. The main disadvantages of laparoscopy are the cost of equipment and the
need for significant training. As with surgery, there is a
need for general anesthesia and the cost is higher than
ultrasound‐guided sampling. A recent retrospective paper
showed low complication rates, although potential complications, other than hemorrhage, include air embolism,
damage to viscera with trocar placement and the potential
for seeding of neoplastic cells through port sites. The latter would also be a potential complication with needle
biopsies. Approximately 4% of cases in this study required
conversion to a laparotomy.
Overall, there are significant advantages provided
by surgical or laparoscopic biopsies and these are the

657

VetBooks.ir

658

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

preferred choice of the author if the pet owner is willing
to take this approach. When approaching cases with
jaundice, it is important to utilize clinical pathology findings in combination with ultrasound to try to establish if
jaundice is hepatic or posthepatic in origin (having
excluded prehepatic – see earlier). If extrahepatic bile
duct obstruction is suspected, laparotomy and laparoscopy allow direct visualization of the extrahepatic biliary
system and local organs, evaluation of patency of the bile
duct, bile sampling and, if necessary, cholecystectomy.
Surgical intervention, such as biliary diversion or resection of a mass, is also possible with a laparotomy.
Ultrasound‐guided liver biopsy should be avoided in this
situation due to risks of rupture to the biliary tree. The
author still prefers the surgical or laparoscopic approach
even in cases of suspected intrahepatic jaundice due to
the advantages offered in examining and sampling the
gallbladder and local organs. Ultrasound has been shown
to be insensitive in diagnosing gallbladder rupture in
dogs with both gallbladder mucoceles and cholecystitis.
In addition, the sensitivity of ultrasound for detection of
cholecystitis is not 100%. In view of this, direct evaluation can be useful.
In acute cases where ultrasound is suggestive of pancreatitis, surgical intervention should be avoided while
initial symptomatic management is evaluated. Many
such cases will improve without further intervention and
the attendant risks of anesthesia and reduced pancreatic
perfusion. Only if the jaundice persists despite this management is surgery indicated.
Liver Histopathology

There are a variety of additional stains that can be used
along with the standard hematoxylin and eosin for further evaluation of liver histopathology. When a clinician
performs a liver biopsy, they should be ready to work
with the pathologist reading the biopsy. Providing a clear

clinical history is imperative. Understanding that the
biopsy represents only a small fraction of the overall liver
is key. The clinician should always relate the information
gained to the patient’s clinical picture and bloodwork,
remembering that there is the possibility of significant
sampling error, as discussed in the sections above. The
biopsy results should be used to guide the treatment by
defining the disease processes noted within the sample
(e.g., inflammation, vacuolation) rather than necessarily
providing a definitive diagnosis.
In breeds in which copper‐associated hepatopathies
are known to occur, the measurement of hepatic copper
is important. Ideally semiquantitative copper staining of
biopsy samples and quantitative copper analysis of tissue
should both be performed. The latter requires adequate
sample size, which typically entails a wedge biopsy.
Information for individual cases is probably best discussed with the pathologist involved.

­Conclusion
Patients with hepatobiliary disease pose many diagnostic
challenges to the clinician. The vast array of liver functions and its tremendous functional reserve mean that
patients with significant disease can present in very
diverse guises and often very late in the overall disease
process. The challenge for the clinician is to become adept
at identifying patients with liver disease early on, when
they may have vague or minimal clinical signs, as these
patients are the ones more likely to benefit from treatment. Diagnostic tests, such as clinical pathology, rarely
offer a definitive diagnosis in patients with liver disease.
Instead, they should be used to build up an overall picture
guiding a rational approach to the patient. A liver biopsy is
often necessary, providing the most accurate indication of
the underlying disease process, severity, and prognosis.

­Further Reading
Bexfield N, Buxton R, Vicek T, et al. Breed, age and gender
distribution of dogs with chronic hepatitis in the United
Kingdom. Vet J 2012; 193: 124–8.
Buob S, Johnston A, Webster C. Portal hypertension:
pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment. J Vet Intern
Med 2011; 25: 169–86.
Dircks B, Nolte I, Mischke R. Haemostatic abnormalities in
cats with naturally occurring liver diseases. Vet J 2012;
193: 103–8.

Poldervaart J, Favier R, Penning L, et al. Primary hepatitis
in dogs: a retrospective review (2002‐2006). J Vet Intern
Med 2009; 23: 72–80.
Prins M, Schellens C, van Leeuwen M, et al. Coagulation
disorders in dogs with hepatic disease. Vet J 2010;
185: 163–8.

VetBooks.ir

659

61
Imaging in Hepatobiliary Disease
Esther Barrett, MA, VetMB, DVDI, DECVDI, MRCVSt
Wales and West Imaging, Chepstow, UK

The aim of diagnostic imaging in hepatobiliary disease is
to provide information about the structure and, to a certain extent, the function of the hepatobiliary system. In
common with the diagnostic imaging of all other organ
systems, the imaging findings are rarely specific for a single disease process and it is not possible to exclude disease on the basis of apparently normal imaging findings.
Hepatobiliary imaging should therefore be considered
not as an isolated process but as an important part of the
overall diagnostic work‐up, with the imaging findings
always interpreted in the light of all the other available
information (patient history, findings on physical examination, results of laboratory investigations, etc.).
Radiography and ultrasonography are the techniques
most commonly used in the diagnostic imaging of the
hepatobiliary system. Although much less widely available, scintigraphy (nuclear medicine) is also a well‐established hepatobiliary imaging technique, useful in
providing functional as well as anatomic information.
More recently, the advanced cross‐sectional imaging
techniques of computed tomography (CT) and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) have become increasingly useful, especially in the anatomic mapping of complicated
vascular anomalies and in the evaluation of, and potential surgical planning for, patients with liver masses.

­Classification of Hepatobiliary Disease
In 2006, the WSAVA published the outcome of its hepatic
standardization project, an initiative started in July 2000
with the aim of describing universally accepted standards and criteria for the diagnosis of all known liver diseases of dogs and cats. In establishing the recommended
classification of different hepatobiliary diseases, ultrasonographic findings were considered an important feature, alongside clinical pathologic and histologic findings.

As a result of this work, four main groups of liver disease
have been established: parenchymal disorders, neoplastic disease, biliary tract disorders, and vascular disorders. In this chapter, the WSAVA classification system is
used as a basis for describing the imaging features of
commonly encountered hepatobiliary diseases.

­Normal Hepatobiliary Anatomy
The canine and feline liver is the largest soft tissue organ
in the abdomen and is divided by deep fissures into left
and right, quadrate and caudate lobes. The left and right
hepatic lobes are further divided into lateral and medial
sublobes. The liver is located almost completely within
the costal arch, with a convex cranial surface lying immediately adjacent to the diaphragm and an irregularly concave caudal surface lying in contact with the stomach,
pancreas, duodenum, and right kidney. On the ventral
aspect of the liver, the proximal aspect of the fetal falciform ligament usually remains as an irregular fat‐filled
fold (falciform fat).
The Biliary System
The canine gallbladder is typically pear shaped and lies
between the quadrate and right medial lobes. The feline
gallbladder, which is sometimes folded or bilobed, usually lies between two parts of the right medial lobe. The
common bile duct is formed by the confluence of the
cystic duct (from the gallbladder) with the hepatic duct/s
(directly from the liver). The common bile duct leaves
the liver at the porta hepatis, where it lies ventral to the
hepatic arteries and the hepatic portal vein, and enters
the proximal duodenum at the major duodenal papilla.
In cats, the pancreatic duct usually joins the common
bile duct before emptying via the major duodenal papilla
into the proximal duodenum. In dogs, although both the

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

660

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

pancreatic duct and common bile ducts empty at the
major duodenal papilla, they usually remain separate; an
additional accessory pancreatic duct empties further
­distally, via the minor duodenal papilla.

Radiologic Evaluation

Hepatic Vasculature

Normal Findings

The liver is unique in having a dual blood supply. The
proper hepatic arteries, which arise from the abdominal
aorta via the celiac artery and enter the liver at the porta
hepatis, supply approximately one‐fifth of the blood
­supply. The remaining four‐fifths of the blood supply is
provided by the hepatic portal vein. The portal vein
arises in the midabdomen, where it is formed by the
­confluence of the larger cranial mesenteric and smaller
­caudal mesenteric veins. It is joined by the splenic vein
and gastroduodenal vein, before entering the porta hepatis, where it lies ventral to the hepatic arteries and dorsal
to the ­common bile duct. On entering the liver, the portal vein divides into a smaller right portal branch, which
arborizes into the right medial and lateral lobes, and a
larger left portal branch, which arborizes throughout the
remaining liver. Venous drainage from the liver is
through several (usually three) short hepatic veins and
multiple tiny tributaries, which empty into the caudal
vena cava as it crosses the liver on the right dorsal aspect
of the midline.
Lymphatic Drainage
Lymphatic vessels from the hepatic parenchyma and the
gallbladder anastomose and drain together into the
hepatic and splenic lymph nodes. Variable numbers (typically between one and five) of hepatic lymph nodes lie to
the right and left of the hepatic portal vein, just caudal to
the porta hepatis, and receive lymphatic drainage from
the liver, stomach, duodenum, and pancreas. The splenic
nodes are located along the course of the splenic artery
and vein and receive lymphatic drainage from the esophagus, stomach, pancreas, spleen, omentum, and diaphragm, as well as the liver. Together with the gastric
lymph nodes, which drain the liver mesentery, and the
pancreaticoduodenal lymph nodes, the hepatic and
splenic lymph nodes form the celiac lymph center.

­Hepatobiliary Radiography
Radiographic Technique
A minimum of two orthogonal views, a ventrodorsal and
either a right or left lateral recumbent view, is recommended for evaluation of the liver. Good radiographic
technique is essential in order to obtain images of high
diagnostic quality.

The radiologic assessment of the hepatobiliary system
relies on the logical evaluation of liver position, size,
shape, opacity, and margination.
The normal liver is of homogenous soft tissue opacity,
merging with the soft tissue opacities of the diaphragm
and gallbladder to form the “hepatic silhouette.” On a lateral view (Figure 61.1a), the hepatic silhouette is approximately triangular in shape, with a sharply pointed
caudoventral angle.
The liver lies within the cranial abdomen, immediately
caudal to the diaphragm, with the right kidney and stomach lying against its caudal border. The “stomach axis” is
an imaginary line running from the fundus to the pyloric
antrum of the stomach. This axis, which is most easily
recognized when a small amount of gas is present in the
stomach lumen, provides a useful reference point for
evaluating liver size. In most dogs and cats, the liver is
almost entirely contained within the costal arch, and the
gastric axis lies approximately parallel to the ribs; however, normal variations, both in the position of the caudoventral hepatic angle with respect to the costal arch
and in the orientation of the gastric axis, may be seen
between different dog breeds and ages. Deep‐chested
dogs typically have a relatively cranially located liver,
with a more upright gastric axis, while the liver of barrel‐chested dogs and puppies tends to extend further
caudally and may protrude beyond the costal arch,
resulting in caudal displacement and anticlockwise rotation of the gastric axis.
The caudoventral angle and ventral border of the liver
are often highlighted against the relative radiolucency of
the adjacent falciform fat on a lateral abdominal radiograph; this provides a clearly defined ventral margin,
especially in cats, where the gallbladder is occasionally
identified as a soft tissue bulge along the ventral hepatic
border. The position of the cranial and caudal hepatic
margins is inferred from the location of the diaphragm
and stomach respectively. Dorsally, the caudate lobe of
the liver lies adjacent to the right kidney; in most dogs,
these two soft tissue structures merge into a single soft
tissue opacity, and the caudodorsal margin of the liver
cannot be seen. Cats typically have a larger amount of
retroperitoneal fat, usually separating the caudodorsal
liver from the right kidney and allowing the two structures to be identified separately.
The hepatic silhouette is less easily appreciated on a
ventrodorsal radiograph (Figure 61.1a); while the position of the cranial margin is demarcated by the location
of the diaphragm, the caudal margins are poorly defined
and can only be inferred from the location of the
stomach.

VetBooks.ir

61 Imaging in Hepatobiliary Disease

(a)

(b)

Figure 61.1 (a) Right lateral recumbent radiograph of a normal cat’s abdomen.
The sharply angled caudoventral margin (blue arrow) and ventral border of the
liver are highlighted by the adjacent falciform fat (pink arrow). The stomach axis
(green arrow) is highlighted by a small amount of gas within the stomach lumen
and lies in a normal position, approximately parallel to the ribs. (b) Ventrodorsal
radiograph of a normal cat’s abdomen. The location of the cranial hepatic margin
is demarcated by the location of the diaphragm (blue arrows). The caudal hepatic
margin is poorly defined (pink arrows) and inferred by the position of the stomach
(green arrow). Source: Courtesy of University of Liverpool.

In the dog, the caudal extent of the liver on the ventrodorsal view is similar on right and left sides; caudal to the
liver, the stomach lies approximately perpendicular to
the spine, with the fundus located on the left, the lesser
curvature centrally and the pylorus and cranial duodenal
flexure on the right. In the cat, the liver extends further
caudally on the right, with the empty feline stomach
located entirely on the left and the pylorus located
approximately on the midline.
Changes in Position

Displacement of the liver from its normal subcostal position in the cranial abdomen is almost always due to
abnormalities of the adjacent organs and structures
rather than primary hepatobiliary pathology. Examples
include the cranial displacement of the liver through a
ruptured diaphragm and the caudal displacement of the
liver due to increased thoracic volume.
Changes in Liver Size and Shape

Generalized hepatomegaly (Figure 61.2) is an increase in
overall liver size, recognized on a lateral radiograph as
caudal extension, and usually rounding, of the caudoventral hepatic margin beyond the costal arch, together with
caudal displacement and anticlockwise rotation of the
gastric axis.

Localized hepatomegaly (Figure 61.3) is usually more
challenging to identify and in some cases may be difficult
to differentiate from diffuse hepatic enlargement.
Lesions bulging from the surface of the liver will cause
distortion of the normally smooth hepatic margins and
are most easily recognized where they bulge from the ventral or caudal hepatic surfaces. Asymmetric displacement
of organs caudal to the liver may be seen in patients with
large unilateral lesions: a left‐sided liver mass may cause
caudal displacement of the stomach and spleen, while a
right‐sided mass may cause caudal displacement of the
right kidney, pylorus and proximal duodenum, together
with displacement of the stomach across to the left.
A small liver (microhepatica) (Figure 61.4) is usually
completely contained within the costal arch and is recognized by cranial displacement of the stomach and clockwise rotation of the gastric axis.
An apparently small liver is often a normal finding in
deep‐chested dogs and may be difficult to differentiate
from genuine microhepatica.
Changes in Opacity

Hepatobiliary mineralization is uncommon. Focal or
multifocal mineralized areas are occasionally seen due to
dystrophic mineralization of chronic parenchymal
­disease (see Figure 61.3). Dystrophic mineralization of

661

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

(b)

VetBooks.ir

662

(a)

Figure 61.2 (a) Right lateral radiograph showing the abdomen of a dog with hyperadrenocorticism. An enlarged liver is identified
extending well beyond the costal arch, with marked rounding of the caudoventral margin (blue arrow) and caudal displacement of the
gastric axis (green arrow). Multiple radiopaque calculi are identified within this dog’s urinary bladder (pink arrow). (b) Ventrodorsal
radiograph showing the abdomen of the same dog with hyperadrenocorticism. The liver can be identified as a large soft tissue opacity
occupying the cranial abdomen but the caudal hepatic margin (blue arrows) is poorly defined. The radiopaque calculi remain evident
within the urinary bladder (pink arrow). Source: Courtesy of University of Liverpool.

Figure 61.3 Right lateral recumbent radiography of a dog with
large mass causing localized hepatomegaly. The mass bulges from
the caudal aspect of the liver (blue arrows), displacing and
compressing the stomach caudodorsally (pink arrows). Small
mineralized foci scattered throughout the caudoventral aspect of
the liver are consistent with dystrophic mineralization (green
arrows). Source: Courtesy of University of Liverpool.

Figure 61.4 Right lateral recumbent radiograph of a female
chondrodystrophic dog with microhepatica. A small liver (blue
arrow) is identified with a very upright stomach axis (pink
arrow) and a very cranially located transverse colon (green
arrow). This patient is in poor body condition, with reduced
serosal detail due to a lack of mesenteric fat. Source: Courtesy
of University of Bristol.

VetBooks.ir

61 Imaging in Hepatobiliary Disease

the gallbladder wall may be recognized as fine curvilinear mineralization and choleliths are typically seen as
multiple small mineralized opacities superimposed on
the right cranioventral liver. Branching mineralization is
occasionally recognized as an apparently incidental finding in older terrier dogs. The identification of gas opacity
within the liver is even less common but may be seen as
streaks or patches of gas opacity (e.g., in patients with
emphysematous cholecystitis or abscessation) or as
branching lucencies due to gas migrating throughout the
biliary tree (e.g., due to emphysematous cholecystitis) or,
very rarely, throughout the portal venous system.
Changes in Margination

Clearly defined ventral and caudoventral hepatic margins rely on the presence of abdominal fat highlighting
the soft tissue opacity of the liver; loss of this clear
­margination may be seen in patients with ascites and in
very young or emaciated patients.

­Hepatobiliary Ultrasonography
Ultrasound Technique
The location of the liver within the costal arch limits the
availability of acoustic windows from which the liver can
be evaluated without interference from the ribcage. The
use of a transducer with a relatively small contact area is
therefore recommended; a curvilinear or microconvex
probe operating at frequencies of 5–12 MHz is ideal,
with the higher frequencies being used for cats and
small‐to‐medium dogs and the lower frequencies for
large‐ and giant‐breed dogs.
Careful patient preparation is important in optimizing
image quality. An overnight fast is strongly recommended, as the presence of gas and ingesta within the
stomach lumen often reflects and/or attenuates the
sound waves, hindering detailed examination. Although
not always necessary, sedation will usually facilitate an
easier and more thorough examination, especially in
deep‐chested or tense patients who may resent the firm
pressure of an ultrasound probe around their ribcage. A
clipped area extending cranially to the level of the xiphisternum and extending dorsally two‐thirds of the way up
the abdominal wall on either side is required, together
with the generous application and reapplication of ultrasound gel to optimize acoustic transmission.
The liver is fixed within the costal arch by a number of
ligamentous attachments. This fixed location facilitates a
systematic approach to the ultrasound examination. In
cats and small‐to‐medium dogs, it is often possible to
examine the entire liver from a subcostal window, ­usually
with the patient in right lateral or dorsal recumbency:

the ultrasound probe is placed in the midline just caudal
to the xiphisternum and the ultrasound beam is “swept”
through the liver in both sagittal and transverse planes.
In patients where the liver lies well within the costal margins (typically deep‐chested patients and those with a
small liver), it can be challenging to get a good image
from a subcostal window, and it is often easier to examine each side of the liver by obtaining dorsal and transverse plane images through the adjacent intercostal
spaces. The gallbladder, common bile duct, and caudal
vena cava all lie to the right of midline; for this reason,
evaluation of the biliary tract and screening for possible
portosystemic shunts are often performed with the
transducer positioned on the right side, either just caudal
to the costal arch or within the caudal intercostal spaces.
Recognizing Artifacts
Several artifacts are commonly encountered during
hepatic ultrasound. The “mirror‐image” artifact (Figure 61.5)
is seen as a reflection of the liver beyond the diaphragm,
and is caused by the highly reflective interface between
the liver and lung. “Acoustic enhancement” is caused by
the fact that fluid results in less attenuation of the ultrasound beam than soft tissues, and is recognized as the
tissues deep to a fluid‐filled structure, such as the gallbladder, appearing artificially echogenic relative to the
adjacent tissues.

Figure 61.5 A sagittal plane ultrasound image of a normal canine
liver. The diaphragm is seen as a curved hyperechoic line (blue
arrows) demarcating the cranial hepatic margin. The normal
hepatic parenchyma (pink arrow) is of medium echogenicity with
a coarse but even echotexture. In the near field, the ventral border
of the liver is separated from the coarser appearing falciform fat
(green arrow) by a fine hyperechoic line representing the hepatic
capsule. A “mirror‐image” of the liver is seen beyond the
diaphragm (yellow arrow).

663

VetBooks.ir

664

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

“Acoustic shadowing” occurs when highly attenuating
structures (such as bone and calculi) leave the deeper tissues relatively devoid of echoes, appearing artificially
hypoechoic or anechoic. In the normal liver, acoustic
shadowing may be recognized deep to the ribs when
scanning through an intercostal space. “Reverberation” is
recognized as a closely spaced series of parallel hyperechoic bands running across the screen and is caused by
sound waves reverberating between the transducer and a
very reflective gas interface. When examining the liver,
this artifact is most frequently identified deep to a gas‐
filled stomach.
Ultrasound Evaluation
A consistent, logical approach to ultrasound evaluation
is recommended, with an initial assessment being made
of the position, size, and shape of the liver, followed by
more detailed evaluation of the parenchymal structure,
vasculature, biliary system, and lymph nodes.
The position of the liver is most easily evaluated relative to the position of the surrounding organs. The diaphragm should be seen as a curved hyperechoic line on
the cranial aspect of the liver, demarcating the interface
between liver and air‐filled lung, with a mirror‐image
artifact sometimes seen beyond the diaphragm. Caudally,
the normal liver is in contact with the spleen on the left,
the stomach centrally and the right kidney on the right.
Changes in position are more commonly encountered
due to changes in the adjacent organs or structures (e.g.,
rupture of the diaphragm) than due to abnormalities of
the liver itself.
Although radiography is usually more useful in evaluating the overall size and shape of the liver, ­caudal extension of the liver beyond the costal arch and rounding of
the normally sharply pointed caudoventral margin in
patients with generalized hepatomegaly may also be
identified on ultrasound. Localized hepatomegaly is usually easier to identify with ultrasound than with radiography, and is recognized by distortion and/or bulging of
the hepatic margins, often together with a localized
change in the appearance of the hepatic parenchyma.
Parenchymal Structure

The normal liver (see Figure 61.5) is of medium echogenicity with a slightly coarse but uniform echotexture,
interrupted only by the hepatic vasculature and gallbladder. Although the hepatic margins are generally well
defined, the liver lobes are not usually individually identified unless they are separated out by the presence of
free abdominal fluid. The liver is bordered on the ventral
aspect by variable amounts of falciform fat. This fat is
coarser in appearance than the normal hepatic parenchyma and is usually demarcated from the liver by the

fine hyperechoic line of the hepatic capsule; however, in
some patients the demarcation between fat and liver is
not as clear and the falciform fat may be misdiagnosed as
hepatomegaly.
Biliary System

The normal gallbladder is seen just to the right of midline
as a rounded fluid‐filled structure with a thin well‐defined
echogenic wall. Normal gallbladder size varies widely and
is larger in fasted or anorexic patients. The normal gallbladder wall measures up to 1 mm across in cats and up
to 2–3 mm in dogs. Gallbladder sludge is a common and
often incidental finding, recognized as echogenic, nonshadowing material settled dependently within the
­gallbladder lumen. The normal intrahepatic biliary tree
cannot be identified, although in some patients, especially cats, it is possible to identify the normal common
bile duct leaving the porta hepatis ventral to the hepatic
portal vein and entering the proximal duodenum at the
major duodenal papilla.
Vasculature

Normal hepatic arteries are not identified on ultrasound.
The hepatic portal vein enters the liver at the porta hepatis before branching into left and right portal veins and
arborizing throughout the liver. The portal vasculature is
seen as branching, tapering anechoic tubes with characteristically echogenic walls. The caudal cava enters the
liver dorsal to the portal vein, receiving venous drainage
via the hepatic veins as it crosses the right side of the
liver. Unlike the portal veins, the walls of the hepatic
veins cannot usually be seen.
Hepatic Lymph Nodes

The hepatic and splenic lymph nodes receive the majority of lymphatic drainage from the liver and are located
respectively at the porta hepatis and along the course of
the splenic vein. The normal lymph nodes are small,
ovoid, isoechoic to the surrounding mesentery and
­usually not identified. Enlarged lymph nodes are typically hypoechoic and rounded or irregular.

­Imaging Features of Hepatobiliary
Disease
Parenchymal Disease
Conditions classified as parenchymal disorders include
vacuolar diseases (e.g., steroid hepatopathy, hepatic lipidosis), amyloidosis, acute and chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis, hepatic abscessation, granulomatous disease, and
hepatic necrosis (e.g., due to toxic, ischemic or immune‐
mediated disease).

VetBooks.ir

61 Imaging in Hepatobiliary Disease

The radiologic assessment of hepatic parenchymal disease is limited to the evaluation of overall hepatic size
and shape; ultrasound assessment provides additional
valuable information about parenchymal echotexture
and echogenicity and is therefore more sensitive in the
detection of parenchymal abnormalities. Hepatic parenchymal disease may be described as diffuse, focal or
multifocal, depending on the distribution of changes
­
identified on ultrasound.

(a)

Diffuse Parenchymal Disease

Diffuse parenchymal pathology is usually due to generalized infiltrative disease, typically affecting all liver lobes.
Unless the disease process results in a fairly marked
change in liver size and/or shape, the liver may appear
normal on abdominal radiographs. However, in many
cases, changes in hepatic echogenicity and/or echotexture can be identified on ultrasound.
Accurate evaluation of hepatic echogenicity is challenging, as apparent echogenicity is influenced by
machine settings and transducer choice; this makes the
identification of uniform alterations in hepatic echogenicity especially difficult. Comparison of the liver with
adjacent organs imaged at the same depth is useful: the
normal canine liver is coarser than and hypoechoic to
the spleen, but usually isoechoic, or slightly hyperechoic,
to the kidneys. A diffusely hyperechoic liver is likely to
be similar in echogenicity to the spleen, with decreased
contrast between abnormally hyperechoic parenchyma
and the hyperechoic portal vessel walls blurring the normally clear definition of these walls. A diffusely hypoechoic liver may be recognized by the unusual
prominence of the portal vessel walls, which become
highlighted by the abnormally hypoechoic background.
Diffuse parenchymal disease may also be seen as an
abnormally heterogenous liver of mixed hyper‐ and
hypoechogenicity. This can be difficult to differentiate
from a poorly defined multifocal disease process. It is
also important to remember that it is possible for significant infiltrative disease to be present without any obvious abnormalities identified on ultrasound examination.
Due to the nonspecific nature of the imaging findings,
cytologic and/or histopathologic evaluation of tissue
will almost always be required to provide a definitive
diagnosis.
Vacuolar Disease

Vacuolar hepatopathy (Figure 61.6) is most commonly
associated with steroid hepatopathy and hepatic
lipidosis.
The liver typically appears diffusely enlarged, with
caudal extension of a rounded caudoventral hepatic
margin recognized on both abdominal radiography and
ultrasound. On ultrasound, the liver is typically hypere-

(b)

Figure 61.6 Sagittal plane ultrasound images showing the liver of
a patient with vacuolar hepatopathy secondary to
hyperadrenocorticism. (a) Marked rounding of the caudoventral
hepatic margin (blue arrows). (b) Hyperattenuation of the hepatic
parenchyma, with the deeper areas of the liver appearing
unexpectedly hypoechoic (pink arrows).

choic and hyperattenuating, with increased attenuation
of the ultrasound waves as they pass into the patient
resulting in the deeper areas of the liver appearing unexpectedly dark relative to the more superficial areas.
Amyloidosis

Amyloidosis may cause hepatomegaly, with diffusely
heterogenous hepatic parenchyma characterized by
mixed hyperechoic and hypoechoic foci described in
cats. Spontaneous hepatic rupture may occur in patients
with severe amyloidosis, resulting in hemabdomen. This
would be recognized on abdominal radiographs as loss

665

VetBooks.ir

666

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

of normal serosal detail and on ultrasound as the presence of free abdominal fluid. A breed predisposition to
amyloidosis is reported in Shar Peis, Abyssinian and
Siamese cats.
Acute Hepatitis

Although acute hepatitis may cause diffuse hepatic
enlargement, this is often not obvious on abdominal
radiography or ultrasound. A diffusely hypoechoic liver
with unusually prominent portal vessel walls may be
recognized but in some patients the liver may appear
ultrasonographically unremarkable. In cats, there may
be evidence of concurrent biliary tract disease (see
later).
Chronic Hepatitis and Cirrhosis

Chronic hepatitis (Figure 61.7) is usually associated
with a mixed pattern of hepatic fibrosis, inflammation, and hyperplasia; this appears on ultrasound as
heterogenous hepatic parenchyma of mixed
echogenicity.
Cirrhosis is the end‐stage of chronic hepatitis; a
small, irregularly marginated liver may be identified on
both abdominal radiography and ultrasound; extensive
hepatic fibrosis may result in diffusely increased
hepatic echogenicity, often with hypoechoic regenerative nodules scattered throughout the parenchyma and
bulging from the hepatic margins. Portal hypertension
is a common sequel to hepatic fibrosis, resulting in
abdominal ascites and the development of acquired
portosystemic shunts.

Figure 61.7 Sagittal plane ultrasound image showing the liver of
a patient with chronic hepatitis. The liver is small and irregularly
marginated (blue arrows).

Hepatocutaneous Syndrome

Hepatocutaneous syndrome (Figure 61.8), also known as
superficial necrolytic dermatitis, is occasionally seen in
older dogs, where it is associated with ulcerative skin
lesions.
The hepatic parenchymal lesions are seen as multiple
hypoechoic nodules, giving the liver a “honeycomb”
appearance. There are no marked changes in hepatic size
or shape, making this condition impossible to diagnose
from abdominal radiographs.
Focal or Multifocal Parenchymal Disease

Focal or multifocal parenchymal lesions are more easily
recognized than diffuse parenchymal infiltration on
ultrasound examination and are typically seen as areas of
altered echogenicity and/or echotexture that are highlighted by the surrounding normal parenchyma. Large or
peripheral lesions may be identified on abdominal radiographs if they result in localized hepatomegaly or distortion of the hepatic margins. The imaging features
described are not specific and it is not possible to accurately differentiate the different lesions on imaging
appearance alone.
Hepatic Abscesses

Hepatic abscesses are rare in cats and dogs. Although
multiple lesions may be seen, solitary lesions, often at
least 3 cm in diameter, are more common. On ultrasound, the typical appearance is of a rounded or irregular
cavitated lesion, with a relatively echogenic and variably
thick capsule around a hypoechoic central area. There

Figure 61.8 Sagittal plane ultrasound image showing the liver of
a Cavalier King Charles spaniel presented with ulcerative skin
lesions. Multiple poorly defined hypoechoic nodules are seen
throughout the hepatic parenchyma (blue arrows);
hepatocutaneous syndrome was diagnosed from a liver biopsy.

VetBooks.ir

61 Imaging in Hepatobiliary Disease

may be acoustic enhancement deep to fluid content, with
occasional gas bubbles recognized as brightly echogenic
foci with distal reverberation artifact. Mineralization of
the abscess capsule may result in echogenic foci with distal acoustic shadowing. Most hepatic abscesses will not
be radiographically apparent; however, lesions bulging
from the liver surface and lesions with mineralization of
the capsule and/or gas within the abscess cavity may be
identified. Concurrent hepatic lymphadenopathy, abnormally hyperechoic local mesentery, and free abdominal
fluid may be seen in some patients; radiographically,
these features would be recognized as a progressive loss
of serosal detail.
Cystic Lesions

Hepatic cysts are recognized as well‐circumscribed,
single or multiple, uni‐ or multilocular, thin‐walled
­
structures, with anechoic contents and distal acoustic
enhancement. Congenital cystic diseases of the dog and
cat are occasionally seen and may be associated with
polycystic kidney disease. These congenital cysts typically arise from congenital dilation of the intrahepatic
bile ducts, and strictly speaking should be classified as a
biliary disorder. Differential diagnoses include parasitic
cysts, focal areas of necrosis, and cystic tumors (e.g., biliary cystadenoma). Cystic lesions that do not distort the
hepatic margins will not be recognized on abdominal
radiographs.
Hepatic Granulomas and Hematomas

Hepatic granulomas and hematomas are uncommon.
Granulomas are occasionally identified in association
with Mycobacterium tuberculosis, fungal diseases,
migrating parasites and, in cats, feline infectious peritonitis. They are usually multifocal and typically appear
hyperechoic and well marginated on ultrasound.
Abdominal radiographs are often unremarkable but may
occasionally show evidence of dystrophic mineralization, with hepatomegaly and possible distortion of the
normally smooth hepatic margins seen in patients with
extensive disease. Hematomas may be seen following
trauma or biopsy procedures, typically appearing anechoic or hypoechoic on ultrasound until an echogenic
clot has formed. The subsequent retraction and lysis of
the clot results in a variable pattern of mixed echogenicity whose appearance cannot be differentiated from an
abscess or necrotic tumor.

of serosal detail will be seen on abdominal radiographs
due to the presence of free fluid. Depending on the volume of fluid, it may also be possible to appreciate alteration of the normal hepatic shape.
Neoplastic Disease
The WSAVA classification of neoplastic disorders
includes primary neoplasia, usually arising from the
hepatocytes (hepatocellular adenoma/carcinoma) and/or
the biliary system (e.g. cholangiocellular adenoma/carcinoma), primary vascular neoplasia (most commonly
hemanigosarcoma), diffusely infiltrative hematopoietic
neoplasia (e.g., lymphoma, malignant histiocytosis, and
malignant mastocytosis) and metastatic neoplasia.
Although benign, nodular hyperplasia, commonly seen in
older dogs but less frequently identified in cats, is also
included in the classification of neoplastic disease.
Primary Focal Neoplasia

Primary liver tumors arising from the hepatocytes or the
biliary system are typically seen as focal, or occasionally
multifocal, masses. A wide variety of imaging features
may be recognized and it is not possible to differentiate
between benign and malignant lesions or between tumor
types based on imaging appearance. On ultrasound,
lesions are variably well defined and vary in size, shape,
and echogenicity (Figure 61.9).
Biliary cystadenomas are uncommon benign tumors
of older cats. These lesions, which have a wide range of
possible sizes and may be solitary or multifocal, are characterized by the presence of a variable cystic component
(Figure 61.10).

Liver Lobe Torsion

Liver lobe torsion is a rare cause of acute abdominal pain
and abdominal effusion in the dog. On ultrasound, the
affected lobe is typically seen as a hypoechoic mass,
often surrounded by free fluid, with color Doppler demonstrating reduced or no blood flow into the area. A loss

Figure 61.9 Sagittal plane ultrasound image demonstrating a
well‐defined heterogenous mass in a 10‐year‐old FN DSH (blue
arrows). The cytologic diagnosis was hepatocellular carcinoma.

667

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

Although a wide variety of imaging features may be seen,
the identification of “target lesions,” seen as hypoechoic
nodules with a hyperechoic center, is commonly associated with (but not pathognomonic for) metastasis
(Figure 61.11).
An important differential diagnosis for multifocal nodules is benign nodular hyperplasia. Unless the metastatic
lesions are large enough to cause localized or generalized
hepatomegaly, metastatic hepatic disease is unlikely to
be identified on abdominal radiographs.

VetBooks.ir

668

Benign Nodular Hyperplasia

Figure 61.10 Sagittal plane ultrasound image showing a
multiloculated cystic hepatic lesion diagnosed as a biliary
cystadenoma in a 12‐year‐old FN DSH.

Hepatic hemangiosarcomas often also have a cystic
component and, in cases of rupture, will be accompanied
by the presence of free abdominal fluid. Liver tumors will
only be recognized radiographically where they cause
localized hepatomegaly and/or distortion of the normal
hepatic shape (see Figure 61.3). The oral administration
of barium may be useful in determining the location of
the gastric axis in cases with suspected localized hepatomegaly. Pedunculated liver tumors can be confusing and
may be seen as a cranioventral soft tissue abdominal
mass, which is not obviously connected to the liver. In
patients with tumor rupture and subsequent hemoperitoneum, abdominal radiographs will show loss of serosal
detail.

Benign nodular hyperplasia, also referred to as regenerative nodular hyperplasia, appears on ultrasound as multiple nodules of variable size, shape, echogenicity, and
definition. It is not possible to distinguish between
benign nodular hyperplasia and primary or metastatic
neoplasia from the ultrasound appearance. Mild
­generalized hepatomegaly may occasionally be radiographically apparent in patients with benign nodular
hyperplasia.
Disease of the Biliary System
Important disorders of the biliary tract include cholestasis, due to either primary liver disease or obstruction of
the (usually extrahepatic) biliary tract, and cholangitis
(most commonly neutrophilic or lymphocytic). Diseases
affecting the gallbladder include gallbladder mucoceles
and cholecystitis (frequently seen in cats, sometimes in
association with neutrophilic cholangitis).

Infiltrative Neoplasia

Lymphoma, histiocytic tumors, and mast cell tumors are
typically diffusely infiltrative. On ultrasound, these
tumors are most commonly recognized as diffusely
hypoechoic or heterogenous hepatic parenchyma, or as
multifocal parenchymal nodules or masses. Less
­commonly, the hepatic parenchyma appears diffusely
hyperechoic or, occasionally, ultrasonographically normal. Evaluation of the area around the porta hepatis is
important for the identification of hepatic lymphadenopathy, which is often identified in association with
infiltrative hepatic neoplasia. Diffuse neoplastic infiltration often results in generalized hepatomegaly, which
may be apparent on abdominal radiographs.
Metastatic Neoplasia

Metastatic hepatic disease is most likely to be recognized on ultrasound as multifocal nodules or masses.

Figure 61.11 Sagittal plane ultrasound images showing target
lesions (blue arrows) consistent with metastatic liver disease in a
9‐year‐old JRT with an insulinoma.

VetBooks.ir

61 Imaging in Hepatobiliary Disease

Extrahepatic Cholestasis

Causes of extrahepatic biliary obstruction (EHBO)
include inflammation or neoplasia of the common bile
duct, pancreas or duodenum and obstruction of the duct
lumen by choleliths (choledocholithiasis). Dilation of the
common bile duct (>5 mm in cats and >4 mm in dogs) is
the most consistent ultrasound finding in acute EHBO
(Figure 61.12).
Dilation of the extrahepatic and intrahepatic bile ducts
may be seen in patients with obstruction of at least 5–7
days duration; these dilated ducts are recognized as the
presence of multiple slightly tortuous anechoic tubes
with hyperechoic walls, which do not show any evidence
of flow on Doppler. Dilation of the gallbladder is an
inconsistent finding and the absence of a distended gallbladder does not exclude the possibility of EHBO.
Detailed evaluation of the common bile duct is required
to identify possible causes of obstruction; obstructive
choleliths are most commonly located in the distal common bile duct, highlighted by the dilated bile duct proximal to the obstruction, with an empty bile duct seen
distally. In patients with inflammatory or neoplastic disease, an extraluminal mass may be identified causing
obstruction; however, it is not possible to determine the
nature of the mass (inflammatory or neoplastic) from the
ultrasound appearance. Although mineralized choleliths
may be identified on abdominal radiographs, EHBO will
not be seen.

lymphocytic cholangitis are both commonly diagnosed
in cats, but less frequently reported in dogs. On ultrasound, cholangitis is most commonly recognized as
­diffusely hypoechoic hepatic parenchyma, which highlights the echogenic walls of the portal vasculature
(Figure 61.13).
These changes are nonspecific, and it is not possible to
make a definitive diagnosis or to distinguish between
neutrophilic and lymphocytic disease without tissue
sampling. Cholangitis cannot be diagnosed from abdominal radiographs. Concurrent cholecystitis (see later) is
identified in a significant number of cats and occasionally dogs with cholangitis.
Gallbladder Mucocele

Inflammatory liver disease is classified according to the
histopathologic features of the disease. Neutrophilic and

Gallbladder mucoceles occur in dogs and are caused by
an abnormal accumulation of inspissated mucus and bile
within the gallbladder lumen, leading to progressive
luminal distension and potentially to necrosis and ultimately rupture of the gallbladder wall. Typical mucoceles
have a distinctive ultrasound appearance, described as
“kiwi‐like” or “stellate,” with immobile hyperechoic striations seen radiating from a central point (Figure 61.14).
Variations in the appearance include a “mosaic‐like”
pattern of mixed echogenicity; unlike gallbladder sludge,
which is a common and often incidental finding, the contents of a gallbladder mucocele are immobile and do not
move with gravity when the patient changes position.
Gallbladder wall thickness is variable, although inflammation and/or necrosis may result in wall thickening.
Gallbladder rupture may be recognized as discontinuity
within the gallbladder wall, together with a localized

Figure 61.12 Ultrasound image of a 14‐year‐old MN Siamese
showing moderate dilation (7 mm) of the distal common bile duct
(yellow cursors) just proximal to its termination. The duodenum is
seen in the near field of the image (blue arrows).

Figure 61.13 Sagittal plane ultrasound image showing the liver of
a jaundiced 11‐year‐old MN DSH. The diffusely hypoechoic
hepatic parenchyma highlights the echogenic walls of the portal
vasculature. A histopathologic diagnosis of neutrophilic
cholangitis was made on examination of an ultrasound‐guided
tissue‐core biopsy.

Cholangitis

669

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

VetBooks.ir

670

Figure 61.14 Ultrasound image showing the typical “kiwi‐like”
appearance of a gallbladder mucocele in a 5‐year‐old FN
Chihuahua.

­collection of free fluid and abnormally hyperechoic fat
around the periphery of the gallbladder.
Cholecystitis

Cholecystitis is more commonly identified in cats than
dogs, and is usually associated with bacterial infection.
Typical ultrasound features of acute cholecystitis include
gallbladder wall thickening (Figure 61.15) (>1 mm in
cats, >2–3 mm in dogs), together with thickening of the
wall of the common bile duct.
The thickened gallbladder wall may be diffusely
hyperechoic or may have a layered appearance, with a
hypoechoic central layer sandwiched between hyperechoic layers. Differential diagnoses for gallbladder wall
thickening include acute cholecystitis, edema (e.g., in
patients with hypoalbuminemia or portal hypertension), cystic mucinous hyperplasia and, rarely, neoplasia. Although commonly considered to be an incidental
finding, biliary sludge, sludge balls, and choleliths may
be associated with cholecystitis, especially in cats.
Biliary sludge is recognized as mobile echogenic nonshadowing debris within the gallbladder lumen. Sludge
balls are mobile, rounded, echogenic, nonshadowing
luminal structures composed of thick bile. Choleliths
are seen as hyperechoic foci of variable size, shape, and
number, often casting an acoustic shadow. Ultrasound‐
guided aspiration of bile (cholecystocentesis) is useful in
providing material for bacterial culture in patients with
suspected cholecystitis.
Radiographic abnormalities associated with cholecystitis are unusual; however, choleliths may occasionally be
identified as small mineralized foci in the area of the gallbladder and/or common bile duct and, rarely, patches

Figure 61.15 Ultrasound image showing thickening of the
gallbladder wall (blue arrows) in a 10‐year‐old ME cross‐bred dog
diagnosed with cholecystitis.

and streaks of gas opacity may be seen in patients with
emphysematous cholecystitis.
Hepatic Vascular Disorders
The largest group of hepatic vascular disorders consists
of the circulatory disorders, which are subdivided into
congenital portosystemic shunts, hepatic congestion due
to outflow disturbances, and disorders due to portal
hypertension. Other vascular disorders include peliosis
hepatis and portal vein thrombophlebitis.
Congenital Portosystemic Shunts (CPSS)

Congenital portosystemic shunting occurs due to an
anomalous connection between the portal vasculature
and systemic venous system, which allows blood to
bypass the hepatic sinusoids. CPSS are usually
described according to their location (extrahepatic or
intrahepatic) and can be further classified by their anatomic configuration. Extrahepatic CPSS are most commonly identified in smaller breed dogs and in cats,
while intrahepatic CPSS are most commonly identified
in larger breed dogs. Although studies have demonstrated more than 90% accuracy for experienced operators, the identification of CPSS with ultrasound is
challenging.
In addition to evaluating the liver from the standard
subcostal acoustic window, the use of a high right dorsal

VetBooks.ir

61 Imaging in Hepatobiliary Disease

acoustic window, located just cranial to the right kidney,
with the patient positioned in left lateral recumbency, is
recommended for visualization of the caudal vena cava
(CVC) and the hepatic portal vein (HPV) as they enter
the liver; in most patients with an extrahepatic CPSS,
this window allows identification of the shunting vessel
itself. Subcostal, right dorsal intercostal, and left ventral
intercostal windows are all recommended for evaluation
of the liver in patients with a suspected intrahepatic
CPSS. In anesthetized patients with a very small liver,
positive pressure ventilation may be useful in improving
visualization by displacing the liver caudally. Although
not essential, color and spectral Doppler allow the determination of flow direction, the identification of turbulence and the measurement of hepatic portal velocity,
and are therefore very useful in the ultrasound assessment of patients with suspected CPSS.
The majority of extrahepatic CPSS in dogs originate
from the splenic or left gastric veins and terminate in the
caudal vena cava (usually at the level of the epiploic foramen), the left phrenic vein (at the level of the oesophageal
hiatus) or, less commonly, in the azygos vein. In cats, portocaval shunting via the left gastric vein is most frequently
reported but cats also appear to have a higher incidence
of more unusual shunting loops, which may arise caudal
to the confluence of the mesenteric veins. Regardless of
the precise anatomy, the ultrasound appearance of an
extrahepatic CPSS is usually of a relatively short, dilated
and sometimes tortuous vessel, diverting blood away
from the hepatic portal vein (Figure 61.16).

Figure 61.16 Color Doppler ultrasound image showing an
extrahepatic portocaval shunt (blue arrows) in a 6‐month‐old ME
Bichon × Yorkshire terrier. The blue color indicates that the
direction of blood flow is away from the hepatic portal vein.

Comparison of the diameter of the portal vein at the
porta hepatis with the diameter of the aorta and caudal
vena cava at the same level is very useful; a portal
vein:aortic ratio ≤0.65 is predictive for the presence of an
extrahepatic shunt. Conversely, an extrahepatic shunt is
considered unlikely with a portal vein:aortic ratio >0.8
and a portal vein:caval ratio >0.75.
Intrahepatic CPSS may be classified as left, central or
right divisional. The left divisional shunt, which represents a patent ductus venosus and joins the left portal
branch to the intrahepatic caudal vena cava, is the most
common (Figure 61.17).
Both right and central divisional shunts arise from the
right portal branch; right divisional shunts are long
shunts, whereas the central divisional shunt is usually a
short aneurysm‐like dilation joining the right portal
branch with the intrahepatic caudal vena cava.
Microhepatica is common in dogs with both extrahepatic and intrahepatic CPSS, but is less commonly
reported in cats. Urolithiasis and mild renomegaly are
also fairly common in dogs, but infrequently identified
in cats.
Potential abnormalities identified on survey radiographs of patients with CPSS include microhepatica,
renomegaly, and limited serosal detail due to poor body
condition. In cases with portoazygos shunting, a dilated
azygos vein is occasionally recognized as a soft tissue
band crossing the thorax adjacent to the aorta. Although
hematogenous osteomyelitis of the lumbar vertebrae has
occasionally been reported in patients with CPSS, this is
not a common finding. The uroliths associated with CPSS
are ammonium biurate and are typically radiolucent.

Figure 61.17 Color Doppler ultrasound image showing a left
divisional intrahepatic portocaval shunt in a 6‐month‐old FE
golden retriever. The mosaic pattern of the color Doppler indicates
turbulence at the point that the shunt joins the intrahepatic
caudal vena cava.

671

VetBooks.ir

672

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

Historically, mesenteric portovenography was widely
used for the definitive confirmation of a suspected portosystemic shunt and for the differentiation between intra
and extrahepatic shunts. The most popular technique for
portovenography is the intravenous injection of nonionic iodinated contrast media through a catheter preplaced into a mesenteric vein. This involves a laparotomy
and is an invasive procedure. Alternative and potentially
less invasive, but less commonly used, techniques for
contrast administration include percutaneous ultrasound-guided catheterization of the splenic vein, catheterization of the cranial mesenteric artery via the femoral
artery and transvenous retrograde portography. In many
cases, mesenteric portovenography has been superseded
by contrast Computed Tomographic examination.
However, during surgical occlusion of a shunt, portovenography is still used to verify that the correct vessel has
been occluded, to check that there are no additional
shunting vessels and to assess the degree of portal vascularization post-ligation. Fluoroscopic imaging of the contrast injection provides useful real time information (Fig
61.18): if this is not available, then standard radiographic
views (ideally both lateral and VD views, each exposed at
the end of a separate contrast injection) should be taken.
Hepatic Congestion

Disturbance of the normal venous outflow results in passive hepatic congestion. Causes include right‐sided heart
failure and obstruction or compression of the cranial part

of the caudal vena cava (between the hepatic veins and
right atrium), for example by thrombosis, neoplasia or
inflammation. Ultrasound findings include hepatomegaly,
reduced hepatic echogenicity, dilation of the hepatic veins
and caudal vena cava and, in some cases, the presence of
free abdominal (+/− pleural) fluid. Radiographs may show
hepatomegaly and loss of serosal detail in patients with
ascites, possibly with evidence of a pleural effusion and
cardiomegaly in patients with right‐sided heart failure.
Portal Hypertension

Chronic portal hypertension resulting in the development of portosystemic collaterals (acquired portosystemic shunts) is relatively common in dogs, but rarely
identified in cats. Causes of portal hypertension include
advanced chronic liver disease (cirrhosis), intrahepatic
arterioportal fistulae, congenital hypoplasia of the portal
vein and portal vein obstruction. Ultrasound evaluation
of patients with portal hypertension will typically demonstrate ascites, often with edema of the gallbladder wall
and pancreas. Spectral Doppler is useful in measuring
portal velocity; the identification of reduced flow velocity (from a normal velocity of approximately 17+/5cm/s to <10 cm/s in the dog), and occasionally reversed
portal flow, is very suggestive of portal hypertension.
The portosystemic collaterals open in response to sustained portal hypertension and connect the portal system directly to the systemic circulation. These acquired
shunting vessels can be challenging to identify on ultra-

Figure 61.18 Ventrodorsal intraoperative fluoroscopic image acquired immediately after the administration of nonionic contrast medium
into a mesenteric vein. The contrast highlights a left gastro-azygos extrahepatic portosystemic shunt (blue arrow). Source: Rob White,
School of Veterinary Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham

VetBooks.ir

61 Imaging in Hepatobiliary Disease

sound; in dogs, the opening of splenorenal collaterals,
with enlargement of the left gonadal vein and development of a complicated plexus of vessels adjacent to the
left kidney, has been most commonly documented.
Ultrasound examination may be useful in documenting the cause of portal hypertension. A small, hyperechoic, irregular liver with multiple hypoechoic
regeneration nodules may be identified in patients with
cirrhosis. Intrahepatic arterioportal fistulae are direct
connections between the hepatic arteries and the portal
vessels. These vascular anomalies may be congenital or
acquired and may be seen on ultrasound as distended,
tortuous intrahepatic vessels. The high arterial pressure
results in portal hypertension and dramatic ascites, with
spectral Doppler demonstrating reversed, often pulsatile
flow within an enlarged hepatic portal vein. Congenital
hypoplasia of the hepatic portal vein is thought to affect
both extrahepatic and intrahepatic portal vasculature
and includes the condition of portal vein hypoperfusion
previously referred to as microvascular dysplasia.
Although hypoplasia of the extrahepatic portal vein
may be seen as a reduction in vessel diameter, the lack of
objective measurement criteria makes this difficult to
identify definitively. A small liver may be identified in
patients with mild portal vein hypoplasia; ultrasound
examination is often otherwise unremarkable. However,
evidence of portal hypertension and acquired portosystemic shunting may be identified in patients with more
severe changes. The most common cause of portal vein
obstruction is portal thrombosis, which may occur secondary to hypercoagulability, vascular stasis or damage
to the vascular endothelium (for example, due to local
neoplasia or inflammation). Portal thrombosis is recognized as an intraluminal immobile echogenic structure,
with color Doppler highlighting the thrombus as filling
defects in the normal pattern of flow (Figure 61.19).

Figure 61.19 Color Doppler ultrasound image highlighting a
portal thrombus as a filling defect within the hepatic portal vein
(blue arrows).

Larger thrombi can extend from the extrahepatic portal vein into the portal branches, resulting in portal
hypertension and acquired shunting.
Radiographic examination of patients with portal
hypertension is often unrewarding. Many will have
­evidence of ascites, obscuring the serosal detail of the
abdomen. In patients with chronic liver disease, it may
be possible to identify microhepatica, even in the
presence of ascites, by the cranial displacement and
­
clockwise rotation of the gastric axis.
Peliosis Hepatis

Peliosis hepatis is seen as randomly distributed cystic and
blood‐filled spaces within the liver, thought to be formed
due to either focal hepatocytic necrosis or local obstruction of small portal branches with hepatic atrophy and
subsequent sinusoidal dilation. The condition is rare in
dogs and more commonly identified in older cats. On
ultrasound, the the abnormal sinusoidal dilation may be
seen as multiple cystic lesions that may mimic vascular
tumors, such as hemangioma or hemangiosarcoma.

­Advanced Imaging Techniques
Contrast‐Enhanced Ultrasound
Contrast‐enhanced ultrasound is a non-invasive imaging technique that enables the functional assessment of
organ perfusion patterns. The contrast media consist of
microscopic (2–6 μm) inert gas‐filled microbubbles that
are injected intravenously. When subjected to ultrasound waves, these bubbles respond with a nonlinear
oscillation, generating strong harmonic ­frequencies that
can be detected using specialized transducers and dedicated contrast imaging software. In the liver, two phases
of contrast enhancement may be recognized: the early
phase of enhancement is equivalent to the blood pool
phase and is composed of arterial (wash‐in) and portal
(wash‐out) stages, with the enhancement peaking at the
same time as peak portal blood flow (typically 15–60
seconds in dogs), and disappearing by 150–200 seconds
in most dogs. This early phase allows the detection of
hepatic arteries and small vessels that would not be
apparent with conventional gray‐scale B‐mode imaging.
The late phase is only recognized with contrast media
that are able to leave the blood pool; this phase corresponds to intracellular contrast uptake and enables the
assessment of parenchymal perfusion.
Contrast‐enhanced ultrasound has been demonstrated
as a safe and accurate technique for differentiating
between benign and malignant liver lesions. Malignant
lesions do not have a portal venous supply and are
­perfused only via the hepatic arterial supply. At peak

673

VetBooks.ir

674

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

(portal) early phase enhancement, malignant nodules
therefore appear show hypoenhancement in comparison
to the surrounding liver, while benign nodules typically
show isoenhancement or slight hyperenhancement. A
similar pattern is reported during late‐phase enhancement, with most malignant lesions appearing relatively
hypoechoic.
Nuclear Scintigraphy
Although nuclear scintigraphy is a well‐established imaging technique, its availability is limited by the strict regulation of radiopharmaceuticals. Nuclear medicine is most
widely used as a very sensitive and minimally invasive
technique for the diagnosis of PSS. The best documented
protocol involves the per‐rectal administration of 99mtechnetium pertechnetate (99mTc), which is rapidly absorbed
from the colonic mucosa. The 99mTc subsequently enters
the mesenteric vessels, from where it should pass through
the hepatic portal vein into the hepatic parenchyma before
filtering through the hepatic microcirculation to enter the
hepatic caudal vena cava and then the heart. In a patient
with a PSS, the 99mTc bypasses the liver and is delivered
directly to the heart. Regions of interest (ROIs) drawn
over the heart and liver are used to calculate the shunt
fraction by comparing the intensity of radioactive counts
over the heart with the intensity of counts over the liver.
Shunt fraction
Total heart counts over first 12 seconds
Total heart and liver counts over first 12 seconds
A normal shunt fraction is less than 15%. In dogs with
PSS (extra‐ or intrahepatic), shunt fractions of 80%+ have
been reported; lower shunt fractions (approximately 50%)
have been reported in cats with PSS. Unfortunately, there
does not appear to be a good correlation between the calculated shunt fraction and the physical size of the shunt.
Direct ultrasound‐guided injection of the 99mTc into the
splenic parenchymahas been described as an alternative
to per‐rectal administration; this results in significantly
decreased radiation exposure and provides superior
image quality, in many cases allowing the differentiation
between single congenital and multiple acquired shunts.
Although useful both in confirming the presence of a PSS
and identifying the presence of continued shunting after
an unsuccessful or partial surgical ligation, disadvantages
of nuclear scintigraphy include the lack of specific
­anatomic information (especially with per‐rectal scintigraphy), as well as the potential inconvenience and hazards
of working with radioactive isotopes. Portal vein hypoplasia (microvascular dysplasia) will not be identified
with nuclear scintigraphy.

Following the intravenous administration of the radiopharmaceutical 99mTc‐mebrofenin, hepatobiliary scintigraphy may also used for the evaluation of liver function,
detection of cholestasis and biliary tract obstruction, and
diagnosis of cholecystitis. In the normal patient 99mTc‐
mebrofenin is extracted from the blood pool by the liver,
with peak liver radioactivity observed 6–8 minutes after
injection. The hepatic extraction fraction (HEF) is used as
a measure of hepatocyte function. Following extraction by
the hepatocytes, the radiopharmaceutical is excreted into
the biliary tree with a half‐life of 19 minutes, resulting in
detectable radioactivity in the gallbladder and small intestines within one hour of injection. A prolonged clearance
time indicates extrahepatic biliary obstruction and in dogs
may allow the detection of abnormalities before any ultrasound changes are identified.
Computed Tomography
Computed tomography (CT) is an increasingly widely
available, rapid and noninvasive diagnostic imaging technique that is especially useful in the evaluation of hepatic
vascular abnormalities and hepatic mass lesions.
Multidetector row CT angiography enables very detailed
anatomic evaluation of the hepatic arterial, portal and
venous architecture and should facilitate the identification of both intra‐ and extrahepatic portosystemic
shunts, arterioportal fistulae, and portal vein obstruction. Using three-dimensional reconstructions, it should
be possible to accurately identify and trace the hepatic
­portal vein and its tributaries and to accurately identify
the ­origin and termination of both intra‐ and extrahepatic shunts.
In patients with hepatic masses, CT provides important information about the exact size and extension of a
mass, allows identification of significant vascular
involvement, and facilitates evaluation of the rest of the
abdomen and the thorax for the presence of metastatic
disease; this information is invaluable both in determining the feasibility of surgical resection and in planning
surgical margins. More recently, the use of dynamic contrast CT in dogs has shown potential in the differentiation of benign and malignant hepatic masses.
Disadvantages of CT include its relatively limited availability, the requirement for general anesthesia, and the
relatively high doses of ionizing radiation involved.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Contrast‐enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
usually referred to as magnetic resonance angiography
(MRA), is routinely used in humans for imaging the
­portal venous system. Although the acquisition of good‐
quality images is technically difficult and accurate
interpretation of the images requires experience, this

VetBooks.ir

61 Imaging in Hepatobiliary Disease

technique is being successfully used in dogs and cats and
can provide a rapid and accurate diagnosis with excellent
anatomic resolution. In dogs with liver masses, MR
imaging findings have also been successful in differentiating benign and hepatic lesions.

­Image‐Guided Sampling
Although diagnostic imaging provides useful information,
the imaging features of canine and feline hepatobiliary disease are rarely specific for a single disease process. Despite
the potential offered by newer techniques such as contrast‐enhanced ultrasound, CT and MRI, in most cases it
is still not possible to definitively characterize the underlying disease process or to differentiate benign from malignant disease from the imaging appearance alone.
Obtaining samples of material for cytology and/or histopathology is therefore important in providing additional
information and, in many cases, a definitive diagnosis.
The most commonly used image‐guided sampling
techniques are percutaneous ultrasound‐guided aspiration and tissue‐core biopsy. These well‐established techniques are routinely used in dogs and cats, and are
considered safe and minimally invasive. Fine needle aspiration (FNA) is cheaper, easier and has fewer potential
complications than tissue‐core biopsy. However, cytopathologic (FNA) and histopathologic (core biopsy)
diagnoses from the same tissue do not always agree.
FNAs inevitably result in disruption of the normal structural relationship between cells within a tissue and are
therefore most useful in diagnosing diseases that can be
identified from individual cells (e.g., lymphoma) and in
differentiating between inflammatory, neoplastic, and
degenerative/necrotic change. In conditions where preservation of tissue architecture is more important, for
example vascular disorders and chronic hepatopathies, a
tissue‐core biopsy is more likely to provide useful diagnostic information.

When obtaining samples, the most important guidelines are to use the shortest distance and the safest path
to reach the site of interest. The needle should not pass
through more than one body cavity or more than one
organ and for both FNA and tissue‐core samples, it is
important to visualize the needle tip as it is advanced
into the tissue, keeping the entire needle length visible
within the plane of the ultrasound beam. Accurate needle placement is usually easier using a curvilinear (or
micro‐convex) transducer. For superficial lesions, linear
transducers have the advantage of superior near‐field
resolution, but needle placement may be more challenging. 1” or 1.5” 20–22 ga standard injection needles are
most commonly used for FNA, with 2.5” or 3.5” spinal
needles occasionally used for sampling deeper lesions.
For tissue‐core biopsies, either manual or automated
biopsy devices may be used. A 14, 16 or 18 ga needle
(depending on the size of the patient and of the liver) and
a 2 cm tissue sample notch are usually selected.
Depending on the patient’s clinical status and the tissue
being sampled, a coagulation profile is not usually
required before obtaining FNAs; however, it is strongly
recommended prior to tissue‐core biopsy.
Although many conscious patients will tolerate ultrasound‐guided FNAs, sedation is recommended and general anesthesia is indicated for patients undergoing
tissue‐core biopsy. When obtaining FNAs, the skin overlying the aspiration site should be clipped and cleaned
prior to sampling; ultrasound gel can confuse the cytologic interpretation and should be avoided. For a tissue‐
core biopsy, aseptic preparation is required. Ultrasound
gel may be used, but should be sterile.
Serious complications associated with FNAs are rare, but
include hemorrhage, tumor seeding, and, following gallbladder aspiration, bile leakage and potential peritonitis.
The risk of hemorrhage is increased with tissue‐core biopsy;
however, although small amounts of free fluid are not
uncommon post biopsy, in patients with normal coagulation status any bleeding should be self‐limiting.

­Further Reading
D’Anjou MA. Liver. In: Penninck D, d’Anjou M, eds. Atlas
of Small Animal Ultrasonography. Ames, IA: Blackwell
Publishing, 2008, pp. 217–62.
Gaschen L. Update on hepatobiliary imaging. Vet Clin
Small Anim 2009; 39: 439–67.
Rademacher N. Liver. In: Barr F, Gaschen L, eds. BSAVA
Manual of Canine and Feline Ultrasonography.
Gloucester, UK: BSAVA Publications, 2011, pp. 85–99.

Rothuizen J. Introduction – background, aims and
methods. In: Rothuizen J, Bunch S, Charles S, et al., eds.
WSAVA Standards for Clinical and Histological
Diagnosis of Canine and Feline Liver Diseases.
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier, 2007.
Schwarz T. The liver and gallbladder. In: O’Brien RT, Barr F, eds.
BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Abdominal Imaging.
Gloucester, UK: BSAVA Publications, 2009, pp. 144–56.

675

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

677

62
Metabolic, Toxic, and Neoplastic Diseases of the Liver
Jan Rothuizen, DVM, PhD, Dip ECVIM-CA
Department of Clinical Science of Companion Animals, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands

­Metabolic Diseases
The liver displays a multitude of metabolic functions,
which may fail when the liver becomes diseased. The
most important functions which may cause immediate
clinical signs with a failing, diseased liver are bilirubin
metabolism and metabolism of neurotransmitter precursors. Failing liver function may then lead to hyperbilirubinemia with icterus, and hepatic encephalopathy,
respectively. Furthermore, the liver is involved in many
metabolic and detoxification processes, and may therefore be the principal organ to develop secondary damage. The most important examples are secondary
nonspecific (reactive) hepatitis, steroid or vacuolar
hepatopathy, and hepatotoxicity of drugs such as acetaminophen, carprofen, and sulfonamides. Hepatic lipidosis (steatosis) in cats deserves specific mention, as this is
the most common metabolic disorder of the liver in cats.
The final group of metabolic liver diseases are the inherited metabolic diseases. Some are very frequent, such as
copper storage diseases in many dog breeds, while others
are rare (amyloidosis) or very rare (lipoprotein lipase
deficiency, lysosomal storage diseases).
Vacuolar Hepatopathy, and Liver Changes
in Cushing Disease
Etiology/Pathophysiology

Both spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing disease) and the administration of glucocorticoids cause
specific abnormalities in the liver. A similar hepatic
change may occur without any known cause. There is
glycogen accumulation in the hepatocytes that results in
large vacuoles (ballooning). This leads to varying degrees
of hepatomegaly. These changes can cause elevation
of the plasma levels of liver enzymes, mainly alkaline

phosphatase (ALP), and bile acids. Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) may be elevated but usually much less than
the cholestasis indicators. Increased ALP is caused not
only by hepatocellular damage but also by induction of
an isoenzyme of ALP by glucocorticoids.
History and Clinical Signs

The clinical signs are those of Cushing disease if this is
the underlying cause. Steroid hormones other than cortisol may also cause these liver effects. The above‐mentioned changes in the liver can result in hepatomegaly,
which may be detectable by abdominal palpation. The
histologic changes occur long before signs suggestive of
Cushing disease, as do the elevations of ALP and ALT. It
is important to remember that a number of signs that
occur in Cushing disease also occur in primary liver diseases: lethargy, exercise intolerance, polydipsia, hepatomegaly, and elevated ALP, ALT, and bile acids.
Diagnosis

It is important to know whether elevated liver enzyme
levels and bile acids are due to exogenous corticosteroid
use or Cushing disease. The typical liver changes can
always be determined by histologic examination of a liver
biopsy; the histologic changes are specific. These diffuse
changes are also detectable in cytologic smears taken by
way of fine needle aspiration. The corticosteroid‐induced
ALP isoenzyme can be distinguished because most of it
is still active after heating the plasma to 65° for 2 minutes.
Readers are referred elsewhere for discussions on the
diagnosis and management of Cushing disease.
Therapy

The glucocorticoid‐induced changes in the liver are
reversible within a few weeks to months after removing
the cause. However, in other cases, the prognosis depends

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

678

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

on the cause of the glucocorticoid excess. In cases in
which it is not possible to identify the cause of glucocorticoid excess, over time fibrosis may develop, leading to
worsening liver disease.
Hepatic Lipidosis Secondary to Diabetes
Mellitus
Etiology/Pathophysiology

The liver plays a central role in fat metabolism. In diabetes mellitus, there is increased lipolysis in adipose tissue
and therefore increased delivery of fatty acids to the liver,
while the production of triglycerides is also increased.
Fat accumulates in the liver cells and in the dog it is
microvesicular, mainly caused by accumulation of triglycerides. This fatty change begins around the central
veins and progresses toward the periphery of the lobule.
This results in the development of hepatomegaly.
Sometimes there is cholestasis, which can be quite
severe. There is much more severe liver dysfunction with
fatty change than with glycogen accumulation. In
humans, the chronic fatty change that occurs in diabetes
mellitus can lead to hypertrophic liver cirrhosis, but in
dogs and cats this is very rare.
History and Clinical Signs

Fatty change in the liver is usually present in diabetes
mellitus and it can occur without causing clinical signs.
It can also cause mild to severe intrahepatic cholestasis.
In this case, physical examination reveals hepatomegaly
and icterus. All of the liver enzymes can be mildly to
severely increased. The clinical signs are those related to
diabetes mellitus, namely polyuria, polydipsia, weight
loss, and an increased appetite.
Diagnosis

Liver histology demonstrates the fatty change, which is
confirmed in combination with the diagnosis of diabetes
mellitus (persistent hyperglycemia, glucosuria).
Therapy

Therapy of fatty change in the liver of dogs is not necessary. Regulation of the diabetes mellitus leads to a gradual disappearance of the fatty change.
The Liver in Hyperthyroidism
Hyperthyroidism is associated with fatty infiltration of
the hepatocytes. This does not cause clinical signs of
liver dysfunction, but in many cases the liver enzymes
and bile acid levels are abnormally high. The fatty
changes are not severe and there is no liver enlargement.
A number of clinical signs associated with hyperthyroidism mimic those of primary liver diseases: polyuria,
vomiting, diarrhea, and weight loss.

Hepatic Lipidosis (Steatosis) in Cats
Etiology/Pathophysiology

One important difference between dogs and cats is the
relatively low capacity of the liver enzymes responsible
for conjugation of cholephilic substances, used to make
them more polar prior to biliary or urinary excretion, in
the cat. The low hepatic glucuronyl transferase capacity
is important for the metabolism of endogenous products
such as bilirubin and exogenous compounds, either
drugs or toxins. The elimination of drugs like chloramphenicol, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and anticonvulsants depends on this function. Hence, toxic
side‐effects develop much more easily in cats in cases of
overdosage or reduced liver function.
Cats also have different amino acid requirements from
dogs, as they cannot synthesize a sufficient number of
the essential amino acids (arginine, taurine, and carnitine). Arginine is an important intermediate metabolite
in the hepatic urea cycle in which ammonia is being converted into urea. This causes a relatively high susceptibility
to develop hyperammonemia and hepatic encephalopathy in cases of inadequate protein intake, for example
anorexia. Cats, unlike dogs, may have hepatic encephalopathy with parenchymal liver disease without portosystemic collateral circulation. Arginine and taurine are
involved in the hepatic production of apoproteins, which
are used to form the very low‐density lipoproteins. These
lipoproteins are the form in which the liver can secrete
triglycerides into the circulation for further metabolism.
Insufficient availability of arginine and taurine may lead
to accumulation of triglycerides in the liver, for example
in the case of fasting. Taurine also plays a role in detoxification, as it is used by the liver as a conjugating group to
make substances such as bile acids more hydrophilic.
Taurine is also involved in glutathione metabolism,
which is one of the major routes of hepatic detoxification. Carnitine is an intermediate enabling beta‐oxidation of long chain fatty acids in mitochondria, and this
function may be impaired in anorexia.
Fat accumulation in the liver occurs in different species, as a result of metabolic conditions in which there is
increased deposition or impaired removal of triglycerides in the liver. Clinically, this may be of importance in
diabetes mellitus as discussed for dogs. Subclinical fat
accumulation, only detectable with histologic examination of the liver, occurs in many other conditions such as
high intake of calories, hypoxia of the liver and induction
by a number of toxic substances. Cats, however, display
an idiopathic form of hepatic lipidosis that may become
life‐threatening. Accumulation of triglycerides is the
result of a disturbed balance between triglyceride uptake
by the liver and their removal. The latter is normally
achieved by formation of lipoproteins (especially very

VetBooks.ir

62 Metabolic, Toxic, and Neoplastic Diseases of the Liver

low‐density lipoproteins, VLDL), which allows for secretion of fatty acids into the circulation for further metabolism in other tissues. Another route for the liver to
metabolize fatty acids is via beta‐oxidation.
Fat cats seem to be predisposed, but lean cats may also
develop lipidosis. It is generally appreciated that prolonged fasting is the most important factor inducing lipidosis. Fasting may affect hepatic fatty acid metabolism in
three ways. First, fasting induces peripheral lipolysis and
increased delivery of fatty acids to the liver. The intake of
essential amino acids may also become inadequate.
Deficiency of arginine and taurine may inhibit the apoprotein formation necessary to form resulting in the
accumulation of triglycerides. Finally, carnitine deficiency
may result in impairment of beta‐oxidation, which is a
major pathway for hepatic fatty acid catabolism.
Most cats with lipidosis have slight hyperglycemia as a
result of impaired glucose tolerance. It is not known
what underlying mechanism leads to deranged glucose
metabolism. There is no tendency to develop overt diabetes mellitus. There is no consistency with respect to
the level of insulin and glucagon; both high and low values have been reported. In cats with concurrent diabetes
mellitus, very high doses of insulin are required to lower
the blood glucose in these cats, suggesting insulin resistance. We have measured high growth hormone concentrations in a few patients, which could explain insulin
resistance, but this could not be related to progestin
administration or other factors known to induce growth
hormone excess. Whatever the cause, hyperglycemia is a
possible factor further contributing to accumulation of
triglycerides.
Lipidosis results in hepatomegaly with yellow discoloration and a friable texture. As in all types of hepatomegaly, the margins of the lobes become rounded.
Accumulated fat is concentrated in micro‐ or macrovesicular vacuoles in the hepatic cytoplasm. Swelling of
cells can easily produce intrahepatic cholestasis.
Reduced liver function and fasting may trigger hepatic
encephalopathy.
Signalment

Lipidosis may occur at any age in both males and females,
although there seems to be an increased incidence in
middle‐aged cats. There appear to be individual differences in susceptibility; some cats sustain prolonged fasting without developing lipidosis, and others develop
recurrence with every episode of prolonged fasting. It is
interesting to note that hepatic lipidosis occurs regularly
in the United States but less frequently in Europe, and is
very uncommon in the United Kingdom. It is not known
whether these regional differences reflect variations in
genetic make‐up of the populations or differences in
composition of cat food.

History and Clinical Signs

Cats often present with anorexia and lethargy. There
may be occasional vomiting, and icterus is a common
finding. Clinical signs consistent with hepatic encephalopathy may also occur. Clinical signs related to an
underlying disease resulting in anorexia may also be
present.
Diagnosis

The clinical signs and findings on physical examination
(icterus and hepatomegaly) are not specific, and neither
are elevated serum bile acids and liver enzymes. Slight or
moderate hyperglycemia is often present but this is not
diagnostic. Remember that stress during blood sampling
often results in hyperglycemia in cats. On ultrasonographic examination, an enlarged and obviously hyperechoic liver is commonly seen. The diagnosis can only be
made by evaluation of liver tissue. However, due to the
diffuse nature of the disease, fine needle aspiration cytology is usually diagnostic.
Therapy

The most important management strategy is to get the
cat out of the catabolic condition, and to supply the
amino acids essential to prevent further fat accumulation
and development of hepatic encephalopathy. Forced
feeding of semiliquid food may be required, and this can
be achieved in most cases by slow oral feedings with a
syringe. However, this method of feeding is unsuitable
for the long term and can be very difficult in some cats.
Other forms of enteral feeding are therefore preferred,
and esophagostomy or gastrostomy tubes are sensible
first choices. These feeding tubes can be left in situ for
prolonged periods, and also enable sufficient calories to
be fed to meet the cat’s daily need. Alternatively, a nasoesophageal feeding tube can usually be placed with relative ease, although these are not suitable for the long
term, nor adequate for meeting the daily nutritional
requirements.
Since protein is the most important component in the
treatment of the metabolic derangements leading to lipidosis, 30–40% of the total calories should be administered as protein. Moreover, diets should contain the
essential amino acids arginine and taurine. Recovery formula commercial diets are available to meet these
requirements. It may be advisable to give vitamin B12
supplementation as well. There is little indication for the
use of glucose as an energy source, since cats tend to
have glucose intolerance and cannot adequately utilize it.
So‐called lipotrophic compounds, such as methionine,
are also not recommended. It also is not recommended
to administer insulin, because of the risk of life‐threatening hypoglycemia, whereas hyperglycemia appears to be
a secondary instead of a primary phenomenon.

679

VetBooks.ir

680

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

Supportive care includes restoration of the fluid and
electrolyte balance. Ammonia (if available), electrolytes
(sodium and especially potassium), and pH should be
monitored to permit supportive care directed at hepatic
encephalopathy if indicated.

resulting from liver dysfunction depend on the extent of
liver necrosis, and vary from general illness and lethargy
to hepatic encephalopathy. Anorexia and vomiting may
occur as a result of impaired detoxifying function of the
liver.

Prognosis

Diagnosis

Owners need to be warned that the prognosis is generally guarded, with roughly half of cats surviving.
Moreover, therapy can be prolonged, sometimes consisting of several weeks to months of enteral nutrition. The
prognosis is quite good if the condition is diagnosed and
treated early. However, cats with severe hepatic encephalopathy have a worse prognosis.

The presence and severity of any liver changes can only
be confirmed by histologic examination of a liver biopsy.
These changes are specific and therefore confirmatory.
An impression of the severity and course of the liver
necrosis is provided by measurements of the liver
enzymes and bile acids in serum, but they may also be
elevated in any other hepatobiliary disease and are by no
means specific. The diagnosis of the underlying disease
causing anemia or shock is not discussed here.

Liver Changes Due to Anemia and Shock
(Acute Hypoperfusion)
Etiology/Pathophysiology

Liver degeneration or necrosis can occur with acute
hypoxia of the liver. In this context, it is important to
remember that the blood supply of the liver is predominantly venous and therefore any adaptation to hypoxia
requires time. Possible causes for such lesions are acute
hemolysis or massive blood loss. Histologically, there is
necrosis of the centrilobular zone 3 (the oxygen‐poor
part of the liver lobule). Extensive necrosis may occur in
rare cases with confluent and bridging necrosis, forming
connections between necrotic centrilobular areas.
Necrosis induces a secondary inflammatory reaction of
polymorphonuclear cells, and there is usually widespread cholestasis. In cases of hemolysis, there is erythrophagocytosis and/or accumulation of iron pigment in
the reticuloendothelial system, and sometimes extramedullary hematopoiesis is seen. In addition to the general
illness and icterus, hepatic encephalopathy can also
occur in severely affected cases.
These changes explain why hemolytic anemia is so
often accompanied by an increase in conjugated bilirubin, and this is sometimes marked. It is the cholestasis,
rather than the hemolysis, that determines the degree of
icterus. Hence, bilirubin is predominantly the conjugated direct reacting type. ALT, AST, ALP, and gamma‐
glutamyl transferase (GGT) can be severely elevated.
Sometimes, the liver dysfunction is so severe that, in
spite of adequate treatment of the hemolysis, it leads to
death.
History and Clinical Signs

Clinical signs are usually acute in onset, and a history of
recent shock may be present. In hemolytic anemia, the
mucous membranes may be jaundiced and are usually
pale. Clinical signs are in part those of anemia, namely
lethargy and exercise intolerance. Subsequent signs

Therapy

Management primarily involves treatment of the underlying cause of hypoxia. There is no specific treatment
possible for the hepatic lesions, and the liver will recover
spontaneously in most cases after resolution of the
underlying condition. In cases of severe damage, the
impaired liver function may become life‐threatening.
Only symptomatic supportive therapy for liver dysfunction can be given, to allow time for the liver to regenerate. Specific measures to prevent or reduce hepatic
encephalopathy may be important. Remember that the
course of liver regeneration cannot be evaluated by the
degree of icterus.
Prognosis

The prognosis is very variable and primarily depends on
the underlying cause of hypoxia. If the underlying cause
can be addressed, hepatic changes are likely to be
reversible.
Amyloidosis
Etiology/Pathophysiology

Amyloidosis of the liver is very rare in dogs or cats.
Amyloidosis is often a systemic disease involving a number of organs. In cases of generalized amyloidosis, there is
usually also deposition of amyloid in the liver and kidneys,
but this seldom leads to clinical signs relevant to the liver.
The severe glomerular damage leading to urinary protein
loss is almost always the most important clinical phenomenon. In the liver, deposits of amyloid are visible as amorphous hyaline and eosinophilic material in the space of
Disse when Congo red staining is used. Depending on the
amount of amyloid, the liver may be enlarged on abdominal palpation. However, it is often a normal size. Liver
enzymes and bile acids may be increased, although sometimes they are within the normal reference interval.

VetBooks.ir

62 Metabolic, Toxic, and Neoplastic Diseases of the Liver

Signalment

Amyloidosis is frequently identified in the shar‐pei dog,
although other breeds can be affected. In cats, the
Siamese, Oriental shorthair, Devon Rex and Burmese are
predisposed.
History and Clinical Signs

Overt liver dysfunction is rare in amyloidosis, even when
the liver is grossly enlarged. Nephrotic syndrome is the
most common finding in these patients due to severe and
prolonged proteinuria resulting from renal amyloidosis.
Other possible signs of renal dysfunction are vomiting,
anorexia, and polyuria. Spontaneous rupture of the liver
may occur in severe cases, resulting in acute blood loss,
shock, and death.
Diagnosis

The deposition of amyloid can only be detected by cytologic or histologic examination of relevant biopsy material (liver or kidney). Taking biopsies is not without risk
as the liver may rupture, resulting in severe abdominal
hemorrhage.
Therapy

There is no specific treatment available for amyloidosis.
The deposition of amyloid is progressive and in animals
with end‐stage disease, the prognosis is very poor.
Copper Storage Diseases Leading to Chronic
Hepatitis and Cirrhosis
The accumulation of copper in liver tissue has been
described in several breeds of dog. Excessive accumulation includes that seen in true “copper storage” disease,
where the primary initiating event is a defect in copper
excretion leading to secondary hepatocyte damage, and
“copper‐associated” disease, in which copper accumulates secondary to an underlying inflammatory liver
disease.
Copper storage diseases probably occur in several
breeds of dog, although there appear to be differences in
prevalence between countries. Copper storage disease
was suspected in about 30% of all dogs with hepatitis in
one study from The Netherlands, but is relatively uncommon in the UK. The Bedlington terrier, Labrador
retriever, Dalmatian, Anatolian shepherd, Airedale terrier, and spaniel breeds appear to be predisposed.
In primary copper storage disease, copper accumulates in the liver when the excretion of excessive copper
into the bile is deficient. This is a gradual process and
usually toxic levels leading to chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis are reached at an age of 4–7 years. Copper first
accumulates in the centrolobular region of the liver (zone
3 around the central vein); in later stages, zone 2 and

zone 1 (periportal zone) may also become gradually
affected. This differs from copper‐associated disease,
which is the predominant form in all dogs, in which cholestasis causes periportal copper accumulation (zone 1),
with copper later accumulating in zones 2 and 3.
Copper Storage‐Induced Hepatitis and Cirrhosis
in the Bedlington Terrier
Etiology/Pathophysiology

This disease occurs in Bedlington terriers, resulting in an
accumulation of copper in the liver, usually due to an
autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. In many
affected dogs, the disease is caused by a deletion in the
COMMD1 gene, resulting in lack of production of a specific protein. This protein is an important chaperone for
the copper‐transporting protein ATPase 2, encoded by
the human Wilson disease gene ATP7B, the principal
hepatocyte exporter of copper into bile. Only homozygotes become ill; heterozygotes have a normal liver.
Normally, some of the copper ingested is absorbed in
the intestine and transported to the liver in the portal
blood, where it is loosely bound to albumin. Most of this
is taken up by the hepatocytes and excreted in the bile via
the liver cell lysosomes. A small part is incorporated in
ceruloplasmin in the liver, and copper incorporated in
this protein is released in the plasma. Copper in ceruloplasmin is used for incorporation in a number of enzymes
and proteins, essential for normal function. Most of the
copper is bound to the protein metallothionein. Copper
then moves to the lysosomes of the hepatocytes and is
excreted into the bile bound to an unidentified protein.
In this form, it leaves the body in the feces. In Bedlington
terriers with copper storage disease, the hepatocytes are
almost completely unable to excrete copper in the bile
and hence there is an increasing accumulation of copper
in the liver. The exact nature of the defect is not known,
but it is a lysosomal disorder. Because the copper accumulation begins gradually, the clinical signs usually only
begin to appear after around 4 years of age. The increased
copper concentration in the liver can be confirmed after
1 year of age; before then, some dogs with the disease
have not yet stored sufficient copper to distinguish them
from normal animals.
There is a chronic form in which the copper accumulation leads to liver cell necrosis and secondary hepatitis,
cumulating in cirrhosis. Some dogs also have an acute
form of copper storage disease, with a hemolytic crisis.
The hemolysis is probably the result of a sudden release
of a large amount of copper from hepatocytes into the
blood. The mechanism for this is not clear. The sudden
increase in blood copper concentration causes acute
hemolysis, and because liver function is already reduced,
this leads to severe icterus. Tubulonephrosis may occur
and can lead to uremia. The hemolysis in turn results in

681

VetBooks.ir

682

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

centrilobular liver necrosis as a result of hypoxic damage. In dogs surviving the hemolytic crisis, cirrhosis
occurs much more often than in other animals.
History and Clinical Signs

With chronic copper accumulation, the clinical signs are
those of chronic hepatitis or cirrhosis. The reader is
therefore referred to the relevant sections for further
details. In the acute form there is acute hemolysis, anemia, severe icterus, and sometimes uremia. The acute
form is often lethal within a few days.
Diagnosis

Laboratory examination may reveal any of the changes
seen in chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis, such as increased
ALT, ALP, GGT, bile acids, and bilirubin. Hypoalbuminemia
and hepatic encephalopathy with increased ammonia concentrations occur only in late stages. There are no specific
laboratory parameters that are specific for copper accumulation. Ceruloplasmin and free copper concentrations are
not different from healthy dogs, whereas Wilson disease in
humans is associated with decreased ceruloplasmin levels.
On the basis of the clinical examination and result of
blood tests, it is not possible to differentiate copper storage disease from chronic hepatitis or cirrhosis. The diagnosis can only be made by demonstrating increased
copper accumulation in a liver biopsy in animals older
than 1 year. Histologically, copper in a liver biopsy may be
detected with specific stains such as rubeanic acid. The
same staining may be used on cytologic preparations collected by fine needle aspiration. Copper accumulation
begins in hepatocytes around the central veins (zone 3)
and gradually spreads outwards toward the portal areas.
The copper is stored in the hepatic lysosomes. The copper‐induced liver cell damage only occurs when a certain
level is exceeded. The damage leads to ongoing liver cell
necrosis and secondary inflammation that can eventually
result in fibrosis and cirrhosis. The normal concentration
of copper in the canine liver is between 50 and 300 μg/g
dry weight. Dogs with copper accumulation have levels
exceeding 1000 μg/g dry weight at 1 year of age, but most
cases have higher concentrations. With time, levels of
12 000 μg/g dry weight may be reached. At 1 year of age, a
few dogs have concentrations between 300 and 1000 μg/g
dry weight, and most of them appear not to accumulate
when reexamined later.
A genetic test for the mutated COMMD1 gene is available, although not all dogs with the disease have this
defect. However, heterozygote carriers cannot be distinguished from homozygote healthy animals. A few decades
ago, the incidence of the disease in Bedlington terriers was
about 30–50%. However, with the availability of a reliable
genetic test, the incidence of the disease has dramatically
declined, with clinical cases becoming quite rare.

Therapy

Once signs of chronic hepatitis or cirrhosis are present,
or those of an acute hemolytic crisis have developed,
specific therapy is usually not possible. Symptomatic
and supportive care is therefore important. In chronic
hepatitis or cirrhosis, management of hepatic encephalopathy, portal hypertension, and ascites is vital.
Readers are referred to Chapter 65 for further details
regarding therapy.
Hemolytic crisis is a very serious event. Administration
of penicillamine, which is a chelating drug that binds
metals, preferentially copper, is indicated. The penicillamine–copper complex is excreted from the kidneys
into urine, resulting in free copper being removed from
the circulation. Intravenous infusion of fluids with diuresis may also be helpful to enhance urinary copper
excretion.
It is important to try to prevent the development of
clinical signs in dogs at risk for copper storage disease.
Hence, asymptomatic dogs should be examined at a
young age, and if there is copper accumulation, life‐long
medication with drugs that prevent further accumulation of copper is essential. There are two drugs available,
and both are given orally in a capsulated form.
Penicillamine may be given 30 minutes before each meal
at a total daily dose of 25 mg/kg. Penicillamine binds
copper in the circulation and the bound complex is
excreted in the urine. Another drug is zinc, which may be
given as zinc gluconate at a dosage of 30 mg/kg/day in
divided doses immediately before each meal. The action
of zinc is at the level of the intestinal mucosa, as it induces
the formation of copper‐binding metallothionein, thus
preventing the absorption of copper. The two drugs
should not be combined since they form complexes and
inactivate each other. These medications are unable to
reduce hepatic copper levels in most cases, but they prevent further accumulation and development of the
symptomatic stage. Another measure to prevent further
accumulation is to reduce the copper content of the food.
Commercial foods have been developed to treat and prevent copper storage diseases, and have been proven to be
very effective. These are veterinary‐formulated liver
diets containing low copper and high zinc.
Copper Storage‐Associated Hepatitis and Cirrhosis
in Labrador Retrievers

Since 2006, Labrador retrievers have been reported to
have a form of copper storage disease causing hepatitis,
which if untreated results in cirrhosis. Much of the
description pertaining to the Bedlington terrier applies to
the disease in Labradors. Like all forms of copper s­ torage,
the disease develops gradually due to the slow accumulation of copper in the centrilobular area of the liver.
Therefore, the typical age of onset of clinical signs in this

VetBooks.ir

62 Metabolic, Toxic, and Neoplastic Diseases of the Liver

breed is also 4–7 years. The copper concentrations in
Labrador retrievers remain much lower than in Bedlington
terriers (by a factor of 10), and liver samples from Labrador
retrievers usually do not exceed 2000 μg/g dry weight,
whereas Bedlington terriers may have concentrations
exceeding 15 000 μg/g dry weight. Another difference is
that Labrador retrievers do not develop a hemolytic crisis
as easily as Bedlington terriers. The hepatitis may remain
“hidden” for a long period since the most sensitive marker,
ALT, may stay within normal limits for years, even when
copper accumulation and hepatitis are already present. In
more advanced cases, fibrosis and cirrhosis may develop,
similar to other breeds with copper storage disease.
The diagnosis is made in the same way as the
Bedlington terrier, and prevention and therapy are also
comparable. Commercial hepatic diet has proven very
effective in this breed. Although it is a proven genetic
disease, it appears to be much more complex than in the
Bedlington terrier, and as such a reliable genetic test is
not yet available. Due to the complexity of the disease, it
is difficult to give good advice to breeders to aid in prevention of the disease.

­Toxic Diseases
Nonspecific Reactive Hepatitis
Due to Endotoxins
Etiology/Pathophysiology

Nonspecific reactive hepatitis is a diffuse or focal liver
disease with secondary inflammatory reaction resulting
­
from toxemia or sepsis. Reactive hepatitis can occur with
every toxemia, sepsis, inflammation, and necrotizing process (including necrosis in tumors). When the process is in
tissues drained by the portal system, toxins are transported
exclusively to the liver. Toxins and bacteria from processes
elsewhere are first diluted in the general circulation before
reaching the liver. It is therefore logical that reactive hepatitis is most often caused by processes within the abdomen.
Reactive hepatitis develops in most cases of gastroenteritis and extensive gastric or intestinal tumours (e.g.,
lymphoma), as a result of increased endotoxin absorption.
It also develops in peritonitis, including local peritonitis
resulting from abdominal surgery, and in other inflammatory processes in the organs drained by the portal vein.
Reactive hepatitis is thus most often caused by gastrointestinal disorders. On the other hand, vomiting and/or
diarrhea often occur with primary liver disorders. Hence,
when a patient with gastrointestinal problems is found to
have high liver enzyme levels, the classic chicken‐or‐egg
situation is encountered, and this problem may only be
solved with liver histopathology. However, the reaction
pattern in the liver to endotoxins primarily involves the

development of canalicular cholestasis, and therefore the
cholestatic enzymes ALP, GGT, and bile acids are the most
important markers. In many primary liver diseases, the
hepatocellular enzymes ALT and AST are the predominant markers, with cholestatic markers less affected.
However, there are many exceptions to this general rule.
The circulating toxins, inflammatory mediators, and
microbes cause reticuloendothelial proliferation and
infiltration of neutrophils into the liver. There can also
be focal liver necrosis. In chronic cases, there is also lymphocytic and plasmacytic inflammation. There can be
mild to severe cholestasis in the canaliculi. In some cases
associated with sepsis, there are diffuse foci of necrosis,
microabscesses, or granulomas (e.g., infection with
Herpes canis, toxoplasmosis, brucellosis, tuberculosis,
E. coli and migrating larvae of Toxocara canis).
Hepatocellular functions usually remain intact in this
group of secondary liver diseases. Therefore, hypoalbuminemia, coagulopathies and hepatic encephalopathy are
not seen in animals with nonspecific reactive hepatitis.
History and Clinical Signs

The clinical signs are often determined by the primary
disorder. Hence, there is often vomiting and/or diarrhea,
and sometimes fever. When reactive hepatitis is severe,
there can be icterus, general lethargy, and sometimes
reduced exercise intolerance.
Diagnosis

Differentiation between primary liver diseases and reactive hepatitis is only possible by histologic examination
of a liver biopsy. The abnormalities described under
pathogenesis are characteristic. Once the diagnosis of
reactive hepatitis is made, it can be very difficult to localize the primary process. Further examination and investigation of the gastrointestinal system are usually
therefore indicated.
Therapy

Therapy and prognosis depend on the primary disorder.
Reactive hepatitis itself requires no treatment, since it
resolves spontaneously after removal of the cause. The
underlying, likely gastrointestinal disease should therefore be treated.
Drug Toxicity
Many toxins and drugs are concentrated in the liver and
may cause direct toxic damage (intrinsic toxicity), and
rarely cause idiosyncratic (very acute and severe) toxicity.
Direct toxic damage may primarily involve the hepatocytes, causing necrosis and/or steatosis, or bile canaliculi,
causing intrahepatic canalicular cholestasis. In veterinary
medicine, documented idiosyncratic liver toxicity is

683

VetBooks.ir

684

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

restricted to sulfonamides causing severe intrahepatic bile
duct necrosis and irreparable cholestasis. Anecdotally,
although not well documented, liver toxicity has also been
reported for azathioprine, ketoconazole, fen/oxibendazole,
phenobarbital, halothane, methoxyflurane, cephalexin,
amoxicillin, oxacillin, nafcillin, erythromycin, clindamycin,
and several other drugs. The hepatic lesions may include
canalicular cholestasis and/or liver cell vacuolization and
in severe cases liver cell necrosis. There are no large
studies to document the true risk and toxicity of these
drugs. Relatively well‐documented toxicity is reported for
diazepam (cats), acetaminophen (paracetamol) in dogs
and cats, and carprofen in dogs.
Specific Toxins
Diazepam Toxicity in Cats

This toxicity has all the features of an idiosyncratic reaction, and has only been reported in cats receiving several
doses of diazepam. Toxicity results in severe necrosis of
the entire liver lobule, leading to fulminant liver failure
and severe signs including inappetence, vomiting, severe
lethargy, hepatic encephalopathy, coagulopathy, and
jaundice. Liver enzymes, including the transaminases
ALT/AST, and also ALP and bile acids are significantly
elevated. Only symptomatic treatment is possible and
the prognosis is poor in most cases.
Acetaminophen (Paracetamol) Toxicity in Dogs and Cats

Too high a dose of acetaminophen may cause severe oxidative hepatic damage. The result is hepatocellular
necrosis which, depending on the dose, may involve the
entire liver lobule and cause complete liver failure.
Acetaminophen has been used as an experimental drug
to induce reproducible acute liver failure in dog models,
and it is one of the most used suicide drugs in humans.
If acetaminophen toxicity is suspected, antioxidative
drugs such as SAM‐e and N‐acetylcysteine are advised.
However, the proven effect of these drugs was tested in
experimental situations in which the drug was given
together or before the toxic drug. Treatment after the
occurrence of the toxicity, as occurs naturally, may be
less successful. The most important treatment is immediate gastric lavage. Supportive care with intravenous
fluids and enteral feeding may also be required. If hepatic
encephalopathy with severe hyperammonemia is present, the prognosis is often very poor.
Carprofen Toxicity in Dogs

This nonsteroidal antiin­flammatory drug (NSAID) may
cause idiosyncratic hepatic toxicity. The toxicity usually
occurs after prolonged or repeated treatments, and may
cause very severe liver damage. Immediate drug withdrawal and supportive care, with intravenous fluids and
intensive therapy, result in a favorable outcome for
most cases, although several weeks of treatment may be

required. Carprofen may also cause simultaneous renal
toxicity. Carprofen toxicity causes marked elevation of
all liver enzymes, bile acids, and bilirubin. It is not known
if other NSAIDs can cause similar hepatotoxicity.
Sulfonamide Toxicity in Dogs and Cats

Repeated or prolonged treatment with sulfonamides
(including trimethoprim/sulfa) may occasionally lead to
an idiosyncratic toxicity of the liver in both dogs and cats.
The intrahepatic bile ducts appear to be targeted, especially the collecting bile ducts receiving bile from the
smaller liver lobules. In most cases, these intrahepatic
components of the biliary tree undergo complete necrosis,
leading to very severe intrahepatic cholestasis. The degree
of cholestasis is comparable to that of complete extrahepatic bile duct obstruction. Clinical signs include a sudden
onset of anorexia, depression, vomiting, polyuria, and
occasionally acholic stool, in combination with marked
icterus. Sometimes the liver is moderately enlarged. The
resulting clinical signs are those of severe cholestasis with
preservation of liver function. At ultrasonography, the
gallbladder may be entirely empty. The diagnosis requires
careful histologic examination of the liver, since the lesions
have a specific pattern. Management includes immediate
withdrawal of the drug, and therapy with the choleretic
drug ursodeoxycholic acid. Complete recovery has never
been documented and surviving cases need to be treated
lifelong with ursodeoxycholic acid.
Biologic Toxins

Amanita mushrooms and blue algae are the two important producers of biologic toxins, which may cause very
severe liver damage. Both toxic mushrooms and blue algae
cause severe necrosis of hepatocytes, and this is dose
dependent. In most cases, the damage is very severe and
associated with complete liver necrosis (fulminant hepatitis). This leads to massive increases of all liver parameters
(enzymes, bile acids, ammonia, etc.). Clinical signs are
comparable to those of the drug toxicities, and may include
hepatic encephalopathy, jaundice, spontaneous bleeding,
and severe lethargy. Therapy is supportive, with antiemetics and intravenous fluid administration, and normalization of blood pH and electrolytes. Forced diuresis may
help to relieve the signs of hepatic encephalopathy.

­Neoplasia
Primary Tumors
Hepatocellular Carcinoma
Etiology/Pathophysiology

Among epithelial tumors, hepato­
cellular carcinoma
(HCC) occurs more frequently than hepatocellular adenoma. Both tumors are usually solitary and can become

VetBooks.ir

62 Metabolic, Toxic, and Neoplastic Diseases of the Liver

very large, leading to focal enlargement of a liver lobe.
Hepatocellular carcinomas do not commonly metastasize and they grow slowly. They seldom lead to reduced
liver function as they only arise from one liver lobe, leaving the rest of the liver intact. Hepatocellular carcinoma
is associated with chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis in
humans, but such a relation does not appear to exist
in dogs though they appear to occur more frequently in
Scottish terriers with hyperphosphatemia.
Signalment

Hepatocellular carcinomas are generally seen in older
dogs, and some studies have shown a breed predisposition in the poodle, fox and Scottish terrier, and Labrador
retriever.
History and Clinical Signs

Hepatocellular carcinomas lead to the development of
clinical signs only when they have attained a significant
size, at which time they may be palpable. With increasing
size, they can also displace the stomach and cause vomiting. Abdominal palpation reveals a mass in the cranial
abdomen in most cases, and the tumor may be so big that
the abdomen is distended. It may be difficult to distinguish such masses from those arising from the spleen.
Hypoglycaemia occurs relatively commonly (about
50% of cases), and may be a paraneoplastic phenomenon
due to tumor production of insulin‐like peptides (IGF‐2).
In some cases, hypoglycemia induces exercise intolerance or episodic weakness.
Diagnosis

The liver enzymes are variably elevated, and sometimes
may be within the reference interval. Focal enlargement
of the liver, often combined with displacement of the
stomach, can often be identified on plain abdominal
radiographs. Ultrasonography reveals a mass with an
echogenicity similar to that of normal liver, although
sometimes echogenicity is abnormal. Histology of a liver
biopsy may be diagnostic, but sometimes these tumors
are well differentiated and may be very hard to distinguish from normal liver or an adenoma. Cytologic diagnosis is therefore impossible in most cases.

Bile Duct Carcinoma
Etiology/Pathophysiology

This is a relatively infrequent primary tumor of the biliary epithelium. In the dog, it usually arises from intrahepatic bile ducts and readily metastasizes to the liver
parenchyma and other organs. The multiple metastases
throughout the biliary system often lead to signs of cholestasis. In the cat, bile duct carcinomas occur more often
in the large bile ducts and result in obstruction. The disease tends to be rapidly progressive.
History and Clinical Signs

Icterus is a common clinical sign. Other clinical signs
depend on the amount of hepatic involvement, and signs
may be those of acute or chronic liver disease. There is
often widespread infiltration of the tumor in the liver
and thus hepatomegaly.
Diagnosis

Physical examination and laboratory findings usually only
indicate extrahepatic cholestasis. Fine needle aspiration
cytology is generally not useful for diagnosis. Bile duct
carcinoma is best diagnosed by liver biopsy, either under
ultrasound guidance or at laparotomy/laparoscopy.
Therapy

The tumor usually is usually very infiltrative. However, if
localized to a single liver lobe, lobectomy of that lobe can
be curative. In most cases, no treatment is possible by
the time clinical signs occur. Moreover, no anticancer
chemotherapeutic drugs have been shown to be effective
in the management of this tumor type.
Hemangiosarcoma
Etiology/Pathophysiology

This is the only common mesenchymal type of hepatic
tumor. They are usually smaller (up to a few centimeters)
and multiple. Because they occur as multiple masses,
their presence often results in more extensive hepatic
dysfunction and cholestasis than are seen with epithelial
tumors. Apart from being primary liver tumors, they
may also be metastatic from other organs such as the
spleen, kidneys, and skin.

Therapy

Signalment

Surgical removal of the affected liver lobe is the only definite treatment. This may be successful if the tumor is
not located near the hilus, the large hepatic vessels or
major bile ducts. Peripherally located carcinomas are
resectable, and in most cases, resection is curative. It is
important to monitor the blood glucose concentration
during or directly following surgery. Moreover, no anticancer chemotherapeutic drugs have been shown to be
effective in the management of this tumor type although
tyrosine kinsase inhibitors are being investigated.

History and Clinical Signs

Hemangiosarcomas usually occur in older dogs and
there appears to be a breed predisposition in the German
shepherd dog, golden retriever, boxer, Great Dane and
English setter.
Mesenchymal tumors usually have a severe and rapid
course, with anorexia, vomiting, weight loss, and sometimes icterus. Abdominal distension and hemorrhagic
ascites due to ruptures of the tumor may be present.

685

VetBooks.ir

686

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

Diagnosis

There may be palpable liver enlargement but this is not
always the case. Biochemical examination usually reveals
high liver enzymes and bile acids but this is nonspecific.
Ultrasonography allows visualization of any tumors, and
these appear as dark hypoechogenic masses due to their
rich vascularization. The diagnosis may also be confirmed by laparoscopy/laparotomy. Ultrasound‐guided
biopsy can be used in diagnosis, although there is a risk
of bleeding and also tumor seeding. Fine needle aspiration cytology is not recommended for diagnosis.
Therapy

Mesenchymal tumors are usually inoperable and rapidly
progressive. See discussion of hemangiosarcoma in
Chapter XX. Survival times are usually in the area of
weeks to months, and the owner should be warned about
the risk of acute bleeding into the abdomen.
Secondary Tumors (Metastatic)
Etiology/Pathophysiology

Tumors of organs in the portal drainage area usually
metastasize to the liver in the course of the disease.
Hemangiosarcomas of the spleen are by far the most frequent, followed by pancreatic carcinomas and gastrointestinal tumors. Tumors from outside the portal drainage
area can also metastasize to the liver. Tumor metastases
are almost always multiple and distributed throughout
the liver. Depending on their number and size, there can
be varying amounts of liver damage.
History and Clinical Signs

The clinical signs may originate chiefly from the primary
organ: vomiting in the case of gastric tumors, extrahepatic cholestasis with pancreas tumors, and ascites
resulting from hemorrhage from splenic hemangiosarcoma. The main clinical signs caused by liver damage
from metastatic disease include lethargy, anorexia, vomiting, and icterus. There may also be palpable hepatomegaly, although this depends on the number and size of
masses.
Diagnosis

Physical and laboratory signs of liver damage and/or
cholestasis are not specific. The diagnosis is made by his-

tologic examination, although this may be missed by a
percutaneous liver biopsy. The chances of a representative liver biopsy are increased when this procedure is
performed under ultrasound guidance.
Therapy

Because of the multiple sites of metastases, surgery is
virtually never possible and the prognosis is extremely
guarded.
Generalized Systemic Tumors: Malignant
Lymphoma
Etiology/Pathophysiology

Hepatic lymphoma is relatively commonly seen in dogs
and cats, usually as part of a generalized disease. However,
in some cases lymphoma may only be present in the liver.
Infiltration of tumor cells causes hepatomegaly, and
intrahepatic cholestasis can also occur. Because the liver
damage is diffuse and widespread, there is often severe
liver dysfunction. The tumor infiltration is usually more
severe in the portal areas and around the central veins,
which sometimes causes severe portal hypertension.
Portal hypertension then results in the development of
ascites and acquired portosystemic shunting vessels. In
such cases, hepatic encephalopathy may develop.
History and Clinical Signs

The signs are highly variable, depending on the organ
systems involved. With respect to the liver, clinical signs
of icterus, lethargy, anorexia, and vomiting may occur.
Sometimes there is ascites and hepatic encephalopathy.
Hepatomegaly and splenomegaly may result in abdominal distension.
Diagnosis

The diagnosis can always be confirmed by a percutaneous liver biopsy. The diffuse hepatic involvement also
means that the diagnosis can usually be made by fine needle aspiration cytology; this is one of the few indications
for performing this test for the diagnosis of liver disease.
Therapy

A variety of anticancer chemotherapy protocols for
­lymphoma are available, and the reader is referred to
Chapter 134 for details of these.

­Further Reading
Balkman C. Hepatobiliary neoplasia in dogs and cats. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2009; 39(3): 617–25.
Fieten H, Penning L, Leegwater P, Rothuizen P. New canine
models of copper toxicosis: diagnosis, treatment, and
genetics. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2014; 1314: 42–8.

Hoffmann G. Copper‐associated liver diseases. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2009; 39(3): 489–511.
Van Sprundel RG, van den Ingh S, Guscetti F, et al.
Classification of primary hepatic tumours in the dog. Vet
J 2013; 197(3): 596–606.

VetBooks.ir

687

63
Feline Inflammatory Liver Disease
Nicki Reed, BVM&S, Cert VR, DSAM (Feline), DECVIM-CA, MRCVS
VeterinarySpecialists, Scotland 1Deer Park Road Livingston West Lothian

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Inflammation of the liver in cats may occur with infectious diseases such as feline infectious peritonitis, toxoplasmosis or bartonellosis although other systems may
be more significantly affected than the liver. Hepatitis
may also be seen in association with toxic damage from
drugs such as diazepam, paracetamol (acetaminophen),
methimazole and carbimazole, potentiated sulfonamides, tetracyclines, griseofulvin, and phenobarbitone.
Most commonly, however, feline inflammatory liver
disease refers to the cholangitis/cholangiohepatitis complex, which is primarily an inflammatory disease of the
biliary system. When the inflammation breaches the
fibrous tissue of the periportal limiting plate, the term
cholangiohepatitis may be used. However, as this is
uncommon, cholangitis is usually the more correct term.
Cholangitis may be further classified, according to the
WSAVA Liver Standardisation Group, into neutrophilic
cholangitis (NC), lymphocytic cholangitis (LC), and
chronic cholangitis associated with liver fluke infestation.
The last of these is due to ingestion of raw fish containing
metacercariae of the family Opisthorchiidae, and is associated with mixed inflammation around dilated bile ducts
and development of periductal and portal fibrosis.
Neutrophilic cholangitis is proposed to be due to
bacteria ascending into the biliary system from the intestines, as common bacteria identified include E.coli and
Enterococcus. Acute neutrophilic cholangitis (ANC) shows
a predominantly neutrophilic infiltrate in the epithelium
and lumen of the bile ducts, and edema may be present in
the portal areas. In more severe cases, the inflammation
extends into the hepatic parenchyma and may potentially
lead to development of hepatic abscesses. In more chronic
cases (chronic neutrophilic cholangitis – CNC), the infiltrate becomes more mixed in nature, comprising lymphocytes, plasma cells and fibrosis in addition to neutrophils.

Concurrent inflammation is commonly identified in
other organs such as the pancreas (60%), intestines (50%),
and kidneys (60%). The combination of cholangitis, pancreatitis, and inflammatory bowel disease is commonly
known as triaditis, and occurs in approximately 25% of
NC cases.
Lymphocytic cholangitis is attributed to an immune‐
mediated process although some authors have suggested
that it may be a more chronic form of NC. The inflammatory infiltrate is predominantly T lymphocytes in the
portal region, and in some cases the biliary ductular
­epithelium. With chronicity, portal bridging fibrosis can
develop, severe forms of which have been referred to as
sclerosing cholangitis. Proliferation of bile ducts or ductopenia can develop and ductopenia is also considered to
reflect an immune‐mediated process.
The pathogenesis of this disease complex is incompletely
understood. Recent work has suggested that bacteria may
play a role in LC, as bacterial DNA has been found in the
bile of 38% of cats affected with LC. Although this may
support the theory that this is a chronic form of NC, it
could also be the consequence of the disease, with dilation
of the bile ducts and decreased peristalsis p
­ ermitting retrograde ascent of bacteria from the duodenum. Whether
or not Helicobacter spp. play a role in triggering initiation
of this disease also remains speculative. Another recent
study has also documented bacteria within the hepatic
parenchyma but not the bile ducts in cats with NC, questioning the traditional hypothesis of ascending infection
and suggesting hematogenous entry via the portal vein.

­Epidemiology
Cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis was first described in
cats in the 1980s. It is the second most common feline
hepatic disorder after hepatic lipidosis in the USA, with

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

688

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

hepatic lipidosis being diagnosed twice as often as
­cholangitis, although prevalence within a necropsy population is only documented at 0.86%. The prevalence of
the different forms of cholangitis is difficult to establish,
due to different classifications in older publications.
In the UK, cholangitis anecdotally may be more common
than hepatic lipidosis.

­Signalment
Neutrophilic cholangitis has been reported in a wide age
range, although most commonly young to middle‐aged
cats are affected and a recent study documented a
median age at diagnosis of 110 months (9.2 years). No
breed or sex predispositions are reported. LC was previously reported to affect primarily young cats, and
Persians were suggested to be overrepresented. More
recent studies, however, have suggested that this disease
affects mainly middle‐aged to older cats, with a median
age of around 10.5–11 years. Again, no breed or sex predisposition has consistently been identified.

­History and Clinical Signs
Cats suffering from NC often present more acutely ill
with a shorter history than those with LC. Signs reported
by owners include anorexia or inappetence, vomiting
and/or diarrhea, lethargy, weight loss, and ptyalism
(excessive production of saliva). Physical examination
findings can include dehydration, icterus, hepatomegaly,
abdominal pain, and pyrexia.
Cats suffering from LC often remain bright, and some
may show polyphagia rather than anorexia, although
either is possible. Vomiting and diarrhea tend to be more
intermittent, hence a more insidious history prior to seeking veterinary attention. Acholic feces can occur in cats
with biliary obstruction, for example from cholelithiasis or
with ductopenia due to sclerosing cholangitis (Figure 63.1).
Pyrexia is less common on physical examination
although hepatomegaly and, in advanced cases ascites
can be present.
It is not possible to differentiate the two conditions
based on history and physical examination findings
alone, as there can be significant overlap in presentation.

­Diagnosis
Routine hematology is often nonspecific. Neutrophilia
may be more commonly seen with NC than LC, and neutrophils can have a toxic appearance. Lymphopenia is
also a nonspecific finding. While significant (10–40× ref-

erence range) increases in alanine aminotransferase
(ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and gamma‐glutamyl transferase (GGT)
can be seen, not all cases of cholangitis (NC or LC) will
have elevated values. Hyperglobulinemia may be seen
with LC. Electrolyte abnormalities, most commonly
hypokalemia, may be present as a consequence of vomiting and/or diarrhea.
Bilirubin is frequently, but not always elevated. The
effect on bile acids is likely to be similar to bilirubin, as
both substances are excreted in bile and affected by cholestasis (see Figure 63.1). Intrahepatic cholestasis results
with reduced flow of bilirubin from the hepatocytes into
the bile canaliculus, as a result of periportal edema and
inflammation. Obstruction of larger bile ducts due to
inflammation or cholelithiasis also causes extrahepatic
cholestasis.
Urinalysis should be performed to add further information. The specific gravity can be useful to assess for
concurrent renal involvement if azotemia is identified. In
acutely ill patients it is often high due to dehydration.
The finding of bilirubinuria is abnormal in cats, so if
identified, it reflects hyperbilirubinemia. It does not help
differentiate between the causes of icterus, but if urobilinogen is absent, this may indicate abnormal enterohepatic recirculation, suggestive of extrahepatic bile duct
obstruction (see Figure 63.1).
Although imaging can add further information, findings may be normal or nonspecific for cholangitis.
Radiography can identify hepatic enlargement, and with
chronic inflammatory changes, mineralization of the biliary system can be seen. Presence of ascitic fluid will
reduce the utility of this imaging modality.
On ultrasonographic examination, the liver often
appears normal although it may be enlarged and have a
normal, hypoechoic or hyperechoic texture. Due to the
potential for “triaditis,” it is also important to evaluate
the remainder of the abdomen fully, especially the pancreas, intestines, and kidneys. Free fluid may be sampled
for biochemical analysis, cytology, and culture to rule
out some other differential diagnoses such as feline
infectious peritonitis or neoplasia.
The biliary system should be closely evaluated,
although no differentiation can be made between NC
and LC based on ultrasound findings. The gallbladder
can contain echogenic debris, although this may be seen
in normal cats as well. If the common bile duct is found
to be distended (>4 mm), it should be checked closely
for intraluminal (e.g., choleliths) or extraluminal (e.g.,
pancreatic mass effect) obstructive lesions that require
surgical correction (Figure 63.2). Thickening of the gallbladder wall (>1 mm) is suggestive of cholecystitis.
Ultrasound guidance may be used to obtain bile for
culture, although this can be problematic if the bile is

63 Feline Inflammatory Liver Disease

VetBooks.ir

RETICULOENDOTHELIAL CELL

HEPATOCYTE

RED BLOOD CELL
HEMOGLOBIN
CO

GLOBIN

CHOLESTEROL
FERRITIN
CHOLICACID (1′)

Fe
TRANSFERRIN

BILIVERDIN

CHENODEOXYCHOLIC
ACID (1′)

BILIRUBIN
BILE CANALICULUS

BOUND TO ALBUMIN

BILIRUBIN + LIGANDIN

PRIMARY BILE ACIDS
Aminoacylamination

UDP glucuronyl
transferase

TAURINE

BILIRUBIN GLUCURONIDE

GLYCINE

CONJUGATED BILE ACIDS

• BILE DUCTULE
• INTRALOBULAR DUCT
• INTERLOBULAR DUCT

ENTEROHEPATIC
RECIRCULATION

• HEPATIC DUCT
• CYSTIC DUCT

GALL
BLADDER

N

O

M

M

CO
LE

BI
CT

DU

RENAL
EXCRETION

DECONJUGATED
BILE ACIDS

LITHOCHOLIC ACID (2′)
DEOXYCHOLIC ACUD (2′)
UROBILIN
FECES

CONJUGATED
BILE ACIDS
CONJUGATED
BILIRUBIN

UROBILINOGEN

STERCOBILIN
ILEUM
COLON

DUODENUM

Figure 63.1 Diagrammatic representation of normal biliary physiology. Cholestasis results in hyperbilirubinemia and elevated bile acids.
With complete obstruction of the biliary system, urobilinogen will not be available for urinary excretion, and stercobilin will not be
present in the feces (acholic feces). Bacteria are responsible for deconjugation of bile acids and bilirubin, therefore these processes may
also be affected by abnormal gut flora.

inspissated, requiring use of a larger gauge needle and
hence potentially increased risk of bile peritonitis.
Coagulation times may be prolonged due to vitamin K
deficiency, both as a result of anorexia but also because
cholestasis reduces passage of bile acids into the intestine
where they are required for absorption of this fat‐soluble
vitamin. Coagulation times should therefore always be
evaluated prior to liver biopsy. Liver biopsy is required for

a definitive diagnosis. Due to the patchy distribution of
lesions, the larger samples obtained via laparoscopy or
surgical wedge biopsies may be preferable to needle
(“Tru‐cut”) biopsies. Ideally, both liver and bile should be
cultured, as different organisms may be cultured from
each site, although culture of bile yields higher recovery
of organisms than culture of liver. Anaerobic as well as
aerobic culture should be performed.

689

VetBooks.ir

690

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 63.2 Ultrasound images from a cat diagnosed with neutrophilic cholangitis. Cytology of an aspirate of bile showed large
numbers of predominantly degenerate neutrophils, many of which contained intracellular bacteria. A profuse growth of E.coli was
cultured. (a) The gallbladder is distended and contains hyperechoic sludge. (b) The common bile duct is markedly dilated at 0.94 cm
(normal <0.4 cm). (c) The walls of the common bile duct (CBD) are thickened.

Lymphocytic cholangitis needs to be differentiated
from lymphoma, and immunophenotyping or T cell
receptor polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for gene rearrangement may need to be considered if the diagnosis is
in doubt.

­Therapy
If chronic cholangitis is identified to be due to liver
flukes, treatment involves the administration of praziquantel (30 mg/kg PO q24h for 5–10 days). Treatment of
necroinflammatory hepatitis primarily involves withdrawal of any hepatotoxic drugs and use of supportive
and hepatoprotective therapies as described later.
Patients with ANC can be seriously ill, potentially in
septic shock from bacteremia. Fluid therapy should
therefore be administered at rates appropriate to the

degree of dehydration or shock present. Potassium supplementation at 20 mmol/L fluid is likely to prevent
development of hypokalemia with rehydration; however,
if hypokalemia is already documented, higher rates may
be required.
Analgesia should be administered as abdominal pain is
a common finding in these patients. Opioids are preferred over nonsteroidal antiinflammatories, especially
in hypovolemic patients.
Antibacterial therapy should ideally be based on culture and sensitivity results, but pending these, empiric
choices may be made based on the likely bacteria present
(gram negative and anaerobes – see Table 63.1).
Combination therapy may be required (e.g., fluoroquinolone plus metronidazole). Intravenous antibacterial
therapy should be used initially in systemically ill
patients. Antibacterial therapy is typically administered
for a minimum of four weeks, or until values of hepatic

VetBooks.ir

63 Feline Inflammatory Liver Disease

Table 63.1 Antibacterial agents used in the management of feline hepatobiliary disease
Drug

Dose

Comments

Amikacin

10–15 mg/kg IV, SC, IM
q24h

Gram‐negative bacteria. Nephrotoxic (less so than gentamicin), therefore only
used if resistance patterns merit its use

Amoxicillin‐clavulanate

12.5–25 mg/kg IV, PO
q8–12h

Broad‐spectrum antibacterial but may not be effective against Pseudomonas or
Klebsiella. Oral absorption reduced in systemically ill patients

Cephalexin
(first generation)

10–35 mg/kg PO q8–12h

May not be effective against Pseudomonas or Proteus. Poor efficacy against
anaerobes

Cefotaxime
(third generation)

20–40 mg/kg IV, SC
q8–12h

More effective against gram‐negative but less effective against gram‐positive
organisms than cephalexin. Variable activity against anaerobes

Cefovecin
(third generation)

8 mg/kg SC q14 days

More effective against gram‐negative but less effective against gram‐positive
organisms than cephalexin. Possibly better activity against anaerobes than
cefotaxime

Cefuroxime
(second generation)

10–15 mg/kg IV q8–12 h

More effective against gram negative but less effective against gram positive
organisms than cephalexin, but not as effective as 3rd generation cephalosporins

Chloramphenicol

15–25 mg/kg PO, SC,
IM, slow IV q12h

Good efficacy against gram‐positive organisms and anaerobes. Moderate
activity against gram‐negative organisms. Not used routinely as cholestasis may
increase risk of toxicity

Clindamycin

5.5–12 mg/kg PO q12h
10 mg/kg IV q12h

Effective against gram‐positive organisms and anaerobes. Needs to be
combined with drug effective against gram‐negative organisms. Concentrated
in the bile, but care with reduced liver function as excretion is via hepatic
metabolism

Marbofloxacin

2 mg/kg PO, IV q24h

Good efficacy against gram‐negative and some gram‐positive organisms, but
not effective against anaerobes. Preferred to enrofloxacin as decreased risk of
retinal damage

Metronidazole

8–10 mg PO, IV q12h

Narrow spectrum against anaerobes. May cause nausea, vomiting, and
neurologic signs. Intravenous infusions given over 20–30 minutes

Pradofloxacin

3 mg/kg PO q24h

Better efficacy against anaerobic organisms than marbofloxacin

Options pending culture results:
Amoxicillin‐clavulanate
Cephalosporin + metronidazole
Fluoroquinolone + clindamycin or metronidazole
IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; PO, by mouth (per os); SC, subcutaneous.

enzymes return to normal. In some patients antibacterial
therapy may need to be continued for 2–3 months, and
repeat culture of bile may be warranted to assess response
to therapy.
Surgery may be required to manage biliary obstruction, if identified. The above treatments should be initiated first to stabilize the patient as biliary surgery is
complex and may require prolonged general anesthesia.
Surgical procedures such as stenting of the bile duct,
cholecystectomy, cholecystotomy or biliary bypass
(cholecystoduodenostomy, cholecystojejunostomy) may
be required.
Nutritional support is very important as, if hepatic
lipidosis is not already present, these anorectic patients
are at risk of developing it. Placement of a feeding tube is
recommended. A nasoesophageal tube may be placed in
the first instance, especially if prolonged clotting times
are identified, but an esophagostomy tube is preferred.
The wider bore of these tubes increases the range of diets

that may be administered as well as enabling some medications to be given via this route. In addition, the chance
of removal is reduced, and owners often can manage
these tubes at home. Gastrostomy tubes may be placed at
time of surgical intervention if required.
“Critical care” diets are generally appropriate as they are
highly digestible, can be administered via feeding tubes and
are supplemented with arginine, taurine, and antioxidants.
Hepatic encephalopthy (HE) is usually a contraindication to
feeding a high‐protein diet but in this population of cats,
signs of HE are generally attributable to arginine deficiency
from anorexia and will correct with feeding protein. An
exception to this is if HE is present due to development of
acquired portosystemic shunts subsequent to severe fibrosis, although significant hepatic fibrosis is uncommon in
cats. Longer term dietary management should consider the
presence of concurrent diseases and be chosen accordingly.
A diet for inflammatory bowel disease may be more appropriate than a “hepatic” diet, for example.

691

VetBooks.ir

692

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

Table 63.2 Supportive therapies used in the management of feline hepatobiliary disease
Medication

Dose

Comments

Buprenorphine

0.01–0.02 mg/kg SC, IV, IM
q8h
0.02 mg/kg TM q8h

Partial mu agonist – may affect use of full mu agonist perioperatively.
Can cause dysphoria

Fentanyl

2.5–10 μg/kg/h CRI
25 μg/h transdermal
patch (>3 kg)
12.5 μg/h transdermal patch
(<3 kg)

Full mu agonist. May be indicated with marked pain (e.g., bile duct
obstruction or peritonitis)

Methadone

0.1–0.5 mg/kg IM or slow IV
q4h
0.1 mg/kg/h CRI

Full mu agonist. May be indicated with marked pain (e.g., bile duct
obstruction or peritonitis)

Morphine

0.1–0.4 mg/kg IM or slow IV
q4h
0.1 mg/kg/h CRI

Full mu agonist. May be indicated with marked pain (e.g., bile duct
obstruction or peritonitis)

Cobalamin (vitamin
B12)

0.125–0.25 mg/cat SC q7–14
days

Liver cobalamin stores may be depleted in the face of normal serum
cobalamin; may help stimulate appetite

Vitamin K1

0.5–1.0 mg/kg SC, PO q12h
for 3 doses

Given by SC injection using a 25 ga needle

Vitamin E

10 IU/kg PO q24h

Antioxidant often depleted with anorexia or malabsorption

Cimetidine

2.5–5.0 mg/kg PO q12h

H2 receptor antagonist with weak antacid effects

Famotidine

0.5–1.0 mg/kg PO q12–24h

More potent H2 receptor blocker. Prokinetic effect unknown

Ranitidine

2 mg/kg PO, SC,
slow IV q8–12h

Prokinetic effect may be beneficial in addition to H2 receptor blockade

Omeprazole

1 mg/kg PO, IV q12–24h

Antacid of choice; more potent thanthe H2 receptor blockers by
causing complete blockade of the proton pump

Maropitant

0.5–1.0 mg/kg SC q24h

Antiemetic acting on NK1 receptors. May also provide some visceral
analgesia

Metoclopramide

1 mg/kg/24h CRI

Central antiemetic effect in cats questionable due to lack of
dopaminergic receptors, but peripheral prokinetic effects

Sucralfate

250 mg/cat PO q8–12h

Protects against esophageal, gastric, and duodenal ulceration

S‐adenosyl-Lmethionine (SAM‐e)

20–40 mg/kg PO q24h
90 mg/cat/day

Nucleotide essential for major hepatic biochemical pathways with
antioxidant and hepatoprotective properties. A higher dose is required
if enteric‐coated tablets are crushed for administration via feeding tube

Ursodeoxycholic acid
(UDCA)

10–15 mg/kg PO q24h

Synthetic hydrophilic bile acids that aid bile flow. It has
antiinflammatory, immunomodulatory, and antifibrotic activities, and
is cytoprotective to hepatocytes

Milk thistle (common
name for Silybum
marianum)

20–50 mg/kg per day
Optimal dosage unknown

Contains silibinin (sylibin/silymarin); may be useful for treatment of
chronic and acute liver disease, and may modulate cirrhosis. Evidence
base is limited

Chlorambucil

2 mg/cat PO q48h (>4 kg)
2 mg/cat q72h (<4 kg)

Immunosuppressive effect is not well documented

Prednisolone

1–2 mg/kg PO q12h (LC)
tapering to 0.5 mg/kg q24h
0.5 mg/kg PO q12–24h (NC)

Immunosuppressive doses used for LC; antiinflammatory doses used
for NC

Analgesia

Vitamins

Management of vomiting

Hepatoprotection

Immunomodulation

CRI, constant rate infusion; IM, intramuscular; IU, international units; IV, intravenous; LC, lymphocytic cholangitis; NC, neutrophilic cholangitis;
PO, by mouth (per os); SC, subcutaneous; TM, transmucosal.

VetBooks.ir

63 Feline Inflammatory Liver Disease

Vitamin supplementation is usually beneficial in anorectic cats. B vitamins become rapidly depleted and thiamine deficiency can contribute to neurologic signs, while
cobalamin deficiency can exacerbate anorexia. Vitamin E
is an antioxidant that also has antiinflammatory properties. Vitamin K supplementation may be required to correct coagulopathies (Table 63.2).
Symptomatic therapy can include antiemetics (e.g.,
metoclopramide or maropitant) and gastroprotectants
(e.g., H2 blockers, proton pump inhibitors, sucralfate).
Control of vomiting is important for patient comfort and
to reduce the risk of feeding tubes becoming dislodged.
Gastroprotectants may be beneficial due to the presence
of concurrent inflammatory bowel disease and to address
gastritis induced by persistent vomiting (see Table 63.2).
S‐adenosyl‐L‐methionine (SAM‐e) has a number of
hepatoprotectant effects: it is a glutathione precursor
(hence antioxidant properties), it stabilizes cell membranes, and it modulates inflammatory cytokines. As low
glutathione levels are present in a high percentage of cats
with hepatobiliary disease, administration of SAM‐e
should be beneficial, although no published data exist to
support this claim (see Table 63.2).
Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) is a hydrophilic bile
acid that has a number of benefits: choloresis, that is,
making the bile more liquid and promoting bile flow;
replacement of more toxic, hydrophobic bile acids; antiapoptosis; antioxidant; and immunomodulation (see
Table 63.2). It has been used as the sole therapy for treatment of primary sclerosing cholangitis in people, but its
use as sole therapy for treatment of LC in cats did not
compare favorably to prednisolone.
Immunosuppression is considered important for the
management of LC, but should only be commenced once
NC has been ruled out. Prednisolone is typically
employed, starting at higher, immunosuppressive doses
and tapering to as low a dose as possible once in remission (see Table 63.2). Some authors have also advocated
the use of methotrexate or chlorambucil.

Development of fibrosis is seen with progression of the
disease. While the use of colchicine to reduce fibrosis has
previously been advocated in dogs, there are no studies
to demonstrate benefit. Moreover, its use can be associated with significant side‐effects. Current medical advice
suggests that it not be recommended, although silymarin
and UDCA may have potential antifibrotic effects.
Our poor understanding of the etiopathogenesis of the
cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis complex, and lack of controlled clinical trials, combined with an inability on occasions to obtain diagnostic samples before antibacterial
therapy, can often result in initiation of therapy with an
antibacterial along with other supportive therapies as
indicated. If a diagnosis of NC has been made, and
improvement has plateaued, prednisolone at antiinflammatory doses could be introduced as this may be beneficial in attenuating the inflammatory response.

­Prognosis
Prognosis will depend on the severity of the disease.
Obstruction of the bile duct, necessitating surgical intervention, has a guarded prognosis, particularly where biliary diversion surgery is required. Cats with ascites
similarly have a guarded prognosis as this is likely to represent the presence of significant fibrosis. However, cats
that survive the initial acute phase of NC or that are diagnosed with LC often go on to live for several years.
Relapses are possible, especially if there is a concurrent
condition such as pancreatitis that may be difficult to
control.
Lymphocytic cholangitis is likely a progressive disease,
and dilation of the bile ducts may be irreversible. This has
been proposed to increase the risk of these cats developing ascending infections and potentially cholecystitis,
therefore although recurrence is not inevitable, periodic
monitoring of liver parameters +/‐ ultrasonographic evaluation of the biliary system may be warranted.

­Further Reading
Callahan Clark JE, Haddad J, Brown D, et al. Feline
cholangitis: a necropsy study of 44 cats (1986–2008).
J Feline Med Surg 2011; 13(8): 570–6.
Otte CM, Gutierrez O, Favier R, et al. Detection of
bacterial DNA in bile of cats with lymphocytic
cholangitis. Vet Microbiol 2012; 156(1–2): 217–21.
Otte CM, Penning L, Rothuizen J, Favier R. Retrospective
comparison of prednisolone and ursodeoxycholic
acid for the treatment of feline lymphocytic cholangitis.
Vet J 2013; 195(2): 205–9.

Twedt DC, Cullen J, McCord K, et al. Evaluation of
fluorescence in situ hybridization for the detection of
bacteria in feline inflammatory liver disease. J Feline
Med Surg 2014; 16(2): 109–17.
Warren A, Center S, McDonough S, et al. Histopathologic
features, immunophenotyping, clonality and eubacterial
fluorescence in situ hybridisation in cats with
lymphocytic cholangitis/cholangiohepatitis. Vet Pathol
2011; 48(3): 627–41.

693

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

695

64
Canine Inflammatory Liver Disease
Nick Bexfield, BVetMed, PhD, DSAM, DECVIM-CA, PGDipMEdSci, FHEA, MRCVS
Department of Veterinary Medicine, Queen’s Veterinary School Hospital, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK

The most frequently identified inflammatory liver diseases in dogs are nonspecific reactive hepatitis, acute
hepatitis (AH), and chronic hepatitis (CH) and their histologic appearance has been standardized by the World
Small Animal Veterinary Association’s (WSAVA) Liver
Standardization Group. Nonspecific reactive hepatitis
represents a nonspecific response to a variety of extrahepatic disease processes, especially febrile illnesses and
inflammation somewhere in the splanchnic bed.
Histologically, it is characterized by an inflammatory
infiltrate in portal areas, and sometimes in the parenchyma, without evidence of hepatocellular necrosis or
apoptosis. It results from a disease occurring outside the
liver, so will not be discussed further. AH is characterized
by a combination of inflammation and hepatocellular
apoptosis and necrosis, with the specific features varying
according to the cause. The majority of AH cases occur as
a result of toxin or drug ingestion, and are discussed further in Chapter 62.
Acute hepatitis can sometimes be caused by infection
with certain bacteria or viruses, and these are detailed
below. CH is defined histologically by the presence of
hepatocellular apoptosis or necrosis, a variable mononuclear or mixed inflammatory cell infiltrate, regeneration,
and fibrosis. It is the most frequently identified canine
inflammatory liver disease and so will be the focus of most
of this chapter.

­Chronic Hepatitis
Etiology/Pathophysiology
The development of fibrosis is the key pathologic change
that leads to the development of CH. The hepatic stellate
cell, also known as the Ito cell or lipocyte, is central in the
development of fibrosis in humans and rats, and evidence also suggests its involvement in the pathogenesis

of hepatic fibrosis in dogs. Hepatic stellate cells reside in
the space of Disse, between the sinusoidal endothelial
cells and the hepatocytes. In the healthy liver, they are
the major storage site of vitamin A, but in chronic liver
injury they are stimulated to transform into collagen‐
secreting, activated cells that express smooth muscle‐
specific alpha‐actin and secrete high‐density matrix and
collagen into the space of Disse. The secretion of collagen and formation of fibrous tissue from activated
­stellate cells are believed to be indirect via the release
of cytokines from inflammatory cells, although some
inflammatory mediators act on them directly. Fibrous
tissue within the liver leads to the development of intrahepatic portal hypertension by altering sinusoidal tone
and blood flow. The development of portal hypertension
results in many of the complications of chronic liver disease such as ascites and gastrointestinal (GI) ulceration.
The known or postulated causes of CH are listed below,
although the majority of cases have no identifiable cause
and thus are termed idiopathic.
Infectious Causes
Canine Acidophil Cell Hepatitis Virus

A potential viral cause of AH and CH was identified in
1985 and named “canine acidophil cell hepatitis virus”
although no specific agent was isolated. Histopathologic
examination revealed an inflammatory infiltrate with
areas of hepatocyte necrosis and scattered numbers of
large cells with acidophilic cytoplasm, termed “acidophil cells.” When liver homogenate and serum from
affected dogs were injected into naive animals, this
resulted in the development of clinical and pathologic
changes of AH that in some dogs progressed to CH.
However, no further work to identify the potential
transmissible hepatitis‐causing agent was performed,
nor have further reports emerged.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

696

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

Canine Adenovirus‐1

Adenoviruses are medium‐sized viruses, two of which
are known to infect dogs: canine adenovirus type 1
(CAV‐1) and canine adenovirus type 2 (CAV‐2). CAV‐1
is well known as a cause of AH in nonimmune dogs, but
CH has also been experimentally reproduced in partially
immunized dogs challenged with CAV‐1. However, several studies have failed to identify CAV‐1 in liver tissue
from large numbers of clinical cases of CH.
Canine Hepacivirus

A novel virus, canine hepacivirus (CHV), was recently
identified in outbreaks of respiratory illness in dogs from
animal shelters in the USA. CHV was also identified at
low levels in hepatocytes dogs that died of “unexplained
GI illness” although the results of liver histology were not
reported. Despite CHV being identified in canine liver
tissue, it is unclear if this virus is hepatotrophic or if it
causes disease. However, in two recent studies, there
was no evidence of exposure to, or a carrier state of, CHV
in large cohorts of dogs with CH, suggesting that the
virus is probably not associated with canine CH.
Hepatitis Viruses A, B, C, E, and GBV‐C

Although hepatitis B (HBV) and C viruses (HCV) are by
far the most frequent causes of human chronic viral hepatitis, several other viruses are implicated. The more frequently described include hepatitis A (HAV) and E
viruses (HEV), and GB virus‐C (GBV‐C), although these
are generally associated with the development of AH.
However, previous attempts using polymerase chain
reaction (PCR)‐based approaches have failed to identify
HAV, HBV, HCV, HEV, and GBV‐C in liver tissue from
large numbers of dogs with CH.
Bacteria

Infection with leptospires is a well‐known cause of AH,
as detailed later in this chapter. Infection with leptospires
can also cause CH, with histologic changes consisting
mainly of lymphoplasmacytic, portal and intralobular
inflammation, hepatocyte necrosis, and biliary stasis.
The organisms are relatively sparse and difficult to find
with conventional staining techniques, so it is possible
that CH associated with leptospirosis is underrecognized. Using nested PCR, a recent study failed to detect
Leptospira spp. DNA in 98 dogs with CH.
Infection with other bacteria is a relatively uncommon
cause of CH. Bacillus piliformis, Helicobacter canis,
Ehrlichia canis and Bartonella spp have also been identified in dogs with CH, but causality has not been clearly
established. Dogs do develop cholangitis or cholangiohepatitis, and this is covered in further detail in
Chapter 67. Additionally, granulomatous hepatitis is an
unusual presentation, in which the predominant cell

type present is the macrophage. Lesions are usually multifocal and have been associated with numerous bacteria,
including Nocardia, Mycobacterium, Rhodococcus,
Bartonella, and Borrelia. Chronic hepatic leptospirosis is
a particular concern in these cases and should be ruled
out with fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH). In
addition, several fungi have been associated with this
specific histologic diagnosis.
Autoimmunity
An immune-mediated aetiology to human liver disease is
well recognised, and the criteria for its diagnosis are well
established. Diagnosis is based on increased serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) activity, presence of positive serum autoantibody titres, increased serum IgG
concentration, characteristic histopathology findings,
and exclusion of other aetiologies. However, there is only
anecdotal evidence for an immune-mediated cause to
canine CH. Circulating autoantibodies were present in
the serum of dogs with a variety of liver diseases, and
antiliver membrane protein antibodies have been identified in serum of dogs with CH. However, the question
that remains from all these studies is whether these
autoantibodies are the primary cause of the disease, i.e.
suggestive of an autoimmune aetiology, or whether they
are a secondary phenomenon. Peripheral blood mononuclear cell proliferation in response to liver membrane protein was also significantly higher in dogs with CH
compared to control dogs. Moreover, high numbers of
CD3+ lymphocytes are found in the liver of dogs with
CH, again suggesting the involvement of the immune system in the etiology of the disease. An immune-mediated
aetiology to CH in some dogs is also suggested by the fact
that there is a female gender predilection, along with
clearly defined breed predispositions. In addition, the
association of certain susceptibility and resistance MHC
class II haplotypes with CH indicates a role of the immune
system in disease development, although this does not
necessarily point to an autoimmune aetiology.
Copper
The accumulation of copper in liver tissue has been
described in several breeds of dog. Excessive accumulation includes that seen in copper-associated hepatitis,
sometimes known as true “copper storage” disease,
where the primary initiating event is a defect in copper
excretion leading to secondary hepatocyte damage, and
the copper accumulation which occurs secondary to an
underlying inflammatory liver disease. Copperassociated hepatitis was first described in the Bedlington
terrier over three decades ago. Since then, many studies
have detailed its clinical course and pathologic features,

VetBooks.ir

64 Canine Inflammatory Liver Disease

including the progressive accumulation of copper in
hepatocytes starting in zone 3 and leading to the development of CH. Copper‐associated hepatopathies have
been reported in several breeds of dog including the
Dalmatian, Labrador retriever, Skye terrier, West
Highland white terrier, and Doberman pinscher. These
may not be true copper storage diseases as copper does
not build up throughout life, and the amount of copper
stored is often not correlated with the severity of the
underlying disease. Although uncommon in the United
Kingdom, copper‐associated hepatopathy is increasingly
seen in other countries, especially The Netherlands.
Disorders associated with excess copper accumulation
are covered in more detail in Chapter 62.
Epidemiology
Historically, the term canine CH was poorly defined
and used to describe a variety of inflammatory liver diseases. The terms chronic active hepatitis and chronic
lobar hepatitis were used early in the description of the
disease, although these names have now largely been
abandoned in favor of CH. Improvements in the classification of canine CH were brought about by the
WSAVA Liver Standardization Group which established standardized histologic criteria for diagnosis.
Since the publication of these criteria, one study has
demonstrated a postmortem prevalence of 12% in a
first opinion practice setting in the UK. Data to assess
the prevalence of the disease in other countries are not
available, although anecdotally CH appears to be the
most frequently identified inflammatory liver disease in
dogs worldwide.
Signalment
Chronic hepatitis typically affects middle‐aged to
older dogs, with the median age for all breeds in a recent
study being 8 years (range, 7 months to 16 years). Females
appear to be predisposed, with a female to male ratio of
1.5:1.0 in one study. Several reports detail breed predispositions to CH. The first of these was performed on a
Swedish population of dogs, and demonstrated that the
American and English cocker spaniel, West Highland
white terrier, Labrador retriever, Doberman pinscher,
and Scottish terrier had an increased risk for CH. In this
study, the disease was reported to occur more commonly
in middle‐aged to older animals and there was a gender
predisposition in male English and American cocker
spaniels and female Labrador retrievers. A recent study
performed in the UK assessed the breed distribution by
comparing the signalment of 551 cases with a histologic
diagnosis of CH to that of a large control population.
From a total of 61 breeds, the American cocker spaniel,

Table 64.1 Age and gender data for breeds with an increased risk
for developing canine chronic hepatitis
Breed

Median age at diagnosis (range)

Gender

American
cocker spaniel

5 years 6 months (2 years to
11 years 3 months)

1F, 5M

Cairn terrier

10 years 2 months (7 years to
13 years 5 months)

4F, 5M

Dalmatian

4 years 7 months (3 years to
12 years)

9F, 1M

Doberman
pinscher

5 years 4 months (2 years
6 months to 10 years)

16F, 8M

English cocker
spaniel

8 years 9 months (1 year
3 months to 14 years)

34F, 19M

English springer
spaniel

5 years (1 year 2 months to
11 years)

60F, 20M

Great Dane

6 years 2 months (1 year
2 months to 7 years 11 months)

3F, 3M

Labrador
retriever

8 years 3 months (2 year
8 month to 13 years)

63F, 32M

Samoyed

10 years (3 years 1 month to
11 years)

2F, 3M

F, female; M, male.

cairn terrier, Dalmatian, Doberman pinscher, English
cocker spaniel, English springer spaniel, Great Dane,
Labrador retriever, and Samoyed were found to be at
increased risk for developing CH (Table 64.1).
History and Clinical Signs
Clinical signs in dogs with CH vary, and are usually
nonspecific and insidious in onset. Sometimes another
disease, stress or therapy causes sudden decompensation. The liver has tremendous functional and structural reserve, and a significant loss of normal hepatic
tissue can occur with minimal or no change in clinical
signs. In addition, the liver has a remarkable capacity to
regenerate following hepatic injury, providing the damage is not too severe or ongoing. Overt liver failure does
not develop until at least 70–80% of functional capacity
is lost, so the development of clinical signs implies
marked impairment of liver function. In addition, some
dogs with advanced CH or cirrhosis can be asymptomatic, or alternatively may present with signs of “acute”
liver disease.
The clinician should pay particular attention to subtle
waxing and waning GI signs, depression, lethargy, anorexia, weight loss, and polyuria and polydipsia. Additional
signs that may be more suggestive of CH, although still
not specific, include jaundice, ascites, coagulopathy, and
neurologic signs caused by hepatic encephalopathy.

697

VetBooks.ir

698

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

Clinical signs of hepatic encephalopathy, which are often
intermittent, include behavioral changes, hypersialism,
head pressing, circling, ataxia, temporary blindness, seizures, and coma. In one study of 101 dogs with both AH
and CH, the most commonly identified clinical signs were
lethargy (56/101), anorexia (56/101), vomiting (48/101),
polyuria and polydipsia (47/101), and weight loss (28/101).
Physical examination findings are generally relatively
unremarkable. Poor body condition is often seen in animals with CH. With progressive disease and the further
development of fibrosis, liver size reduces in dogs with CH.
Ascites and icterus may also be seen with chronic disease.
Diagnosis
Clinical Pathology

Clinical pathology is usually the next step in the investigation of a dog with suspected CH. Sometimes, results
of clinical pathology performed for another reason, for
example as a preanesthetic blood screen, may fortuitously reveal the presence of CH. Clinical pathology
findings include elevations of liver enzymes, especially
hepatocellular enzymes released as a result of liver cell
damage, namely ALT and aspartate aminotransferase
(AST). Increased ALT activity is the primary clinical laboratory finding in dogs with CH, and is raised in over
90% of cases. In addition, the markers of cholestasis,
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and gamma‐glutamyl transferase (GGT), are invariably elevated. It is important to
remember that liver enzyme activity is not a test of liver
function, and very occasionally a dog with advanced CH
may have liver enzymes within the reference interval. In
addition, elevations in liver enzymes are not an uncommon reaction to many other diseases and these elevations can sometimes be marked.
While liver enzymes do not give any indication of liver
function, there are other tests on the biochemistry panel
which provide some information about liver function.
Due to the development of fibrosis, liver function in dogs
with CH is progressively compromised, and so these
markers are particularly useful in diagnosis. With progressive liver dysfunction, levels of albumin, urea, glucose
and coagulation factors decrease, while the concentration of bile acids, ammonia, and bilirubin increases.
Hypoalbuminemia occurs in about 40% of cases, although
with advanced disease (cirrhosis), this increases to 75%.
None of these tests are completely specific for liver disease, so they should always be interpreted in the light of
other clinical and clinicopathologic findings.
Both qualitative and quantitative abnormalities in
erythrocytes may also be present in dogs with CH, in
combination with alterations in white cell and platelet
numbers. The more frequently encountered abnormalities in dogs with CH include mild nonregenerative anemia

of chronic disease, which is normocytic and normochromic. Sometimes abnormal red cells including acanthocytes (irregular large surface projections) and/or target
cells (codocytes), which are dense‐centered cells surrounded by a clear area, can be identified on a blood
smear. Dogs with CH may have a neutrophilic ­leukocytosis,
although this is a nonspecific change. Thrombocytopenia
may develop due to platelet sequestration or increased
destruction, and alterations in platelet function (thrombocytopathies) may also occur.
Abnormalities may be present in the urine of dogs with
CH, including a low specific gravity (<1.030), bilirubinuria, increased urobilinogen, urate crystals, and occasionally urate calculi. Approximately 10% and 60% of dogs
have prolonged prothrombin time (PT) and partial
thromboplastin time (PTT) respectively.
Diagnostic Imaging

Diagnostic imaging is usually the next step after clinical
pathology in the assessment of the dog with suspected
CH. Abdominal radiography can be used to assess liver
size, as dogs with CH may have a reduced liver size.
However, the liver may appear normal on routine radiographic evaluation, even when severely diseased. Ultra­
sonography is the preferred imaging modality for the
investigation of liver disease. In one study of 67 dogs
with CH, only 15 had no identifiable ultrasonographic
abnormalities. Hepatic size was assessed as normal in
26, enlarged in eight and small in 26. Hepatic structure
was found to be normal in 27, irregular in 31, and 11
had increased echogenicity. Nodular processes were
observed in 16 dogs and ascites was present in 18. The
reader is referred to Chapter 61 for further details on
diagnostic imaging in the investigation of liver disease.
Liver Biopsy

It is not possible to make a definitive diagnosis of CH from
the results of clinical pathology or diagnostic imaging. In
some cases, a tentative diagnosis can be made but definitive diagnosis ultimately relies on histologic examination
of liver tissue. Moreover, descriptors of severity of inflammation and the amount of fibrosis are provided, and these
can be used prognostically and therapeutically. Liver histology will give vital information to help establish the most
appropriate therapy. Without a biopsy, therapy of CH will
be at best nonspecific and at worst counterproductive.
Many methods are available for collection of liver tissue,
and the method used will depend on clinician preference,
availability of equipment, technical skill, type of lesion
present, location, and clinical stability of the patient.
Further details about the methods for collection of liver
tissue are detailed in Chapter 60. The recently published
ACVIM Consensus statement on the diagnosis and treatment of chronic hepatitis in dogs, recommends a wedge

VetBooks.ir

64 Canine Inflammatory Liver Disease

biopsy taken at laparoscopy or laparotomy because trucut
biopsies produce misleading results 50% of the time and
also carry an increased risk of haemorrhage. Needle aspiration cytology is not reliable for the diagnosis of CH and
is therefore not recommended.
The only real absolute contraindication for liver biopsy
is severe coagulopathy. Prior to biopsy, coagulation status should be checked, by way of platelet count, measurement of PT, PTT, and ideally thromboelastography.
In humans, thromboelastography can predict bleeding
tendencies in cirrhotic patients, but data does not exist
in dogs to determine how reliable this is as an assessment
of bleeding tendencies. However, assessment of coagulation status should not be a substitute for proper technique and adequate postoperative care. If coagulation
times are prolonged, vitamin K can be given by injection
24 hours prior to biopsy and then coagulation times
retested. An alternative approach, if available, is the use
of fresh‐frozen plasma to assist in replenishing deficient
coagulation factors. All animals should be hospitalised
and monitored carefully for signs of hemorrhage for at
least 12 hours after biopsy.
As detailed previously, standardized criteria for the histologic diagnosis of CH exist. The standard histochemical stain used in the assessment of liver tissue is
hematoxylin and eosin, but consideration should be
given to the use of additional stains for specific features
such as reticulin (connective tissue), Perls’ Prussian blue
(ferritin), Fouchet’s (bile pigments) and periodic acid–
Schiff (polysaccharides). In addition, specific histochemical stains for copper, such as rubeanic acid or
rhodanine, should be consider in at‐risk breeds (see earlier) (Figure 64.1).

100 μm

Figure 64.1 Low‐power photomicrograph of liver tissue from an
English springer spaniel demonstrating disruption to the normal
architecture by a marked and generalized infiltrate of inflammatory
cells and also bundles of fibrous tissue. Hematoxylin and eosin.
Original magnification ×40.

Therapy
Therapy for CH is aimed at the underlying cause, if known.
However, as the etiology of most cases is currently not
understood, specific therapies are usually not possible.
Hepatocytes have a remarkable capacity for regeneration,
which means that early diagnosis and therapy have the
potential to reverse disease mechanisms. It is also important to initiate therapy as early as possible in an attempt to
inhibit fibrosis, which will ultimately lead to functional
impairment. Therapy aimed at addressing clinical signs of
liver disease, including ascites, GI ulceration leading to
melena, and hepatic encephalopathy, is also an important
part of therapy of the dog with CH. Copper chelators are
important in dogs with copper-associated hepatitis.
Careful dietary management to support the liver is essential too. Unfortunately, in veterinary medicine there is a
lack of controlled ­studies on clinical efficacy and pharmacokinetics of the drugs commonly used in canine CH. As
a result, many of our current therapeutic protocols are
either derived from human hepatology or anecdotal
reports or originate from low‐quality veterinary clinical
studies. The following refers to the recommended therapy
of a dog with CH.
Corticosteroids

Corticosteroids have antiinflammatory, immune‐modulating, and antifibrotic properties. They have a potent
indirect antifibrotic action via reducing prostaglandin
and leukotriene production from inflammatory cells,
and a weak direct antifibrotic action by inhibiting
mRNA and enzymes. Corticosteroids are indicated in
the therapy of CH where there is biopsy evidence of
ongoing inflammation, when there is mild to moderate
fibrosis associated with an inflammatory infiltrate, and
when infectious causes have been ruled out as far as possible. However, steroids are not without adverse effects,
and these can be very severe and potentially life‐threatening in some dogs with CH. Adverse effects include
increased protein catabolism, fluid retention, GI ulceration, and risk of infections. Their use in humans with
ascites, GI ulceration, and encephalopathy has been
shown to decrease survival time, and the same is likely
to be true in dogs. These are patients with portal hypertension. As advanced bridging fibrosis or cirrhosis is
likely to be associated with portal hypertension,
­corticosteroids are therefore contraindicated if there is
biopsy evidence of these changes. Dexamethasone tends
to cause more adverse effects than prednisolone and
should be avoided.
There have been limited numbers of studies evaluating
the use of corticosteroids in dogs with CH. In an early
study, prednisolone was used in 151 dogs at a dose of
2.2 mg/kg/day for 7–14 days, and resulted in increased

699

VetBooks.ir

700

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

survival from a median of ten months to thirty months,
and complete remission was reported in some dogs
with no relapse. However, the diagnosis of CH was not
made according to our current histologic criteria. In a
more recent study of 36 dogs with idiopathic CH treated
with prednisolone at 1 mg/kg/day for at least six weeks,
at follow‐up 11 dogs were in complete remission, eight
dogs had recurrent clinical signs, and 17 had residual
disease. In a prospective study of CH in English Springer
spaniels, 14 dogs were treated with prednisolone at a
mean dose of 1.2mg/kg/day. These dogs all demonstrated improved survival over a historical control
group, and there was improvement in liver enzyme
activity and bilirubin in all. Finally, a retrospective
study demonstrated that when 13 Cocker spaniels were
treated with prednisolone 0.5-1.25mg/kg/day, in combination with azathioprine, there was a longer survival
than a historical control group. . In these reports, some
dogs with CH demonstrate an improvement in clinical
signs, laboratory data or histopathology, inferring an
immunomodulatory or anti-inflammatory benefit.
However, limited conclusions can be drawn from most
of these studies, as the underlying cause of CH wasn’t
often known. In addition, variable doses of immunosuppressive drugs were used, and dogs usually received
concurrent therapies. If there is strong evidence for an
immune-mediated causes to CH (see earlier), the clinical should consider using an immunosuppressive dose
of corticosteroids. However, if infectious causes have
not been ruled out, and especially if hepatic histology is
not typical for an immune-mediated aetiology, a lower
dose should be used.
The duration of corticosteroid therapy, or method
of dose reduction in dogs with CH is also not known. In
human patients, corticosteroids are continued for at
least six months beyond remission, and in some cases
life‐long. It is often difficult to assess remission in dogs,
particularly as corticosteroids induce hepatic enzymes
and so confuse attempts to follow the disease clinicopathologically. Repeat liver biopsy can be very useful,
although sometimes results are nonrepresentative if the
disease is patchy in distribution. The length of therapy
therefore remains empiric and some animals remain on
life‐long therapy. In this situation the aim is to use a low
alternate‐day dose. Using an additional immunosuppressive alongside corticosteroids may enable a more
rapid tapering of the corticosteroid.
Ciclosporin has also been used as an additional, or
alternative, immune‐modulating drug in canine CH. . In
a retrospective study 48 dogs with suspected idiopathic
CH were treated with 5.0mg/kg BID cyclosporine; 79%
of dogs achieved biochemical remission, although no
follow-up biopsies were taken to determine the effects of
therapy on hepatic histology.

Antifibrotics

Progressive fibrosis in CH ultimately leads to reduced
function and many of the clinical consequences of
advanced liver disease. The most effective ‘anti-fibrotic’
in chronic liver disease is to remove the underlying cause.
In addition to the antifibrotic action of corticosteroids,
more specific antifibrotics exist. Colchicine, an alkaloid
that binds tubulin, may be useful in some dogs with CH
and moderate to marked fibrosis on biopsy, although it is
not licensed for use in animals. Although it may improve
survival in some human patients with advanced fibrosis,
there are very limited reports of its use in dogs. If used,
care should be exercised as adverse effects, including
marrow suppression, anorexia and diarrhea, are seen relatively commonly. Again, it is very difficult to judge how
long to treat for and a follow‐up liver biopsy is necessary
to assess response. The author does not use colchicine.
Cholerectics and Bile Acid Modifiers

Ursodeoxycholic acid (ursodiol, UDCA) is a hydrophilic
bile acid that displaces toxic hydrophobic bile acids and
also stimulates bile flow (it is a cholerectic). These two
actions reduce cell damage and oxidative stress resulting
from retention of bile acids in the liver. It has also been
shown to have immunomodulatory actions by reducing
immunoglobulin and interleukin production and expression of MHC‐1 on hepatocytes. Recent studies show an
additional antioxidant activity with a synergistic action
with S‐adenosyl‐L‐methionine (SAM‐e) and vitamin E.
No data on its use in canine CH are available, although
because biliary stasis is invariably present, it is probably
indicated in all cases. It also appears to be well tolerated
with no significant adverse effects reported to date.
Antibiotics

The majority of dogs with CH do not appear to have an
underlying bacterial etiology, and so do not require antibiotics. Having said that, due to compromised reticuloendothelial function, bacterial infections may be a secondary
complication of many liver diseases, including CH, and so
their use may be justified. Moreover, antibiotics should
also be used if the patient has signs of hepatic encephalopathy. Because of their efficacy against enteric organisms and
ability to concentrate in bile, suitable antibiotics include
ampicillin, amoxicillin, cephalexin, fluoroquinolones, and
metronidazole. Note that, because of its reliance of hepatic
clearance, metronidazole should be used at half the routine
dose in dogs with liver disease to avoid toxic adverse effects.
The use of antibiotics in dogs with bacterial cholangitits/
cholangiohepatitis is discussed in Chapter 67.
Antioxidants

These include vitamin E, zinc, silymarin (milk thistle),
and SAM‐e. Oxidant stress is likely to be increased due

VetBooks.ir

64 Canine Inflammatory Liver Disease

to the effects of inflammation, reduced blood flow, and
mitochondrial damage by refluxed bile acids. Oxidation
is a significant mechanism of hepatic damage, therefore
antioxidant therapy is reasonable. SAM‐e increases
hepatic and red blood cell levels of glutathione, a potent
antioxidant, and is also a critical enzyme in transmethylation, transsulfuration, and aminopropylation pathways. As part of these pathways, SAM‐e is essential to all
cells and is particularly important in hepatocytes because
of their central role in metabolism. It is widely available
as a neutraceutical for dogs, sometimes in combination
with silymarin. Although no experimental data exist,
antioxidants are likely of benefit in CH. However, not all
antioxidants are necessarily innocuous in liver disease;
for example, ascorbate may increase liver damage by
accumulating iron, so it is best to avoid supplementing
vitamin C.
Copper Chelators

Copper chelators include 2,3,2‐tetramine tetrahydrochloride (2,3,2‐T), 2,2,2‐tetramine tetrahydrochloride
(2,2,2‐T), penicillamine, and zinc. 2,3,2‐T is the more
potent chelator but is not widely available in a drug formulation. Penicillamine is an alternative copper chelator, but significant adverse effects can be associated
with its use. Copper chelators should be reserved for
dogs in which significant copper accumulation has been
identified in liver tissues, primarily those animals with
copper storage disease. Zinc is used as prophylaxis in
dogs with copper storage disease, and commercially
produced hepatic support diets often contain increased
zinc for this reason. The use of copper chelators for the
management of copper-associated hepatitis is discussed
in Chapter 62.
Diuretics

Ascites in CH is usually due to portal hypertension,
although in some animals hypoalbuminemia may contribute to the pathogenesis. If blood albumin is normal or
near normal in the ascitic dog, portal hypertension is
likely to exist. Portal hypertension leads to splanchnic
pooling of blood with subsequent reduction in systemic
arterial pressure and activation of the renin‐angiotensin‐
aldosterone system (RAAS). RAAS activation then leads
to further fluid retention and more ascites. Spironolactone,
an aldosterone antagonist, is therefore the drug of choice
in ascitic patients with portal hypertension, although it
can take 2–3 days to work. For this reason, spironolactone combined with a thiazide diuretic or furosemide
can be used in an attempt to increase its speed of action.
Spironolactone also has the advantage that it does
not induce hypokalemia, which can precipitate hepatic
encephalopathy (HE) (hypokalemia allows ammonia to
enter cells more easily).

Gastroprotectives

Portal hypertension is common in dogs with CH and
leads to gut wall edema and potentially ulceration. This is
one of the most common causes of death in dogs with
chronic portal hypertension. Sudden GI bleeding can
precipitate an acute encephalopathic crisis due to the
high protein content of blood. An important way to
reduce the incidence of GI tract ulceration is to ensure
adequate enteral nutrition (see later), as anorexia predisposes to GI ulceration. H2 receptor antagonists, or proton pump inhibitors, are often used in the prevention and
therapy of ulceration. However, there is some evidence
that gastric pH is actually elevated in human CH, and,
moreover, many ulcers are duodenal rather than gastric,
so the rationale for these drugs is unclear. Traditionally,
ranitidine is preferred as an H2 receptor antagonist in
liver disease as it does not affect the cytochrome P450
system, and sucralfate should probably be used also.
Dietary Management

Appropriate dietary management is as important as drug
therapy in the dog with CH. Each case is individual and
the diet should be adjusted accordingly, so clinicians
should resist the temptation to think that “one diet fits
all.” In particular, many dogs with CH are fed diets with
inappropriate and excessive protein restriction, which
may restrict hepatic regeneration and result in protein‐
calorie malnutrition. Specific recommendations include
the following.
Feed a palatable diet little and often (4–6 times a day)
as many dogs with CH may be inappetent. Frequent
feeding also reduces the development of HE.
●● Feed highly digestible, high‐quality protein in normal
amounts whenever possible. Good‐quality commercial diets are acceptable. Examples of high‐quality
proteins include soya and these can be supplemented
if weight or blood albumin decreases. If signs of HE
are suspected, feeding a normal amount of high quality digestible protein little and often is recommended.
Excessive protein restriction may result in protein‐
calorie malnutrition and the breakdown of highly
ammoniagenic endogenous proteins.
●● Dogs with CH may have impaired carbohydrate metabolism, so a diet containing highly digestible, complex
carbohydrates should be fed.
●● Normal amounts of fat should be fed, although fat can
be restricted if steatorrhea develops.
●● Fermentable fiber is helpful in dogs with HE as it acidifies the colon and traps ammonia. It also increases
nitrogen incorporation into bacteria and reduces
­bacterial ammonia production. Nonfermentable fiber
is helpful in preventing constipation, a predisposing
­factor for hepatic encephalopathy.
●●

701

VetBooks.ir

702

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

Zinc deficiency is common in human CH and is thought
to also occur in dogs with CH. Supplementation reduces
HE and decreases copper absorption from the GI tract
and copper availability in the liver. Zinc may also have
antiinflammatory, antifibrotic, and antioxidant effects.
●● In dogs with excessive hepatic copper accumulation,
primarily those with a primary copper storage disease,
copper intake should be restricted. This includes not
providing water from copper pipes in soft water areas.
●● Fat‐soluble vitamins include A, D, E, and K. Vitamin E
is an antioxidant and can be supplemented in dogs
with CH. Vitamin K supplementation may occasionally be necessary if clotting times are prolonged, especially preceding biopsy. Vitamins A and D should not
be supplemented as vitamin A can cause hepatic damage and vitamin D can cause calcification in tissues.
●● Vitamin B, a water‐soluble vitamin, can also be supplemented, as there may be increased loss associated
with polyuria.
●●

The effectiveness of dietary therapy should be monitored
by the assessment of clinical signs and making sure that
the patient maintains body weight and blood protein
­levels. Consideration should also be given to the use of
enteral feeding methods in the anorexic dog with CH.
Prognosis
The prognosis for CH is variable, and likely dependent
on multiple factors, especially the underlying etiology
and stage of disease. The presence of advanced fibrosis
and cirrhosis is strongly associated with a reduced survival time in humans with CH, and the same appears to
be true in dogs. In one study, the median survival time of
a variety of breeds of dogs with CH was 18.3 months.
Other studies have demonstrated mean survival times of
approximately 18 months and 16 months, again in a variety of breeds of dog with CH. In Labrador retrievers with
CH, the median survival was 374 days (range, 1–2645
days), whereas in English springer spaniels it was 189
days (range, 1–1211 days).
One of the most important individual prognostic
indictors in CH appears to be the presence of ascites; the
time from onset of clinical signs to death was two months
for dogs with ascites, compared to 33 months for those
without. Total serum bilirubin has also been shown to be
significantly negatively correlated with a reduced survival time in dogs with CH. Other parameters associated
with a shorter survival time in dogs with CH include
anorexia, prolonged prothrombin time, prolonged partial thromboplastin time, thrombocytopenia, hypoalbuminemia, and hyperglobulinemia. Caution should,
however, be employed when interpreting these data in
the individual dog with CH, as prognosis is likely dependent on multiple variables.

­Acute Hepatitis
Etiology/Pathophysiology
The majority of cases of AH are idiopathic. Of the known
causes, toxin or drug ingestion is thought to be most
common, and is discussed further in Chapter 62. Other
causes of AH are discussed here.
As detailed previously, a potential viral cause of AH
and CH was identified some 30 years ago and named
“canine acidophil cell hepatitis virus.” However, no specific agent was isolated, nor have further reports
emerged. CAV‐1 is probably the best known infectious
cause of AH, particularly in non‐Immune dogs, but it
can occasionally cause disease in partially immune dogs.
However, the use of widespread vaccination against this
disease has significantly reduced its incidence, so cases
of clinical disease are now uncommon.
Probably the most frequently implicated infectious
cause of AH is due to Leptospira spp. The characteristic
hepatic lesions in acutely infected dogs include edema
and sinusoidal congestion, perivascular inflammation,
hepatocyte necrosis, and cholestasis. Some animals
also present with signs of renal dysfunction. Widespread
vaccination has significantly reduced the incidence of
disease although, at least in the UK, the majority of
dogs are only vaccinated against two serovars. Clinical
cases of leptospirosis due to infection with other serovars occur, so the use of vaccines providing protection
against these additional serovars is recommended.
Infection with other bacteria is a relatively uncommon
cause of canine AH, although dogs do develop cholangitis or cholangiohepatitis.
Defects in copper metabolism leading to the development of AH have also been described in several breeds of
dog. In one study of 21 dogs with AH, five had histologic
evidence of increased copper accumulation and were
diagnosed with copper‐associated hepatopathy.
Epidemiology
Few data exist to determine the prevalence of AH in
dogs. In part, this likely represents the failure to achieve
a histologic diagnosis in many animals. In one study of
101 cases of primary hepatitis, AH was diagnosed in 21
dogs and CH in 67. Improvements in histologic classification of canine liver diseases, including that of AH, may
therefore result in future prevalence studies.
Signalment
Acute hepatitis, like CH, typically affects middle‐aged to
older dogs, and females appear to be predisposed. In a
study of 21 dogs diagnosed with AH, the mean age of

VetBooks.ir

64 Canine Inflammatory Liver Disease

affected dogs was 7.8 +/− 4.1 years, with a range of 2.4–
14.5 years. No comprehensive study has been performed
to determine the breed predispositions to AH, although
in this same study, Jack Russell terriers may have been at
increased risk.
History and Clinical Signs
Clinical signs in dogs with AH are usually nonspecific and
similar to those described for CH. Interestingly, in one
study of dogs with AH, clinical signs had been present for
10.0 weeks (range, 0.5–52 weeks) before diagnosis. Again,
the clinician should pay particular attention to subtle waxing and waning GI signs, depression, lethargy, anorexia,
weight loss, and polyuria and polydipsia. Clinical signs of
HE may also occur in the patient with AH. Physical examination findings are generally unremarkable, although the
liver is occasionally palpably enlarged in the dog with AH.
Dogs with an infectious etiology may also be pyrexic and
show other signs of systemic disease.
Diagnosis
As discussed earlier, clinical pathology is usually the
next step in the investigation of a dog with suspected
AH. Clinical pathology findings include elevations of
liver enzymes, including ALT, AST, ALP, and GGT. In
one study, there was no significant difference in any routine biochemical or hematologic variable between dogs
with AH and CH. However, if liver function is assessed,
it is more likely to be within the reference range in dogs
with AH.
Diagnostic imaging is often performed after clinical
pathology in the assessment of the dog with suspected
AH. Abdominal radiography can be used to assess liver
size, although as detailed earlier, ultrasonography is
the preferred imaging modality for the investigation of
liver disease. In one study of 21 dogs with a histologic
diagnosis of AH, all apart from two had abnormalities
detected on ultrasonographic examination of the liver.
Hepatic size was assessed as normal in seven
dogs, enlarged in eight, and small in six. The hepatic

parenchyma was found to be normal in seven dogs,
irregular in 11, and to have increased echogenicity in
three. Interestingly, three dogs with AH had evidence of
ascites on ultrasonographic examination.
It is not possible to make a definitive diagnosis of AH
based on results of clinical pathology or diagnostic
imaging. Definitive diagnosis ultimately relies on histologic examination of liver tissue. However, as animals
with AH may be systemically unwell, liver biopsy is
often not performed in the acute setting, with patient
treatment based on a tentative diagnosis. Fine needle
aspiration cytology is not reliable for the diagnosis of
AH, and is not recommended.
Therapy
Therapy for AH is aimed at the underlying cause, if
known. However, as the etiology of most cases is currently not understood, treatment is generally symptomatic and supportive. In one retrospective study, dogs
with AH were treated with antibiotics (5/16), hepatic
support diet and ursodeoxycholic acid (7/16), and 5/16
dogs were not treated. Due to the potential for an underlying infectious cause, corticosteroids are usually avoided
in dogs with AH . The use of antiviral drugs in dogs with
CAV‐1 infection has not been studied. Fluid therapy is
required if the dog is anorexic, and short‐term nutritional support by methods of assisted enteral nutrition is
sometimes also required.
Prognosis
The prognosis for AH is variable, and likely dependent
on multiple factors, such as the etiology, severity of disease, and how early treatment is instigated. In a previous
study, the median survival time of dogs with AH was 34.9
months. It is also possible that AH progresses to CH in
some dogs. For instance, in a study of 12 dogs with AH
that had a repeat liver biopsy performed after approximately six weeks, histopathology revealed complete
remission of inflammatory and degenerative changes in
six dogs, no changes in one dog, and progression from
AH to CH in five dogs.

­Further Reading
Bexfield N, Buxton R, Vicek T. Breed, age and gender
distribution of dogs with chronic hepatitis in the United
Kingdom. Vet J 2012; 193(1): 124–8.
Favier R. Poldevaart J, van den Ingh T, et al. A
retrospective study of oral prednisolone treatment
in canine chronic hepatitis. Vet Quart 2013; 33(3):
113–20.

Poldervaart J, Favier R, Penning L, et al. Primary hepatitis
in dogs:a retrospective review (2001–2006). J Vet Intern
Med 2009; 23(1): 72–80.
Van den Ingh T, van Winkle T, Cullen J, et al. Morpho­
logical classification of parenchymal disorders of the
canine and feline liver: hepatocellular death, hepatitis and
cirrhosis. In: WSAVA Liver Standardization Group, eds.

703

VetBooks.ir

704

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

WSAVA Standards for Clinical and Histological
Diagnosis of Canine and Feline Liver Disease.
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier, 2006, pp. 85–101.
Watson P. Chronic hepatitis in dogs: a review of current
understanding of the aetiology, progression, and
treatment. Vet J 2004; 167(3): 228–41.

Webster CRL, Center SA, Cullen JM et al. ACVIM
consensus statement on the diagnosis and treatment of
chronic hepatitis in dogs. J Vet Intern Med2019; 33(3):
1173–1200.

VetBooks.ir

705

65
Cirrhosis and its Consequences
Katherine Scott, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)
VCA Alameda East, 9770 East Alameda Ave, Denver, CO, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Cirrhosis
Development of hepatic fibrosis and subsequent cirrho­
sis is a common complication of chronic hepatitis (CH).
Cirrhosis is defined histologically by the presence of dif­
fuse bridging fibrosis and regenerative hepatic nodules.
CH can be caused by a variety of different initial insults
that include toxins or drugs, breed‐associated metabolic
errors, including disorders of copper metabolism, and
infections, although the majority of cases are idiopathic.
Regardless of the underlying cause, fibrosis may develop
when CH is severe and/or is present for an extended
period of time.
Fibrosis develops when hepatic myofibroblast‐like cells
become activated secondary to hepatic injury. These cells
produce factors including transforming growth factor‐
beta (TGF‐beta), which upregulate hepatic extracellular
matrix components such as collagen and glycoaminogly­
cans. TGF‐beta also upregulates inhibitors of metallopro­
teinases, resulting in decreased extracellular matrix
breakdown. In CH, these changes result in progressive
accumulation of extracellular matrix in the liver. Cirrhosis
develops with the diffuse accumulation of fibrous tissue
in the liver, resulting in conversion of normal hepatic
architecture into structurally abnormal hepatic nodules
(Figure 65.1). With the development of cirrhosis, a variety
of adverse consequences develop, and these are predomi­
nantly related to the development of portal hypertension
and progression of hepatic dysfunction.
Portal Hypertension
Portal hypertension (PH) is an increase in blood pres­
sure within the portal vasculature, the vessels responsi­
ble for providing venous drainage to the intestines and
spleen. The hypertension can be caused by any disease

that results in obstruction of venous return of portal
blood. PH can be classified according to location of the
increase in blood pressure, including prehepatic, intra­
hepatic, or posthepatic causes. The type of portal hyper­
tension caused by cirrhosis is an intrahepatic form of PH,
as opposed to prehepatic PH that occurs in disorders of
the portal vein itself, or posthepatic PH that occurs with
right‐sided heart failure or caudal vena cava disorders.
With cirrhosis, hepatic sinusoidal endothelial cells have
lost normal fenestrae and acquired a collagenous base­
ment membrane in their place. This change, as well as
other remodeling changes in the liver such as regenera­
tive nodules and microthrombi, results in distortion of
sinusoids and increases intrahepatic venous resistance,
with resultant PH.
Ascites

Once PH is present, ascites may also develop as, accord­
ing to Starling’s law, the increased venous resistance and
increase in portal venous hydrostatic pressure drive fluid
out of the vasculature and into the interstitial space.
Lymphatic drainage of the interstitial space may be able
to deal with this extra fluid for some time, but when the
regional lymphatics become overwhelmed and unable to
control this increase in interstitial fluid, ascites will
develop.
Additionally, ascites may develop as a result of hypoal­
buminemia secondary to severe liver disease. Albumin is
a plasma protein normally produced by the liver, and
significant hepatic dysfunction may result in a clinically
important decrease in albumin concentration. Albumin
is the most important blood protein responsible for
maintenance of normal plasma colloid oncotic pressure.
If serum albumin levels decrease to less than approxi­
mately 1.6 g/dL, plasma colloid oncotic pressure will
become too low to maintain intravascular volume and
fluid will enter the interstitial space. Animals with cir­
rhosis will often develop both portal hypertension and

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

important and the only currently measurable encephalo­
toxin. Ammonia is a breakdown product of ingested
­proteins, and is normally absorbed by the GI tract, trans­
ported to the liver, and metabolized into urea. If aPSS are
present, ammonia remains intact and is transported
­
across the blood–brain barrier, resulting in neuronal
dysfunction and alterations in neurotransmission. HE
­
may result in increased activation of neuronal gamma‐
aminobutyric acid (GABA)/benzodiazepine receptors,
which are responsible for neuronal suppression.

VetBooks.ir

706

Gastrointestinal Ulceration

Figure 65.1 Laparoscopic view of a cirrhotic liver secondary to
toxin insult from cycad ingestion. Note the pale and undulating
appearance of the hepatic tissue.

hypoalbuminemia concurrently, further increasing the
risk of development of ascites.
Acquired Portosystemic Shunts

Portosystemic shunts are anomalous venous vessels
that join the portal blood with the systemic vasculature,
while bypassing the liver. They can be congenital in ori­
gin or acquired secondary to cirrhosis/fibrosis or other
causes of PH. If PH develops and does not resolve
quickly, the development of multiple acquired porto­
systemic shunts (aPSS) may occur. Acquired shunts
are thought to develop in an attempt to decrease PH.
Experimentally, it takes 5–14 weeks of PH before
acquired shunts develop. This continued increase in
hepatic venous portal pressure results in the opening of
embryonic vessels that arise between the portal vascu­
lature and the cranial and caudal vena cava, resulting in
the formation of multiple aPSS. These shunts vary in
anatomic location, but are most commonly visualized
as a plexus of small vessels found caudodorsal to the left
kidney. They connect the portal vasculature with the
vena cava, allowing for venous blood to bypass the liver.
This blood remains unfiltered and enters the systemic
circulation.
Hepatic Encephalopathy

One of the most important consequences in the develop­
ment of aPSS is hepatic encephalopathy (HE). In the
­presence of aPSS, toxins normally filtered by the liver are
transported from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract to the
rest of the systemic circulation, including the central
nervous system (CNS). While many toxins are involved
in this process, ammonia is thought to be one of the most

Gastrointestinal ulceration is another possible complica­
tion of severe hepatic disease or cirrhosis. In humans, GI
ulceration is thought to be related to impaired gastric
mucosal defense secondary to alterations in GI motility
and circulation, and bile acid secretion. While this con­
dition has been described in people, the etiology has not
been evaluated in dogs and cats. Portal hypertension also
likely contributes to the development of GI ulceration.
Regardless of cause, GI ulceration is a recognized com­
plication of liver disease in animals. If GI bleeding occurs
as a result of ulceration, this can acutely increase the risk
of HE. Blood is a highly ammoniagenic protein, and may
result in a rapid increase of serum ammonia levels when
absorbed following the digestion of blood. This rapid
increase in ammonia may cause a sudden onset of signs
related to HE.
Coagulation Disturbances
The liver is responsible for the production of coagulation
factors, recycling and activation of vitamin K‐dependent
factors and protein C, production of thrombopoietin,
and removal of clotting factors from the circulation. In a
liver which is severely diseased from cirrhosis, coagula­
tion abnormalities are likely to be present to some degree.
Studies have shown that anywhere from 57–93% of dogs,
and 82–98% of cats with liver disease have at least one
alteration in coagulation parameters. Decreased factor
production appears to play the most significant role in
secondary hemostatic abnormalities, but consumption
of factors due to disseminated intravascular coagulation
(DIC) may also occur.
Thrombocytopenia may also occur secondary to liver
disease in dogs, but is uncommon in cats. Thrombo­
cytopenia is usually mild, and may occur secondary
to decreased thrombopoietin production by the liver,
increased sequestration in the spleen as a result of splenic
congestion secondary to liver disease, increased con­
sumption from low‐grade DIC, and increased destruc­
tion due to autoantibodies.

VetBooks.ir

65 Cirrhosis and its Consequences

­Signalment
Signalment of an animal with cirrhosis largely depends on
the underlying cause of liver disease, but cirrhosis is much
more common in dogs than in cats. This may be due to a
slower accumulation of fibrosis in cats, or development of
more severe complications of hepatic failure before
advanced fibrosis occurs. Males and females are likely to be
equally affected, and dogs with breed‐related risk of CH
are more likely to be affected. For further details of dog
breed predilections to CH, the reader if referred to
Chapter 62. Dogs with ­idiopathic CH and copper‐associ­
ated CH are often middle‐aged to older, while dogs with
lobar‐dissecting h
­ epatitis are usually young, around 2 years
of age. Dogs or cats with a history of hepatotoxicity sec­
ondary to environmental toxins or drugs may be of any age.

­History and Clinical Signs
The presenting clinical signs in chronic liver disease are
often vague in nature, and include a history of inappe­
tence, lethargy, vomiting, polyuria/polydipsia, weight loss,
and/or diarrhea. Melena may be observed if GI ulceration
is present. Ascites and icterus are more specific clinical
signs that may be noted. Neurologic abnormalities such as
depressed mentation, circling, ptyalism in cats, star‐gaz­
ing, seizures, stupor or coma may also occur secondary to
HE. These neurologic changes may be intermittent in
nature, and frequently occur shortly following ingestion of
a meal containing protein. Signs have usually been present
for weeks to months, and are often progressive in nature.
Physical examination findings are also often nonspe­
cific, and may only include weight loss or muscle wast­
ing. If ascites is present, abdominal distension and a
palpable fluid wave may be apparent. Splenomegaly may
also occur in the presence of PH and pooling of blood in
the spleen. Icterus may be visualized on the skin, sclera,
or mucous membranes as a result of accumulation of
bilirubin. Less commonly, petechiae or ecchymosis may
be observed on the skin or mucous membranes second­
ary to thrombocytopenia or thrombocytopathy. Melena
may be observed on rectal examination. If HE is present,
neurologic examination abnormalities localizing to the
forebrain may be present.

­Diagnosis
Laboratory Testing
The most common laboratory abnormalities in patients
with cirrhosis are alterations of liver‐related enzymes.
Patients with cirrhosis will often have a known history of

elevated liver enzymes, including alanine aminotrans­
ferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alkaline
phosphatase (ALP), and gamma-glutamyl transpepti­
dase (GGT). However, in occasional cases of severe
hepatocellular loss, liver enzymes may be within normal
limits simply due to the low number of remaining hepat­
ocytes. Liver pseudofunction tests may also be abnor­
mal, and suggest some degree of liver dysfunction. It is
estimated that a reduction of approximately 70–80% of
overall hepatic function must be present before these
alterations occur. Pseudofunction tests include decreased
albumin, BUN, cholesterol, and/or glucose, and an
increase in ­bilirubin. All of these pseudofunction com­
pounds are produced or metabolized normally by the
liver, and will be altered in states of liver dysfunction.
On a complete blood count, microcytosis may be noted
in patients with acquired or congenital PSS, secondary to
a deficiency in mobilization of iron stores. Anemia may
occur from GI ulceration and blood loss or bleeding sec­
ondary to coagulopathy. Mild thrombocytopenia may be
present due to decrease in hepatic synthesis of throm­
bopoietin. Leukocytosis is nonspecific, but may occur
secondary to stress, inflammation, or infection.
Urinalysis is often normal in patients with cirrhosis,
but may demonstrate dilute urine as a result of decreased
BUN concentration. Urea is a major component of the
renal medullary concentration gradient, and, when
decreased, may lead to the development of dilute urine.
Bilirubinuria may be observed, and is always significant
in the cat, and if 2+ or greater is also significant in the
dog. Urate crystals may be observed in as many as
40–70% of dogs with canine PSS, and secondary urinary
tract infections are possible as a result of dilute urine.
Coagulation testing should be undertaken if hepatic
biopsy is to be performed, or if any clinical signs of
­bleeding are observed. Prothrombin time (PT) and partial
thromboplastin time (PTT) may be increased, and anti­
thrombin, fibrinogen, and protein C levels are decreased
in dogs and cats with cirrhosis due to poor production of
coagulation factors and/or decreased recycling of vitamin
K. Vitamin K deficiency may be especially important in
cats with severe liver disease. Evaluation of platelet func­
tion testing via buccal mucosal bleeding time may also be
abnormal secondary to a thrombocytopathy.
Hepatic function testing can be performed by measur­
ing pre‐ and postprandial bile acid concentrations or
blood ammonia levels. Both tests may be elevated in the
face of significant liver dysfunction or aPSS secondary
to cirrhosis. Postprandial bile acids are considered to
be more sensitive for detection of PSS but elevated
ammonia may be more specific. Additionally, ammonia
is ­currently the only measureable HE toxin, so the find­
ing of hyperammonemia may also suggest a higher risk
of clinical signs related to HE. However, ammonia sam­

707

VetBooks.ir

708

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

ples are labile, and must be placed on ice and analyzed
within 30 minutes to ensure accurate results. Hepatic
function tests are commonly altered in dogs with cir­
rhosis, but as cats uncommonly develop significant
fibrosis, function can remain normal in this species.
For further details of laboratory testing in patients
with liver disease, the reader is referred to Chapter 60.
Imaging
Imaging modalities most commonly utilized for further
evaluation of cirrhosis and its complications include
abdominal radiographs and abdominal ultrasound.
Abdominal radiographs are the most commonly avail­
able imaging modality, but are relatively nonspecific for
hepatic disease. Cirrhosis may result in microhepatica,
which can be visualized on abdominal radiographs.
However, this is a change that may be seen in other
hepatic diseases such as congenital PSS. Ascites sec­
ondary to PH or hypoalbuminemia may be visible radi­
ographically as loss of abdominal serosal detail.
Abdominal ultrasound is a very useful noninvasive
imaging modality that can be utilized to further diagnose
liver disease and its complications (Figure 65.2).
Ultrasound can evaluate hepatic parenchymal echo­
genicity and uniformity, overall hepatic size, biliary
structures, hepatic and portal vessels, and identify very
small volumes of ascites that might not be visible radio­
graphically. It can also be utilized to identify multiple
aPSS­. Ultrasound is also useful in guiding safe ­collection
of samples of ascites or bile for fluid analysis, or ultra­
sound‐guided “Tru‐Cut” biopsies.
Unfortunately, while ultrasound is a very useful nonin­
vasive test, it does not identify changes pathognomonic
for a specific liver disease, and should never be used to

rule out the possibility of liver disease. Many dogs and
possibly cats without sonographic abnormalities may still
have important liver abnormalities on histopathology.
Ultrasound is also not a reliable method to diagnose
­cirrhosis. In a study evaluating ultrasound findings with
histopathologic diagnoses, there were no sonographic
features significantly associated with cirrhosis, and it was
concluded that ultrasound could not reliably be used to
detect the presence, absence, or severity of fibrosis. In
fact some animals with cirrhosis had ultrasonographi­
cally normal appearing livers. But sonographic findings
may still be useful in suggesting the possibility of cirrhosis
and its consequences. Findings that would be most sug­
gestive of cirrhosis and subsequent PH include identifica­
tion of multiple aPSS, a small liver with irregular margins,
presence of ascites, and a hyperechoic echotexture. But
ultimately, biopsy and histopathology are required to
obtain a definitive diagnosis of cirrhosis.
Other imaging modalities may also be useful in diag­
nosing the cause or complications of cirrhosis. Computed
tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) may provide a more complete evaluation of hepatic
vasculature than abdominal ultrasound. When utilized
with contrast, CT and MRI may also provide further eval­
uation regarding location of neoplasia and possible
metastasis. Rectal or transsplenic nuclear scintigraphy
can be useful in the diagnosis of PSS, when ultrasound is
inconclusive, although scintigraphy may not be able to
distinguish congenital versus aPSS. Further details of
diagnostic imaging in the investigation of cirrhosis and its
complications can be found in Chapter 61.
Cytology and Fluid Analysis
Fine needle aspiration cytology is an inadequate method
to diagnose cirrhosis. While cytology may help identify
the underlying cause of cirrhosis, it cannot confirm the
presence or absence of fibrous tissue
Cytology of ascitic fluid may be utilized when attempt­
ing to identify whether the ascites is caused by PH, infec­
tious disease, or neoplastic disease. Typically, ascites
secondary to PH is a modified transudate (also refereed to
as a protein-rich transudate), or possibly a pure transu­
date. PH ascites is nonneoplastic, and noninflammatory
in origin. Cytology and culture of bile may also be impor­
tant in diagnosing the underlying cause of cirrhosis. Biliary
cultures have been shown to yield a ­significantly higher
rate of positive growth than hepatic tissue cultures.
Histopathology

Figure 65.2 Ultrasonographic image of a cirrhotic liver. Note the
presence of large‐volume ascites, a small liver with irregular
hepatic margination, and mottled echogenicity.

The gold standard diagnosis of cirrhosis is liver biopsy
with histopathology that identifies the presence and
extent of fibrosis. Not only is it important to document

VetBooks.ir

65 Cirrhosis and its Consequences

the presence and severity of cirrhosis, but it is crucial
to attempt to identify the underlying disease that has
resulted in the development of fibrosis/cirrhosis. This
will allow for specific treatment to be directed at the
underlying cause.
Due to the risk of coagulopathy in dogs with hepatic
­disease, coagulation testing including PT, PTT, platelet
count, and possibly buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT)
should always be performed prior to liver biopsy.
Interestingly, results of these parameters do not consist­
ently predict risk of bleeding after liver biopsy in human
patients with chronic liver disease. Fibrinogen concentra­
tion should also be evaluated if possible, as it may be
decreased in cirrhosis. In humans, thromboelastography
(TEG) analysis can predict bleeding tendencies in cir­
rhotic patients, but the value of TEG in predicting bleed­
ing in our canine and feline patients with liver disease is
unknown. In cases of hypofibrinogenemia or other coagu­
lopathy, transfusion with cryoprecipitate or fresh frozen
plasma should be performed prior to biopsy. Vitamin K1
therapy (1–1.5 mg/kg q12–24h for three doses) prior to
biopsy may also be necessary, e­ specially in cats.Assessment
of coagulation status should, however, not be a substitute
for proper technique and adequate post-operative care.
Biopsy may be obtained through ultrasound‐guided
“Tru‐Cut” needles, laparoscopically, or via exploratory
laparotomy. Each method has practical advantages and
disadvantages when it comes to cost, time involved,
invasiveness, and availability. But collection of a wedge
biopsy via laparoscopy or exploratory laparotomy is
­generally considered to be a superior method of sample
collection. It has been shown that morphologic diagnosis
of needle biopsy specimens and wedge biopsies (consid­
ered the gold standard) only agreed in 40% of animals
with liver disease. If the “Tru‐Cut” biopsy method is
­utilized, two or more samples should be collected to
minimize sampling error. Further details on the methods
to collect liver tissue can be found in Chapter 60.

­Treatment
Cirrhosis is considered irreversible. Therefore, the
most important aspect of treatment is addressing the
underlying cause of liver disease as early as possible to
prevent further development of fibrosis/cirrhosis, and
to minimize the risk of cirrhosis‐associated complica­
tions. Corticosteroids have been shown to have positive
long‐term effects in the treatment of idiopathic chronic
­hepatitis, and may have minor antifibrotic properties
(see Chapter 62). Copper‐chelating medications such
as D‐penicillamine or trientine should be utilized in
cases where primary copper‐associated chronic hepati­
tis is diagnosed. In cases of previous toxic hepatopathy

or idiopathic disease, specific treatment may not be
possible. In all cases of cirrhosis, treatment must also
include management of any important complications of
cirrhosis.
Colchicine (0.03 mg/kg/day) is the only specific drug in
veterinary medicine currently used to stop the formation
of fibrosis. It is thought to stimulate collagenase activity,
increasing the breakdown and decreasing the formation
of collagen. Colchicine is reported to have important and
common side‐effects, including vomiting, diarrhea, and
neurologic signs. Additionally, there are no large studies
that have shown positive benefit from this medication, it
has not been evaluated in cats, and it is currently cost‐
prohibitive for many pet owners. As a result of these
problems, most clinicians do not currently recommend
its use, even in documented cases of hepatic cirrhosis.
Glucocorticoids may be beneficial in some cases of
cirrhosis. Steroids interact with TGF‐beta signaling
pathways and may reduce fibrotic progression, although
this effect may be relatively weak. More importantly,
prednisone/prednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) may be useful
in inhibiting hepatic inflammation, if present. This
decrease in inflammation will result in decreased activ­
ity of hepatic stellate cells, responsible for formation of
further fibrosis. Glucocorticoids may be most benefi­
cial for treatment of dogs and cats with active hepatic
inflammation that have not yet developed fibrosis/cir­
rhosis. Evidence supporting use of glucocorticoids in
the absence of hepatic inflammation is lacking, so their
use may or may not provide additional benefit in treat­
ment of cirrhosis alone. Moreover, the adverse effects
of steroids in animals with advanced fibrosis can be
very significant. Due to their ability to cause gastric
ulceration, they should be used with extreme caution in
animals with , as these animals already have a compro­
mised GI tract blood flow. Steroids cause muscle break­
down so may also potentiate HE.Further details on the
use of corticosteroids in dogs with chronic liver disease
can be found in Chapter 62.
Losartan is another medication that shows promise for
fibrosis/cirrhosis but has not yet been evaluated for this
purpose in small animals. Losartan is an angiotensin II
receptor antagonist that has been shown in rodent mod­
els to inhibit hepatic stellate cell activation and attenuate
hepatic fibrosis. It is currently utilized in veterinary
medicine for its effects on proteinuria. No studies have
shown if losartan may be an effective therapy in prevent­
ing fibrosis development in dogs or cats.
Ascites
Ascites may spontaneously improve with specific
treatment of the underlying liver disease. Reducing
hepatic inflammation, when present, may decrease PH

709

VetBooks.ir

710

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

and therefore decrease the volume of ascites. If this
is ineffective, treatment with diuretics is indicated.
Spironolactone is the drug of choice in these cases due
to its sodium‐wasting but potassium‐sparing effects,
with a starting dose of 1–2 mg/kg/day. Aldactazide, a
combination of spironolactone and hydrochlorothi­
azide, may also be administered. Low‐dose furosemide
(1-2 mg/kg PO q12h) can also be utilized, but carries a
risk of worsening HE due to its acidifying effects.
Therefore, it should only be added to therapy when
other diuretics fail to fully control the ascites. Dietary
sodium restriction may also be beneficial to help
decrease volume of ascites. Diets with <0.05 g/100 kcal
of sodium have been recommended. It is important to
monitor electrolytes and renal values while on these
medications, and taper to lowest effective dose to con­
trol clinical signs of ascites.
Abdominocentesis may be performed when necessary
for severe abdominal distension resulting in patient
­discomfort or respiratory difficulties. Removing large
volumes of ascites may result in cardiovascular collapse
and poor perfusion, in addition to lowering body protein
levels, so it is recommended to only remove 20–50% of
the total volume of effusion in one procedure.
Hepatic Encephalopathy
In treating HE, efforts are classically focused on lowering
the amount of encephalopathic toxins in the colon. This
can be performed by both dietary changes and adminis­
tration of lactulose and/or antibiotic therapy. Because
ammonia is derived from protein sources, historically a
protein-restricted diet with reduction in aromatic amino
acids has been recommended in dogs with HE secondary
to cirrhosis. However, protein restriction is controversial,
and evidence from human medicine actually suggests
that patients with cirrhosis require additional, not
reduced, amounts of protein. What is probably more
important is to ensure that the protein content of the diet
is highly digestible and is fed little and often. Dairy and
soy proteins have been found to promote less HE com­
pared to meat protein. Commercial hepatic diets are
available for dogs, although in some dogs the protein level
may be too low, and muscle catabolism may occur. In
these dogs, supplementation with highly digestible, high‐
quality protein in limited amounts may be necessary.
Lactulose is a nonabsorbable disaccharide that acidi­
fies the colonic lumen, converting ammonia (NH3) into
ammonium (NH4+). The positively charged ammonium
is membrane impermeable, compared to the neutral
charge of ammonia. Lactulose is also a cathartic, decreas­
ing GI transit time for production and absorption of
ammonia. Lactulose dosing starts at 0.25 mL/kg PO

q8–12h, with adjustments in dose as needed to achieve a
goal of 2–3 soft, but formed stools daily.
Antibiotics have also been used for HE in an effort to
decrease the volume of colonic urease‐producing bacteria
responsible for production of ammonia. The two most
commonly utilized antibiotics are neomycin (22 mg/kg
q8h) and metronidazole (7.5 mg/kg q12h). Neomycin is an
oral aminoglycoside. Aminoglycosides are very poorly
absorbed by the GI tract, so it is thought that the effects
will usually remain within the GI tract. However, neomycin
carries a risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity, even when
given orally, so acute kidney injury can occur. Metronidazole
may result in vomiting, diarrhea, or neurotoxicity, espe­
cially when administered at high doses or chronically.
Alternatively, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid can be used at
standard doses to decrease in the patient with HE.
Emerging evidence also suggests that inflammatory
cytokines are synergistic with ammonia in precipitating
HE. Treating concurrent inflammatory and infectious
disease in other organs is therefore an important part of
managing the patient with HE.
Emergency treatment of HE is warranted if a patient
presents with seizures or coma, or otherwise is severely
neurologic and unable to safely receive oral medica­
tions. A warm water cleansing enema (10–15 mL/kg
water) should be given to remove fecal material and
allow for a retention enema with lactulose. Lactulose
(5–10 mL/kg) should then be infused at a 30% dilution
and allowed to remain in the colon for 10–15 minutes.
Flumazenil is an antagonist for benzodiazepine recep­
tors and is used as a reversal agent for benzodiazepines.
Because HE may cause stimulation of GABA/benzodi­
azepine receptors, flumazenil (0.01–0.02 mg/kg IV)
may also provide acute improvement in neurologic
depression in cases of HE.
If seizures are present, diazepam or other benzodiaze­
pine medications should not be administered as these
may increase the stimulation of GABA/benzodiazepine
receptors and risk worsening neurologic depression.
Instead, levetiracetam (20 mg/kg) may be given IV for
acute seizure control. Phenobarbital may also be utilized.
If prolonged seizure activity has been present or there
are clinical signs of cerebral edema, mannitol infusion
may also be necessary.

Gastrointestinal Ulceration
Gastrointestinal ulceration and bleeding can increase
the risk of HE due to digestion of blood proteins and
absorption of ammonia. Therefore, aggressive treatment
is warranted in cases of GI ulceration. Proton pump
inhibitors such as omeprazole (1 mg/kg q12–24h) have

VetBooks.ir

65 Cirrhosis and its Consequences

been proven to have superior acid‐blocking effects com­
pared to H2 blockers in dogs and should be utilized in
these cases. Sucralfate may also be of benefit in rapid
healing and prevention of continued bleeding.
Coagulation Disturbances
Disturbances in coagulation will usually only need to be
treated in the face of active bleeding, or if a biopsy is to
be pursued. Vitamin K1 therapy may also be beneficial
either for acute hemorrhage or prior to biopsy, especially
in cats. For active bleeding, cryoprecipitate (1 unit/10 kg)
should be administered for hypofibrinogenemia, as it
provides the most concentrated source of fibrinogen.
Fresh‐­frozen plasma (10–20 mL/kg) may also be utilized
for fibrinogen and other factor replacement.
Hepatoprotectants
The evidence regarding hepatoprotectant therapy in vet­
erinary medicine is generally lacking. It is unclear when
and which hepatoprotectant might be most beneficial for
specific hepatic diseases in dogs and cats. Therefore, it is
difficult to make recommendations regarding their use in
animals with cirrhosis. However, the use of ursodeoxy­
cholic acid, S‐adenosyl‐L‐methionine (SAM‐e), silymarin,
N‐acteylcysteine, and vitamin E have all been anecdotally
or experimentally recommended as potentially beneficial
in the treatment of severe liver disease.
One of the more promising hepatoprotectant medica­
tions is ursodeoxycholic acid (ursodiol, UDCA). Ursode­
oxycholic acid is a synthetic hydrophilic bile acid that is
thought to provide a cholerhetic effect, decreasing l­evels
of more “toxic” hydrophobic bile acids. It is also thought
to have immunomodulatory and antioxidant effects. It has
been advocated for use in CH and gallbladder mucoceles.
Its utility in the treatment of cirrhosis is unknown.
S‐adenosyl‐L‐methionine has also been advocated for
use in cases of hepatic disease. It is thought to increase
available levels of glutathione, an important antioxidant
of the liver, by increasing levels of the glutathione pre­
cursor methionine. Glutathione production may become
inadequate in cases of chronic inflammation and con­
tinuous oxidative stress. SAM‐e was reported to be
effective in veterinary medicine in a case of acetami­
nophen toxicity, and may provide protection against
steroid hepatopathy. It is unknown if it provides benefit
in cases of cirrhosis.
Silymarin, silybinin, or milk thistle, is another antioxi­
dant and free radical scavenger that increases levels of

superoxide dismutase (SOD). It has proven efficacy in
veterinary medicine against hepatic toxicity from
Amanita mushroom and acetaminophen toxicity. It was
also shown to decrease CCNU‐induced hepatotoxicity
when used in combination with SAM‐e. Again, its use
for treatment of cirrhosis has not been evaluated.Further
details on the use of hepatoprotectants in dogs with
chronic liver disease can be found in Chapter 62.

­Monitoring
The frequency of monitoring depends on the severity of
illness and the underlying disease. Rechecking electro­
lytes and renal parameters is of the utmost importance
when utilizing and adjusting doses of diuretic therapy.
Liver enzymes, most importantly ALT, should be evalu­
ated every 2–4 weeks in animals being treated with glu­
cocorticoids for inflammatory liver disease. If HE is
present, monitoring fasting ammonia levels may provide
useful information regarding response to HE treatment.

­Prognosis
Prognosis for cirrhosis is generally guarded, as cirrhosis is
an irreversible condition. Prognosis may also vary widely
based on whether or not the underlying hepatic disease is
treatable, and the severity of cirrhotic complications such
as HE and PH. One study evaluated dogs diagnosed with
CH with and without cirrhosis, and found that noncir­
rhotic dogs with CH had a median survival time (MST) of
33 months, compared to cirrhotic dogs MST of only 1.3
months. Ascites has been reported to be a negative prog­
nostic indicator in dogs with CH, with survival time from
onset of clinical signs to death of only two months, when
compared to dogs with CH and no ascites.

­Conclusion
Cirrhosis is a severe, irreversible condition that occurs as
a consequence of underlying liver disease. It often leads
to additional complications including portal hyperten­
sion, ascites, multiple aPSS , HE, gastric ulcers, and coag­
ulopathy. Early recognition and diagnosis of liver disease
followed by specific treatment are always warranted to
prevent the development of cirrhosis. Once cirrhosis and
its complications are present, supportive care is the only
treatment option and prognosis is guarded to poor.

711

VetBooks.ir

712

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

­Further Reading
Buob S, Johnston A, Webster C. Portal hypertension:
pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment. J Vet Intern
Med 2011; 25: 169–86.
Favier R. Idiopathic hepatitis and cirrhosis in dogs.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2009; 39:
481–8.
Kemp SD, Panciera D, Larson M, et al. A comparison of
hepatic sonographic features and histopathologic

diagnosis in canine liver disease: 138 cases. J Vet Intern
Med 2013; 27: 806–13.
Prins M, Schellens C, van Leeuwen M, et al. Coagulation
disorders in dogs with hepatic disease. Vet J 2010; 185:
163–8.
Vandeweerd JM, Cambier C, Gustin P. Nutraceuticals for
canine liver disease: assessing the evidence. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2013; 43: 1171–9.

VetBooks.ir

713

66
Portosystemic Shunts and Microvascular Dysplasia
Geraldine Hunt, BVSc, MVetClinStud, PhD, FACVSc
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis, CA, USA

­Etiology
Portosystemic shunting refers to a condition where
blood bypasses the liver and travels from the hepatic
portal circulation to the systemic circulation through
one or more connections that can occur at a microvascular or macrovascular level.
Congenital portosystemic shunts (CPSS) occur as a
result of an error in embryonic development where
­primordial vessels either develop abnormal connections
or fail to undergo atresia. This has been shown to have a
genetic basis in some breeds, including the Maltese, Irish
wolfhound, and Cairn terrier. Inheritance, as assessed by
pedigree analysis and test‐mating, appears to be c­ omplex –
either digenic or polygenic with variable expression.
Rarely, intrahepatic shunts may result from failure of
the ductus venosus to close. This is most commonly
reported in Irish wolfhounds (considered to be digenic in
this breed). Left‐divisional shunts may be encountered in
any breed, but it is unclear how often these represent
failure of the ductus venosus to close, versus other vascular malformations.
Acquired shunts develop as a result of increased
­vascular resistance within the portal system, the hepatic
sinusoids or the hepatic veins (in the face of normal
­central venous pressure). The most common cause is
hepatic fibrosis/cirrhosis, although other conditions
such as portal vein thrombosis, periportal neoplasia,
hepatic arteriovenous fistula, and dynamic hepatic
­vascular occlusion are sometimes encountered.
Microvascular dysplasia (MVD, which has more recently
been termed portal vein hypoplasia (PVH) without portal
hypertension, refers to abnormal development or absence
of the portal microvasculature within the liver. As different
authors use different terminology, this spectrum of conditions will be referred to henceforth as PVH‐MVD. PVH‐
MVD may occur with or without CPSS. Dogs and cats

with primary PVH‐MVD (but no CPSS) may develop
acquired shunts within the first few years of life due to
chronic portal hypertension, in which case they fall into a
category termed “noncirrhotic portal hypertension.”
Classification and Anatomy
Portosystemic shunts are classified according to three
criteria:
congenital versus acquired
single versus multiple
●● macroscopic versus microscopic.
●●
●●

Congential portosystemic shunts are further classified
according to their point of origin as either extrahepatic
(originating from the hepatic portal vein or one of its
source vessels) or intrahepatic (originating from one of the
hepatic branches of the portal vein). Extrahepatic shunts
are described by their origin and insertion (e.g., portocaval,
splenoazygous). A subset of extrahepatic shunts that insert
into the phrenic or hepatic vein has recently been characterized in various countries. Intrahepatic shunts are typically described according to the division of the portal vein
from which they arise (left, central, and right‐divisional).
A subset of dogs with CPSS have portal aplasia and no
demonstrable portal circulation to their liver. In these
cases, the shunt represents the only outlet from the portal circulation, inserting directly into the systemic venous
circulation. Unfortunately, there is no surgical option for
these patients. This anatomic variant may be associated
with other malformations such as interruption of the
caudal vena cava with azygous continuation, abdominal
situs inversus, and segmentation of the spleen.
Acquired shunts are usually multiple and generally
extrahepatic. Multiple intrahepatic shunts have been
identified in patients following thrombogenic coil occlusion of intrahepatic shunts but it is not yet known

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

714

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

whether they represent preexisting or acquired vascular
communications.
Traditional acquired shunts may occur between any
branch of the portal and systemic vasculature, but they
are typically small and tortuous and cluster around the
cranial and caudal aspects of the kidneys, especially the
left kidney. Communications with the remnant ovarian
veins may occur in spayed females; these single vessels
may become particularly large and noticeable, especially
in cats.
In PVH-MVD , shunts are considered to be microscopic, occurring between the hepatic portal and hepatic
venous systems, thereby bypassing the sinusoids.

ins) is responsible for the cardinal clinical signs of portosystemic shunting (Table 66.1).
Neurologic perturbations caused by the liver dysfunction resulting from portosystemic shunting leading to
neurologic abnormalities are termed hepatic encephalopathy (HE) (see description later).
It is becoming increasingly recognized that infection
and inflammation also play a role in development of
encephalopathy in laboratory animals and humans.
Circulating blood levels of C‐reactive protein (a marker
of inflammation) have relatively recently been shown to
be elevated in dogs with HE, suggesting that this is also
likely to be an important mechanism in dogs. HE may be
complicated by hypoglycemia in patients that are inappetent or being fasted, as a result of low hepatic glycogen
reserves in the hypoplastic or damaged liver.
Circulating levels of these substances will fluctuate
according to whether the animal has eaten, the diet, and
other factors affecting gastrointestinal transit time, bacterial flora or the production of ammonia within the gut.
Gastrointestinal hemorrhage is a known risk factor for
development of HE, and can be a particular problem in
patients with end‐stage liver disease and portal hypertension, or dogs with CPSS that develop gastrointestinal
ulceration (see later).
Deranged nitrogen metabolism causes a tendency for
urinary ammonium biurate crystalluria and calculus
formation, which may lead to irritation of the renal
­
pelvis with hematuria, ureteral obstruction or (more
­
­commonly) urethral obstruction.
Polyuria and polydipsia are common in patients with
portosystemic shunts. The mechanism is not completely
understood but is probably multifactorial. Contributing
factors include low plasma BUN and poor renal concentrating ability, and increased thirst resulting from systemic inflammation and fever.
Abnormal blood flow within the hepatic sinusoids
results in impairment of delivery of vital substances to

­Pathophysiology
Dogs and cats with portosystemic shunting usually have
low functional hepatic mass. The liver either fails to grow
normally as it is deprived of its normal blood supply,
trophic factors (such as insulin and hepatic growth factor) and nutrients, or liver function is impaired as a result
of a primary hepatopathy (in cases with acquired portosystemic shunts).
The major clinical signs associated with portosystemic shunting result from failure of the liver to metabolize substances being absorbed from the
gastrointestinal tract, receive pancreatic hormones,
and metabolize other circulating hormones. There is
deranged nitrogen metabolism and the capacity of the
liver to produce urea is diminished, leading to elevated
levels of circulating ammonia and low blood urea
nitrogen (BUN) levels. Serum bile acids, which normally undergo almost complete enterohepatic circulation, are also elevated in systemic samples. Abnormal
filtering or metabolism of a variety of other substances
absorbed into the portal venous blood (branched chain
and aromatic amino acids, bacteria and bacterial tox-

Table 66.1 Clinical and diagnostic features of different conditions causing biochemical evidence of hepatopathy

CPS

*

Age

HE

Ascites

Jaundice

Diarrhea

Elevated shunt fraction

Younger

Yes

Rare*

No

Rare

Yes

PVH‐MVD

Any age

No

No

No

No

No

Noncirrhotic PH

Young to middle‐aged

Yes#

Yes

No

Yes

Yes#

Cirrhotic PH

Older

Yes#

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes#

Possible in patients with very low serum albumin.
Once acquired shunts have developed.
CPS, congenital portosystemic shunts; HE, hepatic encephalopathy; MVD, microvascular dysplasia; PH, portal hypertension; PVH, portal venous
hypoplasia.

#

VetBooks.ir

66 Portosystemic Shunts and Microvascular Dysplasia

the hepatocytes, eventually resulting in cell damage and
death. Cell damage is followed by accumulation of lipid
within the hepatocytes, cell death and phagocytosis by
macrophages, which then coalesce to form lipogranulomas. Interstitial fibrosis eventually leading to cirrhosis
has been observed in some patients with CPSS, but is far
more likely to be seen in patients with acquired portosystemic shunts resulting from end‐stage hepatopathy of
another etiology.
Pathophysiology of Portal Hypertension
Portal hypertension (leading to acquired portosystemic
shunts) is by definition an increase in portal venous
pressure above the expected normal of 8–12 mmHg
(note that patients with CPSS will usually have portal
pressures comparable or slightly higher than central
venous pressure (typically 4–8 mmHg). Portal hypertension occurs when the resistance to vascular flow
within the hepatic portal vein or sinusoids increases,
causing sequestration of blood within the viscera.
Reduction in the arterial to venous pressure gradient
across the capillary beds of the gut causes reduced
blood flow and hence reduced oxygen delivery to tissues. Alteration of hydrostatic pressure, often accompanied by reduced plasma oncotic pressure resulting
from the patient’s underlying liver disease, allows fluid
to leak from the capillaries into both the intestinal
lumen and the peritoneal cavity, resulting in ascites and
diarrhea. In acute, severe portal hypertension, frank
blood may leak into the lumen of the bowel, resulting in
hematemesis and hematochezia. Edema and swelling of
the intraabdominal organs causes stretching of the capsules and peritoneum, and hence this condition can be
quite painful.
Reduction in blood flow through the hepatic sinusoids
results in lower venous return to the right atrium, with a
resultant fall in cardiac output and the compensatory
changes of tachycardia and reduced stroke volume.
Hypovolemic shock will eventuate if the compensatory
mechanisms are not sufficient to assure adequate tissue
oxygen delivery, or if ongoing fluid losses into the bowel
and peritoneal cavity cannot be replaced.
In patients that are able to compensate for mild to
moderate portal hypertension, small veno‐venous
communications open within a few days. These take
the path of least resistance from the portal circulation
into a nearby branch of the systemic venous system,
and therefore tend to occur where the vascular systems are in closest proximity to one another (root of
the mesentery, esophageal hiatus, perianal region).
These vessels are thin‐walled and tortuous and usually
cluster in plexi.

Although congestive heart failure or caudal vena caval
obstruction causes hepatic venous distension, this does
not result in acquired portosystemic shunting because the
hydrostatic pressure is increased within the caudal vena
cava as well as the hepatic sinusoids and there is hence no
hydrostatic drive for the portosystemic shunts to occur.
Ascites resulting from increased hydrostatic pressure
within the caudal vena cava (caval tumors, right‐sided
congestive heart failure) tends to be a modified transudate due to leakage of protein‐rich hepatic lymph,
whereas ascites resulting from mild to moderate
­portal hypertension tends to be a transudate. Ascites
occurring in fulminant portal hypertension may also be
sanguinous if the capillaries or splenic capsule rupture.
Portal hypertension is likely to result in splenomegaly,
with a normal to small‐sized liver, unless the obstruction
occurs at the level of the hepatic venules or hepatic
veins (Budd–Chiari syndrome).

­Epidemiology
Signalment
Acquired shunts may be seen in any species or breed of
patient in which diseases causing hepatic fibrosis or cirrhosis occur. A good example of such a disease in dogs is
chronic hepatitis. A subset of patients with acquired
shunts resulting from portal hypertension caused by
congenital PVH‐MVD will present before the age of 3
years and may be ­indistinguishable from patients with
CPSS (see further discussion in Diagnosis section).
Congenital shunts are seen most commonly in pure‐
breed dogs, or cross‐bred dogs with parents of breeds that
are overrepresented amongst the shunt population. Many
breeds have been reported as predisposed around the
world, the most notable being a number of terriers
(Yorkshire, cairn, Maltese, Jack Russell), Chihuahuas, miniature schnauzers, pugs, toy poodles, Australian c­ attle dogs,
Labrador and golden retrievers, and Irish wolfhounds.
In general, extrahepatic shunts are more common in
terriers and other small‐breed dogs, whereas intrahepatic shunts are more common in medium‐ to large‐
breed dogs. However, exceptions occur (e.g., toy and
miniature poodles) and some form of shunt imaging is
recommended prior to surgical exploration. Patients
from breeds that are not known to be predisposed to
CPSS are more likely to “break the rules” and should be
evaluated especially carefully.
PVH‐MVD tends to occur in similar breeds to those
affected with CPSS, and has been best characterized in
the terrier‐type breeds such as Maltese, Yorkshire and
cairn terriers.

715

VetBooks.ir

716

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

History and Clinical Signs
Patients with portal vascular abnormalities may be clinically asymptomatic (abnormality detected after routine
wellness screening, or preanesthetic blood testing), ­display
vague and self‐limiting clinical signs, or present with
severe neurologic abnormalities associated with HE.
Common clinical signs include a picky appetite or pica,
failure to thrive, hypersialism (most evident in cats), sporadic vomiting, polyuria and polydipsia, urinary irritation and obstruction caused by ammonium biurate
calculi, episodes of abnormal mentation accompanied by
ataxia, and amauratic (apparent) blindness. Cats with
CPSS may have copper‐colored irises, although this is
not always the case, and it is not pathognomonic .
Dogs with CPSS sometimes present with a history of
generalized motor seizures, although in a subset of cases
the seizures are caused by a co‐morbidity such as idiopathic epilepsy or granulomatous meningoencephalitis
(more recently referred to as meningoencephalitis of
unknown etiology), rather than the shunt itself (see
Prognosis section). Behavior changes including aggression may occasionally prompt presentation. Dogs with
CPSS may have other intermittent problems that seem to
result from systemic debility, such as coughing, ocular
discharge, and urinary tract infection.
Ascites is very uncommonly seen in dogs with CPSS
unless they have been on a restricted protein diet for an
extended period of time. Ascites is more common in
cases of portal hypertension accompanying end‐stage
liver disease or portal venous hypertension/dysplasia.

­Diagnosis
There are a number of diagnostic methods, including
demonstration of liver dysfunction, confirmation of portosystemic shunting, imaging of the shunt, and histologic
evaluation of the liver.
Clinical Pathology
Biochemical abnormalities typically include low to low‐
normal BUN, cholesterol, albumin, glucose and protein C,
andelevatedliverenzymes(alanineaminotransferase[ALT],
alkaline phosphatase[ALP]). Serum bile acid activity is
measured before (resting) and after eating (post prandial),
to gauge the degree to which bile acids leak into the systemic circulation from the portal vein, rather than being
extracted by enterohepatic circulation. Serum bile acid
activity should be elevated in animals with portosystemic
shunts, and the post prandial sample is more frequently
abnormal than the resting sample. Plasma ammonia levels
can also be measured before and after administration of

an ammonium chloride solution per rectum (ammonia
tolerance test). Ammonia is labile in serum, and the
ammonia ­tolerance test is somewhat more invasive and
can be very d
­ angerous, and thus serum bile acids are preferred over ammonia as a clinical screening test.
Hematologic a­ bnormalities include anemia with microcytosis and often a mature neutrophilia.
Confirmation of Portosystemic Shunting
This is most easily done using nuclear scintigraphy; imaging the patient following rectal or transsplenic administration of technetium pertechnetate. Contrast portography,
following injection of radiographic contrast agent through
a catheter placed in the jejunal vein or percutaneously by
means of splenic injection (­splenoportography), provides
another mechanism for confirmation that portal blood is
passing directly into the caudal vena cava and bypassing
the liver. Contrast portography also provides a mechanism for determining the anatomy of the portosystemic
shunt, if a good‐­quality study is achieved. Chapter 61 provides further details on the methods to image the animal
with a portosystemic shunt.
Imaging of the Portal Vasculature
Abdominal sonography is the least expensive and invasive modality, but confidently finding a portosystemic
shunt can be difficult in very small dogs, dogs with intestinal gas or ingesta, or with shunts that are in unusual
locations. Even in the hands of an experienced sonographer, shunts may not be located in up to 25% of patients.
Even when the vessel is not identified, circumstantial
evidence for CPSS may include turbulence within the
prehepatic caudal vena cava, renomegaly, microhepatica,
and urinary calculi.
Three‐dimensional imaging using computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is
becoming the “gold standard” of diagnosis. Dual‐phase
CT angiography (DPCTA) allows confirmation of
­portosystemic shunting, clarification of the exact shunt
anatomy, identification of other congenital abnormalities, calculation of liver volume, assessment of hepatic
perfusion in both the arterial and venous phase, and
identification of urinary calculi. DPCTA is essential for
planning transvenous coil embolization.
Differentiating CPS from PVH‐MVD
Dogs with these two conditions may present in exactly
the same way, although dogs with PVH‐MVD are less
likely to demonstrate overt signs of HE. Confirmation by
nuclear scintigraphy, or advanced imaging, that there is
no macroscopic shunt, and identification of the histologic

VetBooks.ir

66 Portosystemic Shunts and Microvascular Dysplasia

features on liver biopsy in the absence of another hepatopathy that could explain the biochemical p
­ erturbations are
required for definitive diagnosis of PVH‐MVD.

­Therapy
Medical Therapy
Medical therapy is aimed at ameliorating the signs of
HE by reducing the amount of ammonia (and other substances) produced in the gut, and the degree to which
they are absorbed. Medical management is often
employed in those animals that show few clinical signs on
presentations, are older, in which financial or owner-lead
reasons limit surgery, or which have a shunt that is not
amenable to ligation. The main aims of therapy are to
decrease the formation of gut derived encephalotoxins,
especially ammonia. Therefore the mainstays of current
therapy are a combination of dietary alterations, oral antibiotics to suppress bacterial populations that produce
encephalopathic toxins and local acting agents to reduce
gastrointestinal uptake of ammonia (e.g. lactulose).
Controlled trials have not been performed in animals to
determine the optimal treatment for HE and so current
recommendations are based on anecdotal evidence.
Feeding a high‐quality digestible diet is the mainstay of
management of the stable patient. Protein restriction is
controversial, and generally not recommended, as some
authorities report that dogs with CPSS actually have normal to increased requirements. If protein restriction is
required, a commercial restricted protein diet is the easiest to prescribe. For clients who wish to formulate their
own diet, protein sources should be easily digestible and
metabolizable. Vegetable and dairy proteins tend to be
better tolerated than meat‐based ones, with cottage
cheese being a palatable option for many patients. Cats
have more stringent dietary requirements than dogs, and
this should be taken into account when choosing a diet.
Patients with reduced hepatic mass will have poor glycogen reserves and a tendency toward hypoglycemia, so
meals should be given frequently.
Lactulose is prescribed for symptomatic patients, with
the goal of reducing intestinal pH and thereby trapping
ammonia within the gut, and by virtue of its action as an
osmotic cathartic, hastening intestinal transit time and
reducing the time available for absorption of ammonia.
In patients that are actively encephalopathic and unable
to tolerate oral medication, lactulose may be administered rectally.
Antibiotics may also be prescribed, with a view to
reducing the intestinal bacterial population and thus
reducing ammonia production. Further details about
medical management of the patient with liver disease
can be found in Chapter 65.

There is evidence that patients with liver disease are at
increased risk for gastrointestinal ulceration, and anecdotal reports of this being a particular problem in dogs
with intrahepatic shunts. Therefore, many clinicians
include some type of antacid medication (H2 receptor
antagonist or protein pump inhibitor such as famotidine
or omeprazole) as part of the standard medical management protocol. Finally, emerging evidence also suggests that inflammatory cytokines are synergistic with
ammonia in precipitating HE and that controlling
inflammation in other organs is an important part of
managing the patient with HE.

Surgical Therapy
Surgical therapy is indicated for patients with CPSS, or
hepatic arteriovenous fistulae, where the primary problem can be resolved. Patients with acquired shunts secondary to end‐stage liver disease or PVH are unlikely to
benefit from surgical attenuation of their shunts as the
­ echanism for decompressing
shunts are providing a m
the portal system and reducing portal hypertension.
Dogs with PVH-MVD, and those with portal vein aplasia, are also not candidates for surgical intervention.
However, the results of liver biopsy may inform medical
management in patients with acquired liver disease, and
this often provides justification for surgical exploration.
Surgical therapy for CPSS is aimed at identifying the
shunt and attenuating it. As most patients have poorly
developed hepatic portal circulation and relatively high
portal vascular resistance, total immediate occlusion of
the shunt is highly likely to result in life‐threatening portal hypertension. Therefore, surgical methods aim either
to provide partial occlusion (which may be increased in
stages by subsequent procedures) or application of a
device to promote slow occlusion. The goal of slow or
staged occlusion is to allow the intrahepatic portal circulation time to regenerate, with reduction in vascular
resistance, at the same time as the shunt is being slowly
or incrementally occluded.
The main techniques used for slow occlusion of extrahepatic shunts are cellophane bands and ameroid constrictors. Cellophane bands promote occlusion by
stimulating a foreign body reaction and fibrosis between
the band and the shunt wall. Ameroid constrictors produce some mechanical occlusion as the ameroid clay
takes up fluid, but also cause local inflammation with
fibrosis and thrombosis of the shunt vessel. More recent
reports have described the use of a variety of other clear
films for shunt occlusion in dogs and cats, including
polypropylene and polyethylene. These seem to be as
effective as cellophane, probably due to the chemicals
incorporated during the manufacturing process.

717

VetBooks.ir

718

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

Intrahepatic shunts were historically addressed by surgical attenuation using either extravascular dissection or
a transvenous approach under partial venous inflow
occlusion. In recent years, minimally invasive procedures have become more common, with an expanding
body of international experience in interventional techniques such as percutaneous thrombogenic coil embolization (PTCE). This technique results in much less
morbidity. The downsides are the need for advanced
equipment (including fluoroscopy) and expertise, and
the likelihood that repeated procedures will be required
for complete shunt occlusion (see Prognosis section).
Surgical Attenuation

Surgical exploration is performed through a ventral
­midline celiotomy, which may be extended cranially by
transdiaphragmatic incision or median sternotomy.
Combination of a paracostal incision with a ventral midline celiotomy is also an effective way of exposing the
craniodorsal abdomen, but is rarely required for shunt
surgery. A standard exploration should be performed to
evaluate the portal vasculature and identify the portosystemic shunt. If present, acquired shunts will usually be
visible around the cranial aspect of the left kidney.
Perioperative Monitoring and Treatment

Serum glucose concentration should be monitored
­regularly due to the tendency for hypoglycemia. Albumin
levels may drop markedly when intravenous crystalloid
is administered at surgical rates, and plasma transfusion
is sometimes required. However, serum albumin
increases relatively little following plasma transfusion,
and therefore human albumin solutions are an alternatively way to increase serum albumin. Hemodynamic
parameters should be measured regularly during and following surgery to gauge trends and allow early detection
of developing portal hypertension. Patients can be
severely polyuric prior to surgery and may require
increased fluid rates to avoid dehydration postoperatively. Potassium supplementation may be required.
Complications of Surgery

A large range of complications have been reported following surgery for CPSS. Anesthetic‐related complications include hypotension (mainly in cats), hypothermia
due to small body size and poor body condition, and
hypoglycemia for reasons previously described.
Intraoperative hemorrhage is not usually a major issue
unless tearing of the vessels occurs during dissection.
This is more likely during treatment of intrahepatic
shunts, but unlikely if careful technique is used when
dissecting extrahepatic vessels. Although some perturbations in coagulation parameters have been reported in
dogs with CPSS, most patients do not experience clini-

cally significant problems with coagulation. This is much
more likely to be a problem in patients with end‐stage
liver disease.
The major life‐threatening complications that occur
perioperatively are portal hypertension and postligation
neurologic dysfunction. The incidence of portal hypertension has been greatly reduced by adoption of the slow
occlusion techniques, and publication of guidelines for
safe shunt attenuation. Mild to moderate portal hypertension may not cause life‐threatening problems; affected
patients may have inappetence or diarrhea for a short
period of time, or develop ascites. Assuming they are
able to compensate hemodynamically for the reduced
central venous return, and the bowel does not become
critically hypoxic, they will eventually develop acquired
shunts and a consequent return of portal pressure
towards normal. Early published reports suggested that
up to 20% of patients can be expected to develop acquired
shunts but more recent studies, in which patients underwent postoperative evaluation using DPCTA, showed
that the incidence is probably less than 10%, with an
additional 10% of patients experiencing ongoing shunting as a result of misplacement or failure of the attenuating device to promote complete occlusion.
Postoperative neurologic sequelae range from blindness or muscle twitching, through disorientation, to
generalized motor seizures and status epilepticus.
­
Hypoglycemia and HE may also produce signs that can
be difficult to distinguish from true postligation neurologic dysfunction . In addition, patients experiencing seizures preoperatively may continue to have seizures
postoperatively if the seizures were caused by something
other than their CPS.
Hypoglycemia, HE, and the seizures of idiopathic epilepsy should be manageable by evaluating the patient
and relevant bloodwork, and treating accordingly.
Postligation neurologic dysfunction seizures and status
epilepticus constitute a much more serious problem with
a guarded prognosis. The cause of these seizures is still
not well understood, but may include factors such as
imbalance of neurotransmitters, cerebral edema, and
derangements in cerebral blood flow. Historically, seizures were considered to occur acutely, with patients
found when they were already in status epilepticus.
Closer observation of patients following surgery has
shown that in many cases, the condition is progressive.
Patients start behaving abnormally, vocalizing and showing signs of disorientation and inappropriate mentation.
They do not interact appropriately when being handled.
They are ataxic and often display compulsive movements. Left untreated, they will develop facial twitches
that progress to generalized motor seizures and status
epilepticus. Several studies have shown an incidence of
seizures in up to 5% of dogs following surgery for CPSS.

VetBooks.ir

66 Portosystemic Shunts and Microvascular Dysplasia

Anecdotal experiences suggest that older dogs and pugs
may be at greater risk for seizures, but this has not been
definitively proven. Cats seem at greater risk for neurologic sequelae, including blindness and twitching, in
addition to seizures. Preoperative treatment with phenobarbitol and levetiracetam (Keppra®) has been shown to
significantly reduce the incidence of seizures, although
published reports and anecdotal experience suggest that
the risk is not completely abolished.
Therapeutic Decision Making
In light of the fact that many patients have mild clinical
signs, and surgical shunt attenuation has a significant
morbidity/mortality rate, owners are sometimes faced
with a difficult choice between long‐term medical management and surgical correction. Some dogs live apparently normal lives with no management at all, whereas
others develop severe clinical signs within the first few
months of life. On risk–benefit analysis, a young puppy
with obvious HE is more clearly a candidate for surgery
than an 8‐year‐old dog in which CPSS is detected on a
routine wellness check. An exception would be the older
male dog in which CPSS is diagnosed following urethral
obstruction with ammonium urate calculi. Medical management in these patients may not control stone formation, and as urethral obstruction is, in itself, potentially
life‐threatening, many owners will opt for surgical
­correction of the CPSS. Likewise, patients with severe
polyuria/polydipsia may be generally happy but present
unacceptable management issues, making surgery an
attractive option.
Many dogs with severe clinical signs will become near‐
normal on medical management, prompting the owners
to question the necessity for surgery. The choice then is
between lifelong dietary management and other therapies, weighed against a high probability for return of liver
function to normal following CPSS attenuation.
Ongoing Evaluation
There are two main factors that should be considered
when determining a patient’s progress, either with
­medical or surgical management: liver function and the
presence and degree of portosystemic shunting.
Biochemical Evaluation

Liver function is usually monitored indirectly by measuring blood levels of the products of hepatic metabolism
including albumin, cholesterol and BUN . Return of cholesterol and BUN to reference levels is a good indicator
that liver function is returning to normal. Serum bile
acid levels are a sensitive indicator of macroscopic or
microscopic portosystemic shunting. Postoperatively,

patients may have normal serum biochemistry and a
normal technetium scan in the face of continuing mild
elevations in serum bile acids. The significance of these
mild elevations to long‐term prognosis is not yet known.
Protein C has been proposed as a useful monitoring tool
but the assay is not offered widely, and results from different laboratories may differ, making interpretation of
single results difficult.
Nuclear Scintigraphy

Per rectal scintigraphy provides an estimate of shunt fraction and is helpful in determining the degree of shunt closure following surgery. It does have some interobserver
variation, and we reported some dogs with normal technetium scans following surgery that had persistent shunting through small tributary vessels. Therefore, the results
of scintigraphy should be interpreted in the context of
other measures such as serum biochemistry and imaging.
Percutaneous transsplenic scintigraphy is more accurate
and may provide information about shunt anatomy in the
hands of an experienced operator, but is more invasive
and not yet performed routinely.
Abdominal Sonography

Assuming that the shunt was sonographically visible
before surgery, postoperative sonography is a mechanism
for confirming closure of the shunt, increase in liver volume, and decrease in kidney size. It is also useful for identifying or monitoring development of urinary calculi.
Computed Tomography

Dual‐phase CT angiography is emerging as the most
reliable way to evaluate patients postoperatively, ­allowing
calculation of liver volume and perfusion, and evaluation
of shunt anatomy, presence of persistent shunting
through the original shunt or acquired vessels.
Interpretation of Surgical Outcomes

Historically, patients have undergone minimal objective
follow‐up after surgical attenuation, making interpretation of published outcomes difficult. Patients with
­persistently abnormal blood values may have persistent
shunting, acquired shunts, PVH-MVD, or some other
hepatopathy. Persistently abnormal technetium scans
are now recognized to occur in a variety of scenarios,
including failure of the occlusion device to promote
complete occlusion, malpositioning of the occlusion
device, and development of acquired shunting. Clearly,
neither of these techniques is able to identify the etiology
for the abnormal result, and thus inform the most appropriate management plan.
Imaging using sonography may be helpful if the abnormal vessel(s) are visible. The ideal strategy for evaluation
would include serial serum biochemistry including

719

VetBooks.ir

720

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

serum bile acids and protein C, nuclear scintigraphy, and
DPCTA. This battery of tests should be used as the gold
standard for future research studies attempting to evaluate surgical outcomes, but is not realistic for clinical
patients, many of whom have shown resolution of their
clinical signs and for whom the risk of anesthesia and
contrast imaging is not warranted. Advanced imaging
should, however, be considered for patients displaying
persistent biochemical or scintigraphic abnormalities six
months following surgery.

­Prognosis
While medical management can be successful for a prolonged period in many patients, the published literature
suggests that outcomes following surgery are better, as
long as the surgery is performed before severe secondary
changes in liver function occur. A more recent study has
shown that those undergoing surgical ligation of the shunting vessel have a longer median survival time, and a lower
frequency of ongoing clinical signs. The mortality rate following correction of CPSS (including PTCE) is less than
5%. Up to 80% of patients receiving slow occlusion devices

for extrahepatic CPS can be expected to regain normal
liver function, with a median survival of 152 months. The
mortality and morbidity rates are higher for surgical correction of intrahepatic shunts, and for cats with CPSS of
any anatomic type, and the chance of return to liver function is lower than for dogs with e­ xtrahepatic CPSS.
The prognosis for patients undergoing PTCE has not
yet been established definitively. However, early reports
suggest that the mortality and morbidity rates are low,
and patients are highly likely to show substantial clinical
improvement, although complete closure of the shunt is
unlikely.
Regardless of the technique used, the clinical impact of
residual flow through the original shunt has yet to be
determined. Intuitively, a reduction in shunt fraction
should improve hepatic function, but the actual shunt
fraction at which a patient might resume a normal diet
and not show clinical signs is not known.
Approximately 10% of patients will never return to
normal liver function even following complete shunt
occlusion and will likely require lifetime medical management, although interestingly, they are often less
severely affected clinically once acquired shunts have
developed than they were with a single shunt.

­Further Reading
Adam FH, German A, McConnell J, et al. Clinical and
clinicopathologic abnormalities in young dogs with
acquired and congenital portosystemic shunts: 93 cases
(2003–2008). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 241(6): 760–5.
Falls EL, Milovancev M, Hunt G, et al. Long‐term outcome
after surgical ameroid ring constrictor placement for
treatment of single extrahepatic portosystemic shunts in
dogs. Vet Surg 2013; 42(8): 951–7.
Kim SE, Giglio R, Reese D, et al. Comparison of computed
tomographic angiography and ultrasonography for the

detection and characterization of portosystemic shunts
in dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2013; 54(6): 569–74.
Swinbourne F, Smith K, Lipscomb V, Tivers M.
Histopathological findings in the livers of cats with a
congenital portosystemic shunt before and after surgical
attenuation. Vet Rec 2013; 172(14): 362.
White RN, Parry A. Morphology of congenital
portosystemic shunts emanating from the left gastric
vein in dogs and cats. J Small Anim Pract 2013; 54(9):
459–67.

VetBooks.ir

721

67
Diseases of the Gallbladder and Extrahepatic Biliary Ducts
Ben Harris, MA, VetMB, CertSAM, MRCVS
Northwest Veterinary Specialists, Sutton Weaver, Cheshire, UK

The gallbladder is a bladder‐like organ possessing a thin,
mucosa‐lined wall with a muscular layer and an outer
serosal layer. Its function is to store, modify, and secrete
bile, which is synthesized in the hepatocytes and reaches
the gallbladder via bile canaliculi, lobar bile ducts, and
eventually the cystic bile duct. During its time stored in
the gallbladder, bile becomes concentrated (up to 10
times) and mildly acidified. Gallbladder contraction pro­
pels bile into the common bile duct (CBD) and then via
the sphincter of Oddi into the proximal duodenum at the
major duodenal papilla. Gallbladder contraction is stim­
ulated by cholecystokinin, gastrin, and motilin, which in
turn are released in response to fatty acids, peptides, and
amino acids in the stomach and duodenum.
In cats, the CBD joins the pancreatic duct, sharing a
common opening into the duodenum at the duodenal
papilla. In dogs, the pancreatic and CBD meet only at the
papilla; in many dogs, an additional separate pancreatic
duct enters the duodenum more distal to the papilla.

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Disorders of the canine and feline biliary tract are more
frequently acquired than congenital, although congenital
biliary cysts, malformations, and biliary atresia have
been reported. The flow of bile from the gallbladder to
the duodenal papilla, as well as the chemical character of
bile and the mucosal immunity (secretory IgA and
mucosal mononuclear cells), serves to reduce the risk of
biliary bacterial infection. In vivo studies and molecular
techniques have detected transitory bacteria in bile of
normal dogs. Interruption or obstruction to flow may
allow these transitory bacteria to colonize the tract,
causing bacterial cholangitis.
Trematode infections (Platynosomum fastosum and
other Platynosomum spp.) of the biliary tract are found
occasionally in cats in the southern USA, in South

America and Asia, with clinical disease ranging from
asymptomatic to severe obstructive cholangitis or subse­
quent neoplastic transformation to cholangiocarcinoma.
Mucosal resistance to the extreme chemical nature of
bile is afforded by secretion of mucin from mucous
glands within the biliary tract. Hypersecretion, possibly
as a result of inflammatory stimuli or transporter defects
(ABCB4 phosphatidylcholine translocator mutation in
Shetland sheepdogs), may result in accumulation of
mucin within the gallbladder in dogs, leading to the for­
mation of a biliary mucocele (Figure 67.1). Untreated
­biliary mucoceles may rupture, as the gallbladder wall
becomes necrotic under pressure from the accumulating
concretion of mucus. Bile is a highly irritating substance,
so leakage into the abdomen results in a chemical perito­
nitis (“bile peritonitis”). Cholecystocentesis is contrain­
dicated in biliary mucocele patients because of the risk of
gallbladder rupture.
Biliary obstruction may be either intrinsic to the bil­
iary tract or outside it. Blockage of biliary flow results in
posthepatic jaundice. One of the more common causes
of biliary obstruction is acute pancreatitis. This occurs
due to the intimate association of the body of the pan­
creas with the CBD near the duodenal papilla – the point
of entry of the CBD into the small intestine. Pancreatic
carcinoma or biliary carcinoma similarly may result in
complete bile duct obstruction. Inflammation or neo­
plastic infiltration of and around the duodenal papilla
(e.g., duodenal lymphoma, carcinoma) is an occasional
cause of jaundice.
Choleliths are uncommon in cats and dogs but may
cause bile duct obstruction or rupture. Most canine and
feline choleliths contain some bile pigments, rather than
being pure cholesterol liths such as those commonly
found in humans. A predisposition to cholelithiasis may
occur due to gallbladder motility disorders, endocrine
disease, cholestasis, cholangitis or supersaturation of the
components of bile (cholesterol, pigments).

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

strong association of IBD with primary sclerosing chol­
angitis in humans. Although such a strong association is
not reported in dogs, inflammation around the duodenal
papilla can alter bile flow and may encourage bacterial
colonization of the biliary tract. Likewise, intestinal
motility disorders or small intestinal bacterial over­
growth may augment infection risk by increasing
numbers of potentially pathogenic bacteria that may
­
ascend the biliary tract.
Biliary flukes are not prevalent in Europe, but are more
commonly found in the southern USA, South America,
and Asia. Infection requires ingestion of a secondary
intermediate host such as a frog or lizard.

VetBooks.ir

722

­Signalment

Figure 67.1 A distended gallbladder removed from a dog with a
mucocele.

Primary biliary neoplasia ranges from benign chole­
dochal cysts and biliary cystadenoma to biliary carci­
noma, which may originate in the intrahepatic or
extrahepatic biliary system. Biliary neoplasia occurs more
commonly in cats. The gallbladder is susceptible to infarc­
tion if the cystic artery – the sole arterial blood supply to
the organ – is compromised by trauma or thrombosis.
Bacterial cholangitis may occur due to ascending bac­
terial infection from the gastrointestinal tract, hematog­
enous spread or colonization by the aforementioned
transitory bacteria.

­Epidemiology
Arguably, the most common disorders predisposing to
biliary tract disease are endocrine diseases such as
hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus, and hypothy­
roidism. Of these, hyperadrenocorticism increases risk
of gallbladder mucocele by up to 29 times; the associa­
tion with hypothyroidism and diabetes mellitus is less
concrete.
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a common co‐
morbidity with cats with cholangitis, just as there is a

Particular species and breed associations are found for
certain biliary disorders. Neoplasia occurs more com­
monly in middle‐aged to older cats and dogs, but benign
and cystic disorders may be acquired even in individuals
less than 2 years of age. Biliary flukes are reported in cats
but are far less common in dogs. Mucocele formation is
more common in Shetland sheepdogs, border terriers,
miniature schnauzers and cocker spaniels and become
increasingly common in dogs beyond middle age.
Mutation of a phosphatidylcholine translocator (ABCB4)
has been identified in affected Shetland sheepdogs.
Choleliths are more commonly found in miniature
schnauzers and miniature poodles, particularly in older
females.
Pancreatic neoplasia does not have a strong breed pre­
disposition, but pancreatitis is more commonly associ­
ated with cocker spaniels and miniature schnauzers. Of
note is the often marked inflammatory swelling of the
pancreas in cocker spaniels with pancreatitis, which may
be erroneously described as a pancreatic tumor based on
diagnostic imaging findings. Those breeds with predis­
positions towards endocrine disease (e.g., hypothyroid­
ism, hyperadrenocorticism) may be more commonly
affected by bile stasis, cholangitis, and biliary mucocele.

­History and Clinical Signs
Nonobstructive biliary tract disease may be insidious in
onset, with vague clinical signs such as lethargy, pyrexia,
anorexia, and vomiting. Pyrexia is more likely to be pre­
sent with florid inflammation, bile peritonitis or bacterial
biliary infection but can also be seen with cholelithiasis,
presumably due to secondary bacterial infection. Clinical
signs may be mild and therefore present for weeks or
months before veterinary attention is sought.

VetBooks.ir

67 Diseases of the Gallbladder and Extrahepatic Biliary Ducts

Vomiting may be a clinical sign associated with biliary
disease itself or caused by an underlying associated prob­
lem such as pancreatitis. A history of dietary indiscretion
or ingestion of fatty foods may be relevant in cases of acute
pancreatitis. Abdominal pain may result from the obstruc­
tion or distension of the bile ducts or gallbladder or from
inflammation of the biliary tract and surrounding area
(e.g., local peritonitis). Patients with biliary mucocele may
also exhibit abdominal pain and, if significantly obstruc­
tive, may become jaundiced. Jaundice (icterus) becomes
clinically evident as yellow discoloration of the mucus
membranes, skin, and sclera when the serum bilirubin
exceeds around 2 mg/dL. The exact concentration at
which icterus becomes clinically visible will depend upon
the patient’s own pigmentation and hemoglobin concen­
tration (mucous membrane p
­ allor makes icterus more
evident). Total biliary obstruction prevents pigmentation
of the feces, resulting in pale “acholic” feces.

­Diagnosis
Clinical Examination
It should be apparent from clinical examination if the
patient is jaundiced, but jaundice is only clinically evident
when serum bilirubin levels exceed 2 mg/dL. As previ­
ously mentioned, how evident hyperbilirubinemia is will
depend upon multiple factors. Examination of the sclera
or internal aspect of the pinna (the latter particularly in
cats) may display more obvious evidence of icterus.
Cranial abdominal pain may manifest as a hunched
posture, “prayer posture” or via the patient’s response to
palpation. Once again, how evident this subjective find­
ing is will depend upon patient factors and also concur­
rent problems such as pancreatitis. Pancreatic pain
usually localizes to the right cranial abdominal quadrant,
but may be more diffuse. In some patients, pancreatic
pain does not manifest until pressure is placed directly
upon the pancreas during ultrasonography. A very dis­
tended gallbladder might be palpable beyond the hepatic
margin in some patients, but this is unusual. If rupture of
the biliary tract has occurred then an abdominal effusion
may be present, potentially resulting in a fluid wave on
ballottement. Often, however, patients with bile perito­
nitis have tensed abdominal muscles, because of the
associated pain, which limits clinical examination.

Blood biochemistry in biliary tract disease varies
depending upon the degree of biliary obstruction as well
as the accompanying hepatic and pancreatic disease.
In an icteric patient, total bilirubin will be increased. If
the patient has significant cholestasis, then bile acids will
also be increased. If total bilirubin is increased then
nothing additional may be inferred from measurement
of bile acids or performing a bile acid stimulation
test – the patient has either significant hepatic functional
compromise or bile duct obstruction.
Increases of the concentration of biliary canalicular
enzymes in the blood are expected (alkaline phosphatase
[ALP], gamma‐glutamyl transferase [GGT]) with choles­
tasis or biliary tract inflammation. Bile acids are toxic to
hepatocytes, so it is extremely common for animals with
bile stasis to have elevation in hepatocellular enzymes
(alanine aminotransferase [ALT], aspartate aminotrans­
ferase [AST]). Patients with concurrent hepatic paren­
chymal disease may also have increased hepatocellular
enzymes. If hepatic disease is advanced enough to impair
hepatic function, then urea and albumin may be reduced
due to poor hepatic synthesis and conversion. Similarly,
coagulation factors may be depleted due to reduced
recycling of the vitamin K‐dependent factors (II, VII, IX,
X), resulting in prolonged coagulation times (prothrom­
bin time, activated partial thromboplastin time).
The inflammatory response may cause increased
­synthesis of globulins. Pancreatitis may be reflected by
elevations of amylase and lipase, due to leakage from the
pancreas, but these enzymes have poor specificity and may
be spuriously elevated in hemoconcentrated patients and
patients with other diseases. Amylase and lipase are even
less sensitive and specific in cats than in dogs. Pancreatic
species‐specific lipase is a more sensitive and specific test,
but it must be remembered that a positive result does not
necessarily indicate that pancreatitis is the primary prob­
lem as gastrointestinal disease, peritonitis, or pancreatic
neoplasia can also result in increased pancreatic specific
lipase. Additonally, a normal value does not exclude pan­
creatitis as a possible differential diagnosis.
Hematology
The complete blood count can reflect the inflammatory
disease by revealing increased numbers of neutrophils
which, in marked inflammation or infection, may exhibit
a left shift or toxic changes.

Blood Chemistry

Urinalysis

Following centrifugation, the plasma or serum of a jaun­
diced patient’s blood will appear deep yellow (icteric).
This interferes with some colorimetric blood biochemis­
try tests.

Icteric patients are, by definition, hyperbilirubinemic,
which results in bilirubinuria, imparting a deep yellow
color to the urine. On microscopic examination of urine
sediment, bilirubin crystals may be evident.

723

VetBooks.ir

724

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

Diagnostic Imaging
Radiography

Radiography may give an overall impression of the size of
the liver but usually does not give information regarding
structure. It may identify the presence of radiodense
choleliths within the biliary tree or gallbladder. Rarely,
the gallbladder may be visible as a “porcelain gallblad­
der” with a fine mineral opacity delineating the gallblad­
der wall. This may be caused by dystrophic mineralization
due to neoplasia of the gallbladder. If peritonitis has
developed subsequent to biliary rupture, then effusion
will cause loss of radiologic contrast in the cranial abdo­
men or a “ground glass” appearance.
Ultrasonography

Transcutaneous abdominal ultrasonography is the main­
stay of imaging of the biliary tract. It affords assessment
of the bile ducts within and outside the liver, ensuring
that the ducts are patent and not distended. The gall­
bladder may be examined and measured, noting any
material within the lumen as well as the wall thickness.
The common bile duct should be followed from the gall­
bladder to the point of entry into the duodenum at the
major duodenal papilla. Intestinal gas may impede this
examination. The normal common duct may measure
3 mm diameter in dogs or up to 4 mm diameter in cats.
Choleliths appear as hyperechoic structures with distal
acoustic shadowing. If a cholelith is causing complete
obstruction then the bile duct may appear dilated proxi­
mally. Choleliths do not commonly cause obstruction,
but may be associated with nonobstructive bile duct
­dilation. In humans and most likely in dogs, such nonob­
structive dilation may be associated with bacterial infec­
tion of the bile duct. In this circumstance, it is ­difficult to
determine whether the cholelithiasis is the cause or the
consequence of cholangitis.
Complete bile duct obstruction does not necessarily
result in gallbladder distension but often causes dilation
of the major bile ducts, sometimes giving a very tortuous
appearance on ultrasonography.
Echogenic sediment or “sludge” is a normal finding in
many dogs and cats but should be dependent (i.e.,
affected by gravity) and not obscuring the lumen. “Sludge
balls” are echogenic, roughly spherical accumulations of
bile and mucus that move depending upon patient posi­
tion. They may pose a risk for bile duct obstruction.
Gallbladder mucoceles classically have a hyperechoic
stellate appearance on ultrasound, with strands of the
echogenic material extending to the gallbladder wall.
Early or incipient mucoceles may have a more subtle
appearance, but the main feature is of immobile non­
dependent sludging occupying the majority of the
gallbladder.

Advanced Imaging

Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imag­
ing may yield more detailed information about the
extrahepatic biliary ducts and gallbladder. They can be
useful for detecting neoplasia, characterizing anatomic
anomalies and detecting choleliths. The main advan­
tage of advanced imaging above abdominal ultrasound
is that regions of the abdomen are usually not missed
on advanced imaging, though methodical radiologic
review is essential and time‐consuming. Whereas gas­
trointestinal gas may obscure the bile ducts by reflect­
ing ­ultrasound, this is not a problem with advanced
imaging. When assessing the abdomen for neoplasia on
computed tomography, the thorax may also be scanned
to assess for possible metastasis. Intravenous contrast
may be used to assess the vascularity of a structure to
assist in diagnosis. The requirement for sedation, anes­
thesia, and exposure to ionizing radiation must be
considered.
Endoscopy
The duodenal papilla may be assessed during endoscopy,
which affords the opportunity for gastrointestinal biop­
sies. Some small studies of endoscopic retrograde chol­
angiography and cholangiopancreatography in cats and
dogs have documented that this procedure is feasible,
but there is no tangible benefit over advanced imaging.
Cholangiopancreatography has been used historically to
induce pancreatitis for experimental purposes in
dogs – this in itself casts doubt over its diagnostic utility
and safety. Using a similar procedure employing a side‐
angled endoscope, it is feasible to cannulate and there­
fore stent the common bile duct in the case of functional
obstruction (e.g., acute pancreatitis, pancreatic mass).
Cholecentesis
If inflammatory or bacterial cholangitis is suspected
then bile sampling is indicated. This may be performed
under ultrasound guidance or during a laparotomy or
laparoscopy. While potential complications include bile
leakage and subsequent peritonitis and vagal‐induced
arrhythmias, most samples taken in this way do not
cause complications. The gallbladder should be emptied
as much as possible during the procedure to reduce the
pressure of the residual contents and the risk of leakage.
Bile obtained should be examined cytologically and
should also be submitted for gram staining and bacterial
culture and sensitivity (the author prefers to submit two
transport charcoal swabs of bile – one for aerobic and
one for anaerobic culture conditions). Ideally, both aero­
bic and anaerobic culture should be performed. In a
study of patients with hepatic inflammation, nearly one

VetBooks.ir

67 Diseases of the Gallbladder and Extrahepatic Biliary Ducts

quarter had positive bile culture whereas 6% had positive
culture of liver tissue. In patients with confirmed chole­
cystitis, more than half had a positive bile culture.
Laparotomy and Laparoscopy
Direct examination of the extrahepatic biliary system and
gallbladder affords an opportunity for biopsy, cytology,
and potentially palliative and curative surgical interven­
tion. Complete bile duct obstruction is an indication for
surgical intervention. Bile ducts may be stented for short‐
or long‐term management of obstruction, to allow reso­
lution of the underlying disorder (e.g., acute pancreatitis
causing complete extrahepatic bile duct obstruction).
Surgical exploration may be done via laparotomy or
laparoscopy. Whichever technique is adopted, the
opportunity should be taken for biopsy of the liver and
pancreas, cholecentesis, and possibly intestinal biopsy.
Surgery is required for assessment and potentially repair
of the b
­iliary tract in cases of bile peritonitis.
Cholecystectomy is indicated in the case of gallbladder
mucocele.
Cytology
Fine needle aspirates may be taken, under ultrasound
guidance, from the liver, pancreas, and associated lymph
nodes. Similarly, cholecentesis and abdominocentesis
may be performed to investigate potential inflammatory
or infectious processes. As previously mentioned, chole­
centesis is contraindicated if biliary mucocele is
­suspected – diagnosis may be confirmed at surgery.

(e.g., cholelith). One large retrospective study of bile and
liver culture in dogs and cats with hepatobiliary disease
found that Escherichia coli, Enterococcus spp., Bacteroides
spp., Streptococcus spp., and Clostridium spp. were the
most common isolates. This study suggests that empiri­
cal antibiotic choice for hepatobiliary infection could
include a fluoroquinolone for gram‐negative cover
alongside a penicillin or metronidazole for gram‐positive
and anaerobic organisms. It cannot be stressed enough,
however, that responsible antibiotic usage demands cul­
ture and sensitivity testing, particularly before employ­
ing antibiotics such as fluoroquinolones. Repeating bile
culture to monitor response to treatment should be con­
sidered, as significant antibiotic resistance can develop
during the course of treatment.
Cholerectics
Sludging and stasis of bile promote biliary inflamma­
tion and infection. Additionally, hydrophobic bile
acids are cytotoxic and damage cell membranes.
Ursodeoxycholic acid (ursodiol, UDCA) is a hydro­
philic bile acid, which exerts cytoprotective and anti­
oxidant effects and induces choleresis (increased bile
flow). The recommended dose is 10–15 mg/kg once daily.
In addition to using this drug in cholangitis, it may
have some efficacy in treating early mucoid bile accu­
mulation (early gallbladder mucocele). Ursodeoxycholic
acid is contraindicated in complete bile duct obstruc­
tion and is not an alternative to s­ urgery for gallbladder
mucocele.
Antioxidants

­Therapy
Surgery
The patient should be stabilized first as biliary surgery is
complex and may require prolonged general anesthesia.
As detailed above, dogs with gallbladder mucoceles are
treated surgically by way of cholecystectomy with or
without biliary bypass (cholecystoduodenostomy, chol­
ecystojejunostomy). Surgery is often required for ani­
mals with extrahepatic bile duct obstruction, especially if
this is complete or persistent. Rupture of the biliary tract,
resulting in bile peritonitis, is another indication for
s­ urgical intervention.
Antibiotics
Antibiotic choice for biliary infections should be ideally
based upon results of culture and sensitivity. A 4–6‐week
course is advisable in the absence of a nidus for infection

In addition to the antioxidant effects of ursodeoxycholic
acid, other antioxidant drugs are commonly used
in hepatobiliary disease. S‐adenosyl‐L‐methionine
(SAM‐e) increases glutathione production in cat and
dog livers, assisting conjugation and acting as an anti­
oxidant. SAM‐e has been shown to reduce hepatotoxic­
ity following acetaminophen administration. Milk
thistle‐derived silymarin has strong antioxidant proper­
ties and has been shown to exert hepatoprotective
effects when administered alongside some chemother­
apy drugs. Those formulations which complex silymarin
with phosphatidylcholine have much improved bioa­
vailability. Vitamin E is a widely available antioxidant
that also reduces transcription of proinflammatory
cytokines.
Parasiticides
Praziquantel or fenbendazole may be used as flukicidal
therapy.

725

VetBooks.ir

726

Section 7 Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts

­Prognosis
Biliary neoplasia bears a grave prognosis as resection is
rarely achieved and metastasis is common. Stenting of the
bile duct may be of palliative use and can be performed at
endoscopy, laparotomy or as a laparoscopy‐assisted proce­
dure. Bacterial cholecystitis and cholangitis bear a favora­
ble prognosis if the infection is identified and treated.
Gallbladder mucocele has an excellent prognosis following

successful surgery, but the perioperative period carries
risks such as bile peritonitis and inducing pancreatitis.
Rupture of the biliary tract of any cause bears a guarded
prognosis, particularly if bacterial infection is present.
There is a broad spectrum of prognoses with pancreatitis
with extrahepatic bile duct obstruction, depending upon
the severity and complications. Acute pancreatitis carries a
guarded prognosis, but may reach a successful outcome in
a good proportion of cases with intensive management.

­Further Reading
Center S. Diseases of the gallbladder and biliary tree. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2009; 39: 543–98.
Crews L, Feeney D, Jessen C, et al. Clinical,
ultrasonographic, and laboratory findings associated
with gallbladder disease and rupture in dogs: 45 cases
(1997–2007). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009; 234: 359–66.
Mealey K, Minch J, White S, et al. An insertion mutation
in ABCB4 is associated with gallbladder mucocele
formation in dogs. Compar Hepatol 2010; 9: 6–12.

Wagner K. Hartmann F, Trepanier L. Bacterial culture
results from liver, gallbladder, or bile in 248 dogs and
cats evaluated for hepatobiliary disease: 1998–2003. J
Vet Intern Med 2007; 21: 417–24.
Washabau RJ. Section VI: Diseases of the Gastrointestinal
Tract: Liver. In: Washabau RJ, Day MJ, eds. Canine and
Feline Gastroenterology. St Louis, MO: Elsevier
Saunders, 2012, pp. 849–957.

VetBooks.ir

727

Section 8
Neurologic Disease

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

729

68
The Neurologic Examination
Alexander de Lahunta, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Neurology), DACVP
College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA

­Anatomic Diagnosis
What is the most important first step in evaluating a
patient presented for a neurologic disorder? It is making
the anatomic diagnosis based on the results of your
neurologic examination. Did you ever think about who
first made these correlations between the neurologic
signs exhibited by a patient and the location of the lesions
responsible for these clinical signs? Based on textbook
publications that were available to me, you have to credit
the keen observations of two veterinary pathologists for
this: Jack McGrath at the University of Pennsylvania
School of Veterinary Medicine and Anthony Palmer at
the Cambridge University School of Veterinary Medicine.
These two astute veterinarians both published a textbook
in 1956 and 1965 respectively that recorded their observations of the location and character of nervous system
lesions with the clinical observations supplied to them by
the clinicians that examined the patient prior to its death.
Thus began the concept of an anatomic diagnosis.
I was a veterinary student at the College of Veterinary
Medicine at Cornell University from 1954 to 1958. The
majority of my clinical neurology education took place in a
course in Applied Anatomy in my third year of college.
This course taught the clinical signs associated with cranial
nerve abnormalities and the effects of specific nerve dysfunction on the gait of the animal. I joined the faculty of the
Department of Anatomy at this college in 1963 and was
given the responsibility of teaching the new course in neuroanatomy to first‐year veterinary students in their second
semester. As a rule, veterinary students have a need to
understand the reason why they must study a subject.
When a course in clinical neurology does not exist or is a
brief exposure in the third year, most students will find it
difficult to concentrate on neuroanatomy in their first year.
If you agree with this, then you will understand that
combining the teaching of neuroanatomy and clinical neurology in one course is the solution and the foundation for

making an appropriate anatomic diagnosis. The first‐year
student is readily able to handle this. Now, in the 21st century, when the need for teaching time is so critical, it should
be recognized that the most effective teaching of neuroanatomy and clinical neurology is as a vertically integrated
course taught by a board‐certified veterinary neurologist
ideally in the first year of the curriculum. Most veterinary
neuroanatomy courses are taught by nonveterinarians and
as a result there is no correlation to clinical disorders.
As an example of how far we have come, consider this.
Prior to the mid‐1960s, there was no understanding of
the pathogenesis of what was known as coonhound
paralysis then and is now known as polyradiculoneuritis.
There had been a few case studies published that suggested that these dogs became paralyzed following the
trauma to their cervical spinal cord caused by their continual jumping up on the trees where they had followed a
raccoon. Now, you should recognize the fallacy of this
observation because you understand that a cervical spinal
cord lesion cannot cause the diffuse lower motor neuron
disorder that is present in these paralyzed dogs. Hopefully,
your education has taught you how to distinguish tetraplegia caused by a lower motor neuron disorder from one
caused by an upper motor neuron disorder.
Fifty years ago, we were just learning the importance of
making an anatomic diagnosis and how to do it. Now, we
are faced with how to select the most useful diagnostic
procedure to support our most presumptive clinical
diagnosis from a plethora of diagnostic instruments.
Issues of expense and patient safety are most prevalent.
However, all of these ancillary procedures are meaningless without an accurate anatomic diagnosis.
I was asked to write about the approach to a neurologic
patient. This must be a compassionate hands‐on approach
that requires your utmost patience as well as that of your
patient so that a thorough physical neurologic examination can be performed. An accurate anatomic diagnosis
will be dependent on this cooperation between you and

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

730

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

your patient. It is perfectly appropriate to make a fool of
yourself as you attempt to gain the cooperation needed
from your patient. When you think about this, you are
asking this patient to perform movements never asked of
it before. It is really remarkable how well most of them
cooperate. The reward will be as accurate an anatomic
diagnosis as possible.
Examination of a patient with signs of a neurologic
disorder should include a review of the history, a complete physical examination, a neurologic examination,
and appropriate ancillary procedures. The purpose of
the neurologic examination is to determine the neurologic abnormalities and, based on that, the location of
the lesion or lesions in the nervous system responsible
for causing these abnormalities. The location is the
anatomic diagnosis. The continual use of a routine systematic procedure will provide you with the experience and
confidence to make an accurate anatomic diagnosis.
The differential diagnosis must be based on the anatomic
diagnosis, and the order of significance of these disorders
will depend on your evaluation of the signalment and

history. Be sure to consider all five major kinds of lesions
in your differential diagnosis or a list of these with which
you are comfortable. My list includes malformation, injury,
inflammation, neoplasia, and degeneration (MIIND). Your
experience with the anatomic diagnosis together with the
signalment and history will often lead to a presumptive
clinical diagnosis. Further examination of the patient with
ancillary procedures must depend on your differential
diagnosis and what you consider to be the most likely
clinical diagnosis. Many factors will be considered in this
selection, including the cost to the owner.
Be sure to record carefully all your observations from the
neurologic examination, and never rely on your memory.
Many forms are available for recording your observations.
Some of these forms list in detail every possible response
that is present or absent, with numbers to estimate the level
of response. The considerable variation between individual
patients of the same species makes the recording of the
degree of a response less reliable and often misleading. I
prefer a less time‐consuming form that is easier to follow
and adaptable to all species. An example of this follows.

NEUROLOGIC EXAMINATION
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION: __________________________________________
SIGNALMENT:_______________________________________________________
HISTORY:____________________________________________________________
MENTAL STATUS:____________________________________________________
GAIT AND POSTURE:_________________________________________________
CRANIAL NERVES:
II and VII: Menace:
OS OD
II and III: Pupil Size:
OS OD
   Light in OS:
OS OD
   Light in OD:
OS OD
III: Strabismus
V: Atrophy of temporal/masseter muscles
VI, III and IV: Strabismus
VII and V: Palpebral reflex
VIII: Nystagmus
IX, X: Swallowing
XI: Atrophy of trapezius muscle
XII: Tongue movement/atrophy
SPINAL NERVE REFLEXES:
POSTURAL REACTIONS:
Patellar:
L R
Hopping:
LF RF LH RH
Flexor:
LF RF LH RH
LF RF LH RH
PAW REPLACEMENT:
PERINEAL:
NOCICEPTION:
OTHER:
ANATOMIC DIAGNOSIS:

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS:

VetBooks.ir

68 The Neurologic Examination

­Examination
The neurologic examination can be divided into five
parts.
1) Sensorium – mental attitude
2) Gait and posture
3) Postural reactions
4) Muscle tone, size, and spinal nerve reflexes
5) Cranial nerves
The order in which these parts are performed is usually
determined by the degree of patient cooperation and
your preference. We usually perform the examination
in the order listed. However, if the patient is resting
comfortably in its cage, performing the cranial nerve
examination first may be preferable. If the patient is
excited or apprehensive, performing the cranial nerve
examination may be more convenient after the patient
has been handled for the examination of its gait, postural reactions, and spinal nerve reflexes.
Sensorium – Mental Attitude
An assessment should be made and recorded of the
patient’s sensorium, its mental attitude and response to
the immediate environment, and attitude to being
­handled by you. The owner is the best judge of subtle
changes in the patient’s behavior in its normal environment. Be sure to explore this issue when you obtain the
history. Considerable patient variation exists in how
alert and responsive the patient may be in the examination room of a veterinary hospital. Do not mistake a
very laidback behavior for depression. Descriptive
terms for this portion of your examination include alert
and responsive, depressed, lethargic, obtunded, semicoma (stupor), and coma. Other descriptions include
acting vague, disoriented, hyperactive, propulsive, and
aggressive.
As a rule, alterations in the patient’s normal sensorium reflect disturbances in the ascending reticular activating system (ARAS) and limbic system components of
the cerebrum or rostral brainstem. Be sure to evaluate
the sensorium of a recumbent patient thoroughly.
Recumbency from diffuse neuromuscular disease or
focal cervical spinal cord disease will not alter the
patient’s sensorium. A dog that is recumbent with polyradiculoneuritis may appear to be severely depressed or
lethargic because it has no voluntary movement to show
a response. The quality of the tetraparesis or tetraplegia
with a cervical spinal cord lesion is the same as that
caused by a mid‐ to caudal brainstem lesion, but the
latter circumstance will often alter the patient’s level of
response to its environment.

Gait and Posture
Examination of the gait should be performed in a place
where the patient can be walked with a leash and where
the surface is not slippery. Most hospital floors have a
very slippery surface, which facilitates cleaning but is
poor for evaluating a gait disorder and can be dangerous
if the patient slips and falls. A washable carpet is very
useful for small animals and can be rolled up between
examinations. If you are constructing a small animal
hospital, you should consider having a covered area with
a specialized surface used in playgrounds that is relatively soft, provides excellent traction for the patient,
and is easily cleaned. The material is called Vitriturf®
and is available from Hanover Specialties, Inc., Hauppauge,
New York.
Observe the patient while it is standing for a head tilt,
lowered position of the neck, trembling, degree of tarsal
extension, and tail position. You should evaluate the gait
both as you lead the patient and as an assistant leads the
patient. Most deficits are best seen during a slow walk
and as it turns. Walk the animal back and forth in a
straight line and in circles in each direction. Observe the
patient from all directions. In our opinion, most abnormalities are best seen from a side view. Be aware of
breed characteristics that influence the posture and gait.
The overflexed tarsus in German shepherd dogs is an
example.
Is your patient unwilling or unable to move normally?
When you see a gait disorder, this question is the first
one that you need to answer. This circumstance is especially true when the patient is short strided or does not
support weight well on one or more limbs. A loss of
support from a femoral or radial nerve disorder will
mimic a severe painful disorder causing a reluctance to
bear weight.
Pattern recognition is critical in evaluating gait disorders.
With experience, clinicians recognize specific patterns
in abnormal gaits that suggest an anatomic diagnosis.
These patterns can be described but observing them
on videos is the best way to learn them. See www.
neurovideos.vet.cornell.edu. These patterns have five
components, consisting of two qualities of paresis and
three qualities of ataxia.
Paresis is defined as “weakness” in the dictionary, but
in clinical neurology, it is defined as “a deficiency in the
generation of the gait or the ability to support weight.”
This definition includes the two qualities of paresis,
which are lower motor neuron (neuromuscular) and
upper motor neuron. Lower motor neuron (LMN) paresis reflects degrees of difficulty in supporting weight
and varies from a short stride that is easily mistaken
for a musculoskeletal lameness to complete inability to
support weight, causing collapse of the limb whenever

731

VetBooks.ir

732

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

weight is placed on it. Animals with LMN disorders
affecting both pelvic limbs will occasionally use them
simultaneously. This action is described as bunny
­hopping. Be aware that bunny hopping can also be seen
in orthopedic disorders, as well as spinal cord dysplasias. Upper motor neuron (UMN) paresis causes a delay
in the onset of protraction, which is the swing phase of
the gait. The stride will usually be longer than normal.
Stiffness and spasticity may be apparent in the stride.
Most of the UMN pathways necessary for gait generation
are anatomically adjacent to the pathways of the general
proprioceptive (GP) sensory system, and lesions usually
affect both simultaneously. Therefore, the gait that
reflects UMN paresis also reflects ataxia caused by dysfunction in the GP system. It is unnecessary to recognize
the separate clinical signs of dysfunction of these two
systems. Therefore, we recognize a pattern that reflects
the combined dysfunction of UMN paresis and GP
ataxia. As you observe the gait of a dog with UMN paresis and GP ataxia, you have the sense that the patient
does not know where its limbs are located. This is never
a concern with LMN paresis.
Ataxia is a synonym for incoordination, and we recognize three qualities of ataxia: (1) GP, (2) vestibular (special
proprioception [SP]), and (3) cerebellar. GP ataxia reflects
the lack of information reaching the central nervous system (CNS) that informs the CNS of where the neck, trunk,
and limbs are in space and the state of muscle contraction
at any time. Without this GP information, the onset of
protraction of a limb may be delayed, and the stride may
be lengthened. During protraction, the limb may swing to
the side (abduct) or swing under the body (adduct), overextend during protraction, scuff or drag one or more digits, and in the support phase, stand on the dorsal aspect of
the digits. Remember that these clinical signs overlap with
those caused by dysfunction of the UMN. The gait pattern
of a patient with a focal cervical spinal cord lesion between
the C1 and C5 segments reflects dysfunction of the UMN
and GP systems and is observed as spastic tetraparesis and
ataxia. This cervical spinal cord pattern is often recognized by the overextension of the thoracic limbs creating
an overreaching or floating action. This clinical sign can
be augmented by holding the head and neck extended as
the patient is led. This unique form of hypermetria must
not be confused with cerebellar ataxia in which the limb
is overflexed on protraction. At no time do we try to differentiate between conscious (cerebral) and unconscious
(cerebellar) GP pathways! No examination will clearly
differentiate these two pathways from each other or from
the UMN pathways. No pure conscious proprioceptive
deficit exists. This term should be dropped from the clinician’s vocabulary.
Vestibular ataxia reflects the loss of orientation of the
head with the eyes, neck, trunk, and limbs, which results

in a loss of balance. Lesions limited to this system cause
the patient to lean, drift, or fall to one side. However, the
patient’s strength and awareness of where its limbs are in
space are normal with lesions confined to this system.
This ataxia is usually accompanied by a head tilt and
sometimes abnormal nystagmus. We will occasionally
blindfold our patients with bandage material which will
exacerbate the vestibular ataxia.
Cerebellar ataxia most commonly causes hypermetric
ataxia characterized by sudden bursts of motor activity
with a marked overflexion of the limbs on protraction.
Vestibular system components exist in the cerebellum
that, if dysfunctional, may cause loss of balance, head tilt,
and abnormal nystagmus. As a rule, hypertonia accompanies cerebellar ataxia.
Postural Reactions
Remember that spinal nerve reflexes require only the
specific nerves that innervate the area being tested and
the spinal cord segments with which they connect.
Postural reactions depend on the same components as
the spinal nerve reflexes plus the cranial projecting
pathways in the spinal cord white matter to the brainstem, cerebellum, and frontoparietal portion of the
­cerebral hemisphere and the caudal‐projecting UMN
pathways that return from the cerebrum and brainstem
and comprise tracts in the white matter of the spinal
cord that terminate in the cervical and lumbosacral
intumescences. These postural reactions test the integrity of nearly the entire peripheral and central nervous
systems. By themselves, the postural reactions are relatively less reliable for lesion location.
The degree of functional limb deficit will determine
the need for postural reaction testing. In a patient that is
recumbent with tetraplegia or is paraplegic, you need
not perform postural reactions in the affected limbs.
However, in the paraplegic patient, you must test the
thoracic limb postural reactions so as to avoid overlooking a focal cranial thoracic lesion or a multifocal
disorder.
In small animals, we evaluate muscle size and tone just
before our evaluation of the postural reactions. Be sure
to talk to your patient continually, and use its name to
gain its cooperation. Stand over the patient with both of
you facing in the same direction. Simultaneously palpate
the muscles of the neck and both thoracic limbs from
proximal to distal for any evidence of atrophy. Flex and
extend each limb for range of motion and to determine
the degree of muscle tone. A short stride or stiffness in
the gait may be caused by a joint disorder, limiting
the range of motion. When you place the limb back on
the ground surface, turn the paw over so that its dorsal
surface bears the weight of the limb to determine how

VetBooks.ir

68 The Neurologic Examination

rapidly the paw is replaced. Most normal small animals
immediately return the paw to its normal position. This
response is known as the paw replacement reaction that
requires many peripheral and central components to be
normal. This test is not just for conscious perception of
GP and should not be called the CP test. This term is a
misnomer that we are well aware will be difficult to
eliminate from the clinical language of veterinarians,
even boarded veterinary neurologists.
Moving on, palpate the thoracolumbar epaxial muscles
and then the muscles of both pelvic limbs followed by
flexing and extending those limbs for tone and range of
motion and checking for paw replacement. Check for the
degree of tail tone, and while extending the tail, evaluate
the anal tone.
Hopping responses, in our opinion, are the most reliable
of the postural reactions that we test. While still straddling the patient, move back to the thoracic limbs and
elevate the abdomen with one hand so that the pelvic
limbs are not bearing any weight. With your other hand,
pick up the thoracic limb on that side. With all the weight
supported on that thoracic limb, hop the patient laterally. Go as far as you can without moving your pelvic
limbs. Then, switch hands and hop the patient back on
the other thoracic limb. Repeat this test many times until
you are sure the thoracic limbs are normal or abnormal.
Only evaluate hopping in the lateral direction. As you
stand over your patient and look down the lateral aspect
of the limb that is being hopped, the limb should move
as soon as you move the shoulder region laterally over
the paw. Any delay in this response is abnormal. The
hopping movements should be smooth and fairly rapid
and not irregular or excessive. The paw should never
drag or land on its dorsal surface. Carefully compare one
thoracic limb with the other.
To test the hopping responses in the pelvic limbs,
stand beside the patient, and place your forelimb that is
closest to the patient’s head between its thoracic limbs
with your hand on its sternum. Lift up on the thorax just
enough to take the weight off the thoracic limbs. With
the other hand, pick up the pelvic limb on the side where
you are standing and push the patient toward the pelvic
limb that is bearing the weight. This action will force the
patient to hop laterally on that pelvic limb in a direction
away from you. After a few hops, switch sides, and hop
the patient back on the other pelvic limb. Keep repeating
this test until you have determined that the response is
normal or abnormal. The responses should be brisk and
smooth but will not be quite as rapid as in the thoracic
limbs. While you are hopping the patient, you will also
be aware of the degree of tone in the limb that is bearing
all the weight.
In large dogs that are too heavy to lift for this testing,
the same observations can be made while the patient is

walked on one side (hemiwalking). Hemiwalking is
performed by standing on one side of the patient. Grasp
each limb on that side and lift the limbs off the ground
and push the patient toward its opposite side. The patient
will hop with both limbs on that side. Switch sides and
repeat the hemiwalking performance on the opposite
limbs. Be sure to compare one thoracic limb with the
other and one pelvic limb with the opposite pelvic limb.
In small animals in which the hopping responses are
equivocal or difficult to interpret, testing the placing
responses may be useful. Pick up the patient and bring its
thoracic limbs to the edge of a shelf, table, or chair so that
the dorsal surface of the paw contacts the front surface of
the object. The normal patient will immediately place its
paws on the horizontal surface of the object. Test both
thoracic limbs while holding the patient from both sides.
For some unknown reason, occasionally the normal
patient will not respond on the side on which it is being
held. Blocking the vision of the patient while conducting
this test may also be useful. Do this by extending its head
and neck so that it cannot see the protruding surface of
the shelf, table, or chair. Whether the lack of vision or the
position of the head and neck helps exacerbate the placing deficits is unclear.
In cooperative patients in which you are not sure of the
thoracic limb function, you can wheelbarrow the patient
while holding its head and neck in extension. With one of
your forelimbs, elevate the abdomen of your patient, and
with the other hand, hold the head and neck in extension
and force the patient to walk forward. With this posture,
vision is compromised, and the need for GP is increased.
Remember that patients with LMN disease that still
have some voluntary movements will hop or circle rapidly
if their weight is supported because their GP is unaffected.
This observation may help distinguish between subtle
UMN and LMN paresis. When we are presented with a
patient that we suspect has LMN paresis, we will hop the
patient with and without supporting all the weight on the
affected limb or limbs. As already stated, the patient with
LMN paresis should know exactly where the limb is
located during these postural reactions.
When presented with a recumbent patient, you
should pick it up and hold it in a standing position. Get
help if the patient is too large for you to handle alone.
By holding it in this position and lifting it up and down,
you can readily determine the quality of the muscle
tone, whether they are hypotonic‐flaccid from LMN
disease, or hypertonic from spasticity of UMN disease.
You can determine whether any voluntary movements
are present in the limbs, and while supporting the
patient, you can determine the presence and quality of
the hopping responses.
One might conclude that these postural reactions
are relatively nonspecific. This conclusion is absolutely

733

VetBooks.ir

734

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

correct. Why then are they useful? First, testing postural
reactions acts as a screen for detecting abnormalities in
the nervous system. Abnormal responses will be the first
clinical sign of any progressive lesion in any part of the
central or peripheral nervous system that is involved in
limb movement. One or more of these postural reactions
may be abnormal before any detectable abnormality in
the gait is observed. Second, their importance in localizing lesions is dependent on the results of the rest of
the neurologic examination. If the gait is normal in the
environment of your examination and one or more of
the postural reactions are abnormal in the limbs on one
side of the body, a contralateral prosencephalic lesion is
strongly suggested. This test is the most useful of the
three clinical tests that we use for prosencephalic disorders.
If you have a patient with clinical signs of a unilateral
vestibular system disorder with a normal gait but the
postural reactions are abnormal, then the lesion is in the
central components of the vestibular system.
Remember to use terminology that all clinicians can
understand. Lesions that affect the UMN pathways also
affect the GP pathways; thus when you describe a gait
abnormality as paraparesis, also include pelvic limb
ataxia. Use tetraparesis and ataxia for C1–C5 spinal
cord lesions and hemiparesis and ataxia for unilateral
C1–C5 spinal cord lesions that affect the gait. If the gait
is normal and the postural reactions are abnormal on
one side, describe it that way, and do not refer to this
abnormality as hemiparesis. Be sure your reader can
clearly understand what you have observed.
Muscle Tone and Size, and Spinal Reflexes
In small animals, examination of these features is performed in the recumbent patient that is gently restrained
by an assistant. You can conduct this test unassisted in a
cooperative patient by gently kneeling on the patient’s
neck to hold it in lateral recumbency. For cats, toy breeds,
and puppies, you might want to sit on the floor with your
back against a wall and your knees held together and
flexed. Place the patient with its back resting against your
thighs. This position is also useful for the cranial nerve
examination.
Flex and extend the limbs on the nonrecumbent side to
assess muscle tone, and palpate the muscles again for any
indication of atrophy. For the patellar reflex, hold the
pelvic limb in partial flexion, and, with the limb as
relaxed as possible, lightly strike the patellar ligament
with a human pediatric patellar hammer or any blunt
instrument. The response is a brisk extension of the
stifle. This response can be graded as 2 for normal, 1 for
depressed, and 0 for absent; grade 3 is hyperactive, and
grade 4 is clonic. A clonic reflex is one in which, after the
response to a single stimulus, the stifle repeatedly rapidly

relaxes and extends for a brief period, creating a tremor.
Grades 2, 3, and 4 occur with UMN lesions. This is the
most reliable tendon reflex and determines the integrity
of the femoral nerve and the L4, L5, and L6 spinal cord
segments. Always check the patellar reflexes in both
limbs while in both recumbencies because, in normal
dogs, it will occasionally be absent in one position and
not the other. We have no explanation for this phenomenon. Also recall that, in dogs 10 years of age or older,
one or both patellar reflexes may be absent with no other
neurologic signs present. The presence of normal tone
and the lack of any atrophy suggest that the basis for
this sign is on the sensory side of the reflex arc, which
may involve an age‐related sensory neuropathy.
However, this suggestion has not been proven. The
patellar reflex is the most reliable tendon reflex in our
examination of a patient.
Other tendon or muscle reflexes elicited by striking the
tendon (gastrocnemius muscle – tibial nerve) or muscle
(cranial tibial muscle – fibular nerve) are of limited use
because they are not present in all normal small animals
and some occur in denervated muscle. I do not consistently
perform these reflexes. Be sure to test the patellar reflexes
before the withdrawal reflexes because the latter require
a noxious stimulus that may upset your patient.
The withdrawal‐flexor reflex is evaluated in both pelvic
limbs. This reflex requires an adequate noxious stimulus
that differs between individual patients. A pin may be
adequate in many cats but not in many dogs. I prefer
using tissue forceps because the degree of compression
can be adjusted to the individual patient. Compress the
skin at the base of the third phalanx of a digit with enough
pressure to elicit the reflex and usually a slight conscious
response in a normal patient. By increasing the compression of the digit, the stimulus becomes sufficiently
noxious to elicit nociception. Your digital pressure is
sometimes sufficient, but a pair of tissue forceps is usually
more reliable. Remember that this noxious stimulus tests
both the spinal nerve reflex and the pathways in the CNS
for nociception. You can have a reflex loss without loss of
nociception; therefore you must use care in the amount of
pressure you apply to avoid excessive discomfort to the
patient and injury to you by the patient.
This withdrawal reflex is a more complex reflex. The
sensory neurons tested depend on the digit being tested
or the autonomous or cutaneous zone that you select
for this noxious stimulus. Compression of the first
digit stimulates receptors innervated by the saphenous
nerve (femoral nerve, spinal cord segments L4–L6).
Compression of digits 2–5 stimulates receptors innervated
by the sciatic nerve (tibial nerve on the plantar surface and
fibular nerve on the dorsal surface). The motor response
involves primarily the sciatic nerve in the pelvic limb,
with caudal thigh muscular branches responsible for

VetBooks.ir

68 The Neurologic Examination

stifle flexion, the fibular nerve branch for tarsal flexion,
and the tibial nerve branch for digital flexion. Be aware
that the flexion of the hip is the responsibility of motor
neurons in the femoral nerve and the ventral branches of
all the lumbar spinal nerves that innervate the psoas
major muscle. An animal with a complete dysfunction of
its sciatic nerve can still flex the hip when the medial side
of the crus or metatarsus is stimulated. The latter receives
sensory innervation from the saphenous nerve branch of
the femoral nerve. The spinal cord segments associated
with the sciatic nerve are L6, L7, and S1. As you increase
the forceps compression, nociceptors will be stimulated
and voluntary effort will be added to the reflex you are
testing if the pathway is normal. Remember that these
reflexes will still be intact with a transverse lesion cranial
to the L4 spinal cord segment, but nociception will be
lost in the pelvic limbs.
Lesions of nerves cause both reflex loss and hypalgesia
or analgesia. Lesions of the spinal cord tracts cause hypalgesia or analgesia but will spare the reflexes in the limbs
caudal to the lesion. As you perform this reflex and
observe flexion of the limb that is stimulated, watch the
opposite pelvic limb. In some animals with severe UMN
dysfunction, you may observe extension of the opposite
limb. This reaction is called cross‐extension and is a
clinical sign of release from inhibition and is an abnormal
response. In the dog with severe diffuse LMN paralysis
caused by polyradiculoneuritis, the only evidence of
nociception will be movements of the jaw as the dog
attempts to vocalize and movements of the eyes.
In the thoracic limb, only the withdrawal reflex is reliable.
The biceps (musculocutaneous nerve) and triceps (radial
nerve) tendon reflexes are not consistently elicited in
normal animals. For the biceps reflex, place your finger
on the distal portion of the muscle at the elbow, and
lightly strike your finger with the hammer and feel the
muscle contract or observe a brief elbow flexion. Striking
the triceps tendon may elicit a brief elbow extension.
Striking the extensor carpi radialis muscle (radial nerve)
may elicit a brief carpal extension. Because of the numerous muscles and nerves involved with the withdrawal
response from a noxious stimulus of a thoracic limb
digit, this evaluation method is a crude test for the entire
brachial plexus and the cervical intumescence. The sensory nerve or nerves tested depend on the autonomous
or cutaneous zones selected. In small animals, compression of the digits 1–5 stimulates the sensory components
of the radial nerve dorsally and the median and ulnar
nerves on the palmar surface. The motor neurons
involved are in the axillary nerve (shoulder flexion),
musculocutaneous nerve (elbow flexion), and the median
and ulnar nerves (carpal and digital flexion).
With your patient still being restrained in lateral
recumbency, evaluate the tail and anal tone, and gently

pinch the skin of the perineum and observe for a tightening of the anus. This response is the perineal reflex
(pudendal nerve, sacral spinal nerves, and sacral spinal
cord segments). This reflex is often accompanied by tail
flexion (caudal nerves and segments).
When this testing is completed, return your patient to
a standing position, and perform the cutaneous trunci
reflex evaluation. Using your tissue forceps and starting
at the level of the sacrum, pinch the skin on the dorsal
midline or on either side of the trunk and look for truncal
skin movement due to reflex contraction of the cutaneous trunci muscle. In normal animals, this response will
usually be bilateral. Progress cranially with your midline
stimulus until a response is elicited or until you determine
that it is absent. Some variation exists on where you will
first elicit a muscle contraction in normal animals. In
most dogs, this contraction will occur by approximately
the midlumbar level. Sometimes the contraction cannot
be elicited in some normal dogs and cats. The forceps
compression stimulates the sensory neurons in the
dorsal branches of the spinal nerves that innervate the
area of skin stimulated. Because of the short caudal
distribution of these dorsal branches, each spinal nerve
innervates the skin for a distance of approximately two
vertebrae caudal to the intervertebral foramen where the
spinal nerve emerges from the vertebral canal. The general somatic afferent (GSA) neurons that are stimulated
synapse in the respective dorsal gray column on long
interneurons, the axons of which enter the adjacent
fasciculus proprius bilaterally with a predominance on
the contralateral side. Here, these axons course cranially
to the C8 and T1 spinal cord segments to terminate in
the ventral gray columns by synapsing on the general
somatic efferent (GSE) neurons that innervate the
cutaneous trunci via the brachial plexus and the lateral
thoracic nerve. This reflex is absent in injuries that cause
an avulsion of the roots of the brachial plexus. In these
patients, this reflex will be present only on the side opposite to the injury. This reflex may help locate a transverse
thoracolumbar spinal cord lesion where it will be absent
when the stimulus is applied caudal to a line that is
approximately two vertebrae caudal to the lesion.
At this point in your neurologic examination, if any
indication exists of a possible spinal cord dysfunction,
carefully palpate the vertebral column for any location of
discomfort.
Cranial Nerves
The cranial nerve examination should be performed
when the patient is the most relaxed. In most cooperative patients, this examination is performed after the
examination of the gait and spinal nerve reflexes. With
very young animals, the examination is often performed

735

VetBooks.ir

736

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

before you handle them at all. The less restraint you use,
the better your examination will be. As soon as you try to
restrain young small animals, the ensuing struggle will
make the cranial nerve evaluation very difficult. Puppies
and kittens may be wrapped in a towel and placed
between your thighs when you sit on the floor with your
back against the wall and your knees flexed. This same
floor position can be used for toy breeds. For all other
small animals, we examine the cranial nerves while
standing over the standing patient facing the same way as
the patient, similar to when we performed the postural
reactions. The cranial nerve examination can be performed by the numbers I–XII or by regions. We prefer
the latter method, starting with the eyes, where either
part or all of cranial nerves II–VIII are evaluated.
Vision – Menace and Pupils

We always start with the menace response. Cover one
eye with your hand. In small patients, use the hand that
is holding the head to cover one eye and menace the
opposite eye. This reaction is a learned response that
may not be developed until 10–12 weeks in puppies and
kittens. Before this age, you may be able to assess vision
by determining their ability to follow objects moving
in their environment. The menace response requires
normally functioning eyes, the optic nerves (cranial
nerve II), and the visual pathway to the visual cortex in
the occipital lobe via the lateral geniculate nucleus. The
efferent response involves association axons from the
occipital cortex to the motor cortex and then an UMN
pathway to the brainstem terminating in the contralateral facial nucleus in the medulla. This pathway may
include a connection through the cerebellum via the
pontine nuclei. The majority of this central visual pathway caudal to the optic chiasm is contralateral to the eye
being menaced. Some normal patients need a mild stimulus to get a response. I usually tap their orbital or frontal
bone region with my hand to arouse their attention and
to observe for an intact palpebral reflex to be sure the
facial nerve is functioning. In the normal menace
response, the menacing gesture elicits closure of the
palpebral fissure. This closure is dependent on normal
facial nerve innervation of the orbicularis oculi. Be
careful to avoid touching any part of the face, especially
the hair of the eyelids or the long vibrissae (whiskers),
and to avoid creating a sudden air movement that might
stimulate the hair or skin of the face. This action creates
a cranial nerve V–VII reflex.
If the menace response is absent, we immediately
touch the eyelid to be sure the facial nerve innervation is
intact to cause palpebral fissure closure. If facial paralysis
is present, then we look for eyeball retraction and third
eyelid elevation or head retraction movements to determine if vision is present. Setting up a maze of objects in

the patient’s environment is sometimes necessary to
determine if the animal can see and avoid these objects
when walking around them.
Immediately after the menace test, the pupil size and
response to light should be evaluated. Most patients have
a dark‐colored iris, which makes seeing the border of the
pupil difficult without some light assistance. Cats with a
yellow iris are an exception. You need a bright source of
light such as that from a Welch Allyn halogen pen light
or an Energizer pen light.
Initially, hold the light on the midline over the nose
just close enough so that you can see the margin of the
pupils and determine their size and if any anisocoria is
present. Then bring the light source as close as possible
to one eye without touching the patient’s face. If no
response occurs, move the light so that it shines on all
aspects of the ocular fundus. Quickly swing the light into
the opposite eye and observe what happens to that pupil.
Then quickly return the light source to the original eye.
Keep repeating this swinging light action until you are
comfortable with your findings, and record them accurately. To prevent confusion, record what happens in
each eye when the light is directed into one eye, and perform this maneuver for both eyes. See how this pupillary
light reflex is recorded on the neurologic examination
form in this chapter. In the normal patient, the pupil will
rapidly constrict when the light is directed into it (the
direct response), and the opposite pupil will also constrict without moving the light (the indirect or consensual response). Because of the major axonal crossing that
occurs at the optic chiasm and at the level of the pretectal nuclei, light directed into one eye will cause a stimulus that will reach both oculomotor nuclei. When you
swing the light to the opposite eye, the pupil has already
constricted from the light directed into the first eye, and
it stays constricted. As you repeatedly swing the light
back and forth between the eyes, the pupils remain constricted in the normal animal.
The process I have described here is the way in which
I observe the direct and indirect (consensual) pupillary
light responses, but avoid using these terms, which can
be confusing to students and clinicians alike. I will
sometimes evaluate pupil size in a darkened room to
help determine the origin of anisocoria.
Test yourself on the anatomic diagnosis of the following examples of eye examinations. (OS is oculus sinister
and refers to the left eye. OD is oculus dextra and refers
to the right eye. OU is oculi uterque and refers to both
eyes.)
●●

A patient has no menace response in OS with a normal
palpebral reflex. No anisocoria is observed. Light
directed into OS causes no response OU. Light directed
into OD causes a normal response OU. As you swing

VetBooks.ir

68 The Neurologic Examination

the light from OD where the pupil is constricted back
to OS, the OS pupil that was constricted from stimulation of OD is now dilating back to its original size.
This asymmetry is repeated as you swing the light
back and forth between the two eyes. When you
cover OD with your hand, the OS pupil fully dilates.
Anatomic diagnosis: in OS or the left optic nerve. In
most cases with this anatomic diagnosis, room light
entering the normal eye is sufficient to keep the
pupil in the affected eye constricted. Occasionally, the
pupil on the affected side will be slightly larger than
the pupil on the unaffected side in room light.
●● A patient has normal menace responses. Anisocoria is
present with the pupil in OD widely dilated. Light
directed into OD causes the pupil to constrict only in
OS. Light directed into OS causes only the OS pupil to
constrict. Anatomic diagnosis: right oculomotor nerve
general visceral efferent (GVE) component, ciliary
ganglion, ciliary nerves. Be aware that this reaction
may be the first clinical sign of an extraparenchymal
mass lesion ventral to the diencephalon compressing
the oculomotor nerve and causing a loss of function of
the GVE preganglionic neurons, which may precede
the loss of function in the GSE neurons. This disparity
between the altered pupil size without ptosis or strabismus is useful in making an anatomic diagnosis of
the different components of the oculomotor nerve.
●● A patient has no menace response OD with a normal
palpebral reflex. Anisocoria is present with the OD
pupil widely dilated. Light directed into OD causes no
response OU. Light directed into OS causes only the
OS pupil to constrict. Anatomic diagnosis: right optic
nerve and the GVE neurons of the right oculomotor
nerve, ciliary ganglion, ciliary nerves. A retrobulbar
neoplasm or abscess might produce this result.
●● A patient acts blind and has no menace response OU
with normal palpebral reflexes. In room light, the
pupils are mildly dilated. Light directed into OS causes
the pupils to constrict OU. Light directed into OD
causes the pupils to constrict OU. This dog’s sensorium is normal. Anatomic diagnosis: both eyeballs,
optic nerves, optic chiasm, or optic tracts.
Patients with lesions in the retina (retinal degeneration,
sudden acquired retinal degeneration) or optic nerves
(optic neuritis) OU often lose their vision and are clinically blind but still have light‐responsive pupils when a
bright light is directed into the eyes. However, room light
is insufficient to cause normal constriction, and the
pupils will appear mildly dilated. This response can be
explained by the disease process sparing the retinal
neurons involved with these light responses or, more
likely, with progressive loss of function of retinal neurons,
the threshold for loss of vision is lower than that for

pupillary constriction to light. In other words, the
pupillary light reflex neurons are the last to lose function
when lesions disrupt the retina or optic nerve.
The anisocoria of Horner syndrome has no effect on
the menace response and both pupils will respond to
light directed into either eye. The pupil asymmetry with
Horner syndrome will be more obvious in a dark room
where the absence of room light will further dilate the
normal pupil.
Anisocoria may result from many intraocular disorders. Iris atrophy is fairly common in older dogs and
creates dilated unresponsive pupils with no interference
with vision. Be sure to evaluate the iris thoroughly with
your bright light source. Neurologic causes of anisocoria
include disturbances to cranial nerves II and III and
the sympathetic ocular innervation. Examination of the
patient in a darkened room may help determine the
cause of anisocoria in your patient.
Palpebral Fissure and Third Eyelid

Observe the size of the palpebral fissures and their
symmetry. In small animals, the fissure will be smaller
with oculomotor nerve dysfunction (loss of function of
the levator palpebrae superioris muscle causing ptosis),
sympathetic innervation dysfunction (loss of the orbitalis smooth muscle function in the orbit), and secondary
to atrophy of the muscles of mastication from dysfunction of the mandibular nerve from the trigeminal nerve
or chronic myositis. An elevated third eyelid will be
apparent with sympathetic denervation, as well as
secondary to atrophy of the muscles of mastication. The
third eyelid elevates in tetanus secondary to the tetanus
of the extraocular muscles that results in retraction of
the eyeball and in animals with a facial paralysis when
they are menaced.
Strabismus

Strabismus is an abnormal position of the eyeball. While
examining the eyes, you can appreciate whether they are
normally positioned in the orbits. Normal ocular position is dependent on the innervation of the extraocular
muscles by cranial nerves III, IV, and VI and the normal
function of the vestibular system. Repeatedly move the
head in a horizontal (dorsal) plane from one side to the
other. Watch the excursions of the eyeballs. The degree
of adduction (medial rectus, cranial nerve III) should be
the same as the abduction (lateral rectus, cranial nerve
VI). This is normal physiologic nystagmus and requires a
normal vestibular system as well as normal oculomotor
and abducent nerve function. In some cats, you will only
see this response at the end of the head movement.
A ventrolateral strabismus occurs with oculomotor nerve
dysfunction, a medial strabismus with abducent nerve
dysfunction, and an ocular extorsion with trochlear

737

VetBooks.ir

738

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

nerve dysfunction. The last of these abnormalities causes
the dorsal aspect of the pupil to rotate laterally in cats.
In dogs, in which the pupil is round, a fundic examination will show a lateral deviation of the retinal vein that
emerges from the superior edge of the optic disk and
normally courses in a superior direction. A vestibular
strabismus is usually ventrolateral and is present only in
some positions of the head.
Nystagmus

Nystagmus is an involuntary oscillation of the eyeballs.
In normal animals, a jerk nystagmus occurs when the
head is moved rapidly. This normal physiologic nystagmus
was observed when the eyes were examined for the function of cranial nerves III and VI. Abnormal nystagmus
occurs with dysfunction of the vestibular system. In
severe cases, it is continual and is observed when the
head is resting in its normal posture, as well as in any
change of the head position. This disorder is a resting or
spontaneous nystagmus. In less severe and chronic
disorders, the abnormal nystagmus may be seen only
when the head is held in different positions. This disorder
is called a positional nystagmus.
While you are holding the head in its normal resting
position, look at the eyes for any resting nystagmus. To
facilitate this, use one hand to pull the facial muscles
caudally enough so that the retraction of the eyelids will
expose the limbus of the eye to better observe it for any
abnormal nystagmus. Move the head laterally to one
side, hold it there, and observe for any development of a
positional nystagmus. Repeat this maneuver on holding
the head directed to the opposite side. Then hold the
head and neck in extension and observe for any positional nystagmus. If you are suspicious of subtle vestibular system dysfunction and you have not observed any
abnormal nystagmus with the head held in a laterally
flexed or dorsally extended position, place the patient on
its back in dorsal recumbency. Extend the patient’s head
and neck, and look for any positional nystagmus. Be sure
to record the direction of the abnormal nystagmus, as
well as the plane of rotation. The direction is defined as
the direction of the quick phase of the jerk nystagmus.
The plane of rotation may be horizontal, rotatory, or
vertical. As a rule, a consistently vertical nystagmus
with no rotatory component usually indicates involvement of the central components of the vestibular system.
Look for possible change in this direction with different
positions of the head. With peripheral vestibular system disorders, the jerk phase of the nystagmus is always
directed away from the side of the lesion and is either in
a horizontal plane or is rotatory. If the direction of the
nystagmus changes with different head positions, then
a disorder of the central components of the vestibular
system is present.

When you have the head and neck in extension, look
at the position of the eyeballs, without retracting the
eyelids, to observe in small animals that both eyeballs
have also elevated and are still centered in the palpebral
fissure and no sclera is exposed dorsal to the limbus.
Sclera that is exposed dorsally indicates inadequate
elevation of the eyeball and either an oculomotor nerve
dysfunction or a vestibular system dysfunction; the latter
disorder is a vestibular strabismus. With vestibular strabismus, this eyeball deviation is present only in some
head positions, and the eyeball adducts normally when
physiologic nystagmus is examined.
On rare occasions, a rapid resting pendular nystagmus
is present at all times and in all positions of the head. The
eyeball excursions are rapid and to the same degree in
both directions. This ocular tremor is congenital and
associated with anomalies of the retina or the decussation
of the optic axons at the optic chiasm. Vision is normal.
This is most common in Siamese cats.
Facial and Trigeminal Neurons

Up to this point in your cranial nerve examination, all of
your evaluations have been directed at the eyes and
orbital structures. Some of these evaluations have
involved part of the innervation that is dependent on
normal facial and trigeminal nerve function. At this
point, I reevaluate all of the facial and trigeminal nerve
functions that are practical.
For the facial nerve, repeat the palpebral reflex (cranial
nerves V and VII) by touching both corners of the eyelids
for each eye. The sensory nerves are branches of both the
ophthalmic and maxillary nerves from the trigeminal
nerve and the closure of the fissure is a function of the
palpebral branch of the facial nerve. Observe the symmetry of the face and the position of the ears. The erect
ears of all cats, some breeds of dogs, and those dogs that
have had ear crop surgery will not droop with facial
paralysis because of the rigidity of the auricular cartilage.
You will feel atonia when you palpate the ear, and the ear
will not move when the skin of the ear canal is stimulated
with your forceps or by blowing in the ear. You may be
able to palpate the loss of tone in the lips, and, in many
patients, you may observe a droop of the lips. Elevate the
head and observe the lips at the angle of the mouth. More
lip mucosa may be exposed on the denervated side (VII),
and the animal may tend to drool on that side. Facial
paralysis does not cause a deviation of the philtrum in
dogs and cats. Be aware that a deviated philtrum in a dog
is most likely the result of tetany of the facial muscles on
the side to which the philtrum is directed. This hemifacial tetany can be confirmed by its disappearance with
local or general anesthesia. In older literature, this
observation is known as hemifacial spasm, which is a
misnomer.

VetBooks.ir

68 The Neurologic Examination

For the trigeminal nerve, palpate the muscles of mastication for any denervation atrophy caused by dysfunction of
the mandibular nerve from the trigeminal nerve. The only
evidence of unilateral loss of function of the mandibular
nerve will be unilateral atrophy of the muscles of mastication. Be sure to palpate for this atrophy because you will
not see it in breeds with a thick hair coat, such as an old
English sheepdog. No clinical evidence of any loss of jaw
function will be observed; they can still bite vigorously.
A dropped jaw that the patient cannot move requires
dysfunction of both mandibular nerves. The observation
of a dropped jaw is sometimes aided by holding only the
superior jaw and associated lips elevated and observing the
gap created by the inability to elevate the inferior jaw to
close the mouth. Place the blunt end of your tissue forceps
against the nasal septum. The normal patient will immediately move its head away from the stimulus. This action
tests two anatomic pathways. One is the integrity of the
ipsilateral branch of the ophthalmic nerve from the trigeminal nerve that innervates the mucosa of the nasal septum.
The other is the nociceptive pathway that projects predominantly to the opposite side of the rostral brainstem
and the somesthetic cortex of the opposite cerebral hemisphere. This evaluation is one of the three clinical examinations that we routinely use for prosencephalic dysfunction.
We do not routinely check the autonomous zones of the
other two branches of the trigeminal nerve.
Cranial Nerves IX, X, and XII

Cranial nerves IX, X, and XII are examined together with
the so‐called gag reflex. This examination is performed
rapidly because the patient usually objects to the manipulation that is necessary, especially cats.

Grasp the superior jaw with one hand and pull down
on the inferior jaw with the other hand to open the
mouth. The resistance felt is the result of the function
of the masticatory muscles that close the mouth and are
innervated by the mandibular nerves from the trigeminal nerves. Quickly look at the surface of the tongue for
its size and any movement that is present. Push the
tongue with your finger and observe for any movement.
This maneuver evaluates the sensory branches of the
trigeminal nerves (V) and the motor neurons in the
hypoglossal nerves (XII). Then insert your finger
through the oral cavity into the oropharynx and laryngopharynx. Feel for the muscle tone and evaluate the
patient’s sensory response to this maneuver. This
response is the gag reflex. The sensory nerves stimulated include the trigeminal branches to the tongue
surface and oropharyngeal surface of the soft palate
and both the sensory and motor neurons in the glossopharyngeal (IX) and vagal (X) nerves. This assessment
of the gag reflex is difficult to evaluate and is usually
quite subjective. A more reliable indication of dysphagia usually comes in the form of a complaint by the
owner as they watch their animal eating and drinking.
These functions can also be assessed by watching the
patient prehend and swallow food.
I do not routinely test for olfaction or hearing because
they are difficult to evaluate objectively, especially when
they are incomplete. The owner’s observation of their
animal’s behavior is more reliable for disorders of these
functions. Brainstem auditory‐evoked potential (BAER)
testing is the most reliable way to evaluate hearing
function, especially with unilateral disorders. Tests for
olfaction have been described.

­Further Reading
de Lahunta A, Glass E. Veterinary Neuroanatomy and
Clinical Neurology. St Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2009.
McGrath JT. Neurologic Examination of the Dog with
Clinicopathologic Observations. Philadelphia, PA: Lea
and Febiger, 1956.

Palmer AC. Introduction to Animal Neurology.
Philadelphia, PA: FA Davis, 1965.

739

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

741

69
Central Nervous System Trauma
Simon R. Platt, BVM&S, FRCVS, DACVIM (Neurology), DECVN
Department of Small Animal Medicine and Surgery, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA

­Spinal Trauma
Traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI) is a devastating disease
in human and veterinary medicine. The majority of SCIs
result from vehicle‐related accidents but other important causes include gunshots, dog fights, falls, accidental
owner‐induced injuries, and falling objects.
Pathophysiology of Spinal Cord Injury
The normal spinal cord is a stable structure throughout
life, but it exhibits modest decrements in myelinated
axon and neuron numbers with advancing age. Its
complexity greatly exceeds that of other tissues, and its
thin cellular processes can extend long distances, thereby
increasing their vulnerability. It has unique vascular
barriers and fluid compartments. Its cellular components and the tissues that they form are highly susceptible to injury. Together with the brain, this organ has the
least ability to undergo self‐repair. Increasing evidence
indicates that the spinal cord also has distinct differences from the brain in its injury responses.
The pathophysiology of SCI can be divided into two
phases: the initial primary injury and subsequent secondary injury.
Primary injury refers to the initial traumatic insult to
the spinal cord, which results in immediate severing of
axons and death of spinal cord cells.
●● Secondary injury invariably follows and leads to progressive tissue damage for weeks after the initial insult.
It results from a complex series of related events on a
number of physiologic levels. Hypotension and hypoxia
are important preventable causes of secondary injury at
a clinical level and must be recognized and either prevented or treated proactively. Numerous secondary
injury mechanisms also occur on the c­ ellular level, and
although their delayed time course theoretically pro●●

vides a window for therapeutic intervention, we are currently less capable of halting these processes, which
include vasospasm and localized ischemia, delayed cell
damage and apoptosis, ion‐mediated cell damage and
excitotoxicity, and neuroinflammation, as well as mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative cell damage.
Clinical signs associated with spinal trauma are caused
by injury to the spinal cord, the spinal nerves as they exit
the vertebral canal, and the vertebral column itself. The
different injuries resulting from trauma include vertebral
fractures, subluxations and luxations, flexion/extension
injuries, and traumatic disk herniations. Subluxation
and luxation can occur in combination with a vertebral
fracture or due to soft tissue disruption only, without
evidence of vertebral injury. These injuries occur most
frequently at the lumbosacral, thoracolumbar, and
atlantoaxial junctions. Cats are more likely to suffer sacrocaudal fractures than dogs, and typically have a combination of fracture and luxation, whereas approximately
20% of dogs suffer a luxation only.
These events can cause spinal cord contusion and
­laceration, and can result in compression by bone, soft
tissue or blood (hematomas). Ongoing instability can
result in repeated contusive injuries, additional laceration
of the cord, and increasing severity of compression.
Compression of the spinal cord reduces perfusion, potentially causing neuronal and glial cell death by the secondary injury mechanisms described above. Demyelination
is a common finding histopathologically, as a result of
both direct damage to myelin and death of oligodendrocytes. Physical deformation of axons can cause failure of
ion channels, changing membrane permeability and producing conduction block that rapidly reverses when
decompressed. Ongoing spinal cord compression can
also cause development of syringohydromyelia cranial to
the compression site, potentially causing neuropathic
pain in addition to further neurologic deterioration.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

742

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

Spinal Cord Instability

Instability of the vertebral column can have devastating
consequences for the patient.
Sudden luxation of an unstable vertebral unit can cause
spinal cord transection, contusion, and compression.
Sometimes apparently stable fracture/luxations have just
enough movement to cause repeated small spinal cord
contusions, producing deterioration in neurologic status.
Stability is produced by the interaction of the vertebrae
with each other via intervertebral disks and synovial
joints at the articular facets. The dorsal and ventral
longitudinal ligaments, interarcuate ligaments, and spinal musculature provide further support.
While there are different methods of predicting instability, the most commonly used method divides the spine
into three compartments (Figure 69.1). Compartment 1
contains the ventral three‐quarters of the vertebral body
and disk, and the ventral longitudinal ligament; the
second consists of the dorsal one‐quarter of the vertebral
body, the disk and the dorsal longitudinal ligament;
and the third compartment includes the articular facets,
lateral pedicles, dorsal laminae, interarcuate ligaments,
and dorsal spinous processes. Disruption of any two of
the three compartments is suggestive of instability.
Sometimes muscle spasm or impaction of fracture fragments into each other renders a potentially unstable
injury stable for practical purposes. It is also important
to remember that disruption of the soft tissues of the
intervertebral disk, dorsal and ventral longitudinal ligaments, and synovium of the articular processes disrupts
all the compartments and causes instability.

Clinical Assessment of the Spinal Injury Patient
Once systemic assessment and stabilization has been
completed, attention shifts to more directly assessing and
treating the injured spinal cord. A detailed neurologic
examination is imperative to establish baseline function
and becomes the baseline against which subsequent
examinations and clinical progression are judged. The
neurologic examination should be aimed at localizing the
lesion and determining its severity.
Special attention should be paid to determining the
presence of voluntary motor function and nociception
in each limb. In cases of suspected sacrocaudal fracture
or luxation, nociception in the tail base and perineal
region should be assessed. It is not unusual for there to
be more than one site of injury and so neurologic signs
can be multifocal and peripheral nerve injury such as
brachial plexus avulsion can complicate the clinical
assessment. A full neurologic assessment should be performed ­cautiously, as clinical deterioration is possible
due to vertebral instability. Such a deterioration can be
catastrophic, particularly in patients that have suffered
an atlantoaxial injury.
Patients who have suffered trauma can have other soft
tissue injuries. It is not uncommon for spinal trauma
victims to have significant thoracic trauma causing
­
pneumothorax, pulmonary contusions, and traumatic
myocarditis with their attendant signs. In addition, cervical spinal cord injury may affect motor control of
intercostal and diaphragmatic muscles. The ability to
ventilate should therefore be assessed carefully.
Abdominal trauma can result in a ruptured bladder,
splenic and hepatic injury. Finally, neurologic signs can
be masked by appendicular fractures, and complicated
by head injury.
Thoracolumbar spinal cord injury severity is commonly
graded as follows.
0 – Normal
1 – Painful
●● 2 – Conscious proprioceptive deficits, ataxia and
paraparesis
●● 3 – Nonambulatory paraparesis
●● 4 – Paraplegia with nociception intact
●● 5 – Paraplegia with loss of nociception
●●
●●

Lack of nociception is not as relevant in tetraparesis,
but special attention should be paid to the respiratory
rate and pattern in any nonambulatory tetraparetic
or tetraplegic patient with a view to detecting
hypoventilation.
Figure 69.1 A lateral radiograph of the lumbar vertebrae
illustrating the three compartments used to determine vertebral
stability after a fracture.

Imaging of the Spinal Cord Injury Patient

When SCI is present, imaging is used to confirm the
injury and delineate the anatomy of the lesion.

VetBooks.ir

69 Central Nervous System Trauma

Survey Radiography

Thoracic radiographs should be evaluated after a significant trauma, looking for pleural effusions, contusions, pneumomediastinum, and pneumo­thorax as well as
the possibility of pericardial effusion and diaphragmatic
herniation. If a vertebral injury is suspected, it is recommended that survey lateral radiographs are taken of
the entire spine prior to additional manipulation of the
animal (Figure 69.2). Sites particularly predisposed to
fracture and luxation include the atlantoaxial junction,
the thoracolumbar junction, and the lumbar and lumbosacral spine.
As some fractures can be subtle, good‐quality and
well‐positioned radiographs from orthogonal planes are
necessary. This may be accomplished with the animal
awake and immobilized; analgesia may be required. Poor
radiographic technique resulting in rotation of the spine
(especially in the cervical area) can make assessment for
unstable and malaligned vertebral segments difficult.
Extreme care should be taken in positioning the animal
for ventrodorsal views; horizontal beam radiographs can
be obtained if the equipment is available.
Sedation may be necessary to achieve accurate positioning for radiography in some animals. This should not
be performed if the examiner is unsure of the physical
diagnosis, as sedation often influences the results of the
neurologic examination. Additionally, sedation or
Figure 69.2 A lateral radiograph of the
thoracic vertebrae confirms a fracture
luxation affecting T6–T7.

Figure 69.3 A sagittal reconstructed CT
scan of the thoracic vertebrae of the case
seen in Fig. 69.2. Although the spinal cord
cannot be seen in detail, compression of
the cord can be inferred from the stenosis
of the canal seen with this image at the
site of the luxation.

anesthesia results in the loss of voluntary paraspinal
muscle contraction, and unstable vertebral segments
may be more likely to subluxate.
It is important to remember that radiographs provide a
static record of the location of the vertebrae at the time
of the study but they do not allow for assessment of how
extensive the displacement of the vertebrae was at the
time of the injury and prior to radiology. As a result of
the strong paraspinal musculature, vertebrae can be significantly displaced acutely at the time of injury but then
subsequently pulled back into a more normal position.
Advanced Imaging

Advanced imaging such as computed tomography (CT)
or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is needed to
evaluate spinal cord compression and to ensure that
additional lesions unidentifiable on survey radiographs
are not present. CT is invaluable in identifying bone
defects that may not be apparent on survey radiography
(Figure 69.3). Three‐dimensional reconstruction from
CT images may provide additional anatomic information regarding bone contour for surgical planning
(Figure 69.4).
Magnetic resonance imaging is optimal for delineating
the soft tissues involved in the injury as well as identifying spinal cord compression, spinal cord swelling, disk
herniations, and the presence of intraparenchymal

743

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

Figure 69.4 A 3D CT reconstruction of the
thoracic vertebrae of the case seen in
Fig. 69.2. This ventral view of the spinal
column assists in the understanding of the
vertebral fracture (arrowhead).

VetBooks.ir

744

(a)

hyperintensity and/or hemorrhage, which may assist in
the prediction of adverse neurologic outcomes after SCI
(Figure 69.5).
Both CT and MRI are useful to measure vertebral body
size from the transverse views, essential when considering
the maximum depth of surgical implants to be used.
Urinary Tract Assessment

(b)

In addition to blood urea and creatinine values and
urine specific gravity levels, urethral catheterization
may be required in patients that have undergone a
severe concurrent abdominal or pelvic trauma in order
that urine production may be assessed over the subsequent 72 hours. This will also be of value in those
patients with systemic shock due to the traumatic
event. Abdominal ultrasonography may be required to
evaluate the bladder wall and kidneys, and to detect the
presence of free abdominal fluid; contrast‐enhanced
imaging of the ­urinary tract may provide further information on the function and form of the individual
structures.
Current Treatment Options for Spinal Cord Injury
The standard of care in veterinary medicine remains to
stabilize the patient physically and medically and decompress the spinal cord, although the evidence for early
decompression in dogs has not yet been clearly demonstrated in a prospective manner. However, there is evidence in humans that early decompressive surgery may
reduce hospitalization time and, hence, complications,
and improve the neurologic outcome in some. Spinal
column surgery is a rapidly changing field but although
operative nuances have seen dramatic change, the reality
is that decompression, realignment, and ­stabilization
remain the primary offerings of the spine surgeon for the
acute SCI patient.

Figure 69.5 A sagittal (a) and transverse (b) T2‐weighted MRI of
the case seen in Fig. 69.2. The spinal cord can be seen in detail at
the site of the injury with the cord compressed by hemorrhage
within the canal (arrowhead).

Initial Management

The top priority in managing acute SCI secondary to
exogenous trauma is assessment and stabilization of vital
signs, with strict adherence to a life support protocol.

69 Central Nervous System Trauma

VetBooks.ir

Fluid administration is generally considered first‐line
therapy in this situation; however, a restricted heart rate
makes these patients susceptible to fluid overload. Early
consideration of vasoactive agents is recommended in
people and so should be considered in veterinary patients
where appropriate.
Specific Management Considerations
Medical Therapy
Pain Management Analgesic therapy is essential in the

Figure 69.6 Securing a dog or cat to a board in lateral
recumbency can reduce vertebral movement prior to external or
internal stabilization of a fracture luxation.

At the time of stabilization, patients with SCI should be
immobilized by stabilizing both the body and head using
a rigid spine board (Figure 69.6).
Airway

Although airway and spine protection share top priority,
airway management takes precedence; risking iatrogenic
SCI is justified in exceptional circumstance when
required to secure or protect the airway.
Breathing

Respiratory insufficiency can be an important cause of
early mortality after SCI. Cervical injuries can paralyze
the diaphragm and cause respiratory arrest. Lower cervical injuries can affect the intercostal muscles, causing a
paradoxical breathing pattern. Paralysis of the intercostal
musculature is associated with a decrease in forced vital
capacity and maximal inspiratory force because inspiration can cause chest wall collapse. Patients who compensate initially can fatigue rapidly, and indeed, many
patients with cervical injuries can require intubation in
the first 24 hours. It is thus useful to monitor vital capacity in such patients where possible; intubation should be
considered in patients whose vital capacity is markedly
reduced. Hypoxia is an important cause of secondary
SCI and must be avoided.
Circulation

It is essential to avoid hypotension of any kind in patients
with SCI given its contribution to secondary injury. Care
must be taken to ensure that hypotension from other
causes is excluded, especially that attributable to occult
hemorrhage, which can be challenging to detect in
patients with sensorimotor deficits.

management of the neurotrauma patient. The degree
of analgesia and sedation must be balanced with preservation of blood pressure and ventilatory status, as
depression of each of these parameters can contribute
to secondary injury, and if possible should not impede
reassessment of neurologic status.
Opioids are the analgesic drugs of choice in critical
care medicine, because of their ease of reversal and relative safety when titrated to effect. Several studies suggest
that bolus infusion of opioids should be avoided, and
constant‐rate infusions (CRIs) are preferred. Because of
the ease of reversal, it is recommended that full agonist
opioids be used.
Table 69.1 lists the recommended analgesics and their
respective doses.
The use of corticosteroids in the treatment of acute SCI remains controversial despite extensive
clinical investigation. Proposed mechanisms supporting
the use of corticosteroids in SCI include free radical scavenging, antiinflammatory effects, and improved local
blood flow. Unfortunately, there are no studies demonstrating a benefit of steroids in improving outcome after
SCI in humans or veterinary patients. Given the potential
for significant adverse side‐effects, such as gastrointestinal ulceration, immunosuppression, and compromise of
renal perfusion in hypovolemic patients, the routine
administration of high‐dose corticosteroids in the acute
phase of injury is not recommended.

Corticosteroids

Table 69.1 Analgesic drugs suggested for use in patients
with spinal cord injury
Analgesic

Recommended dose

Fentanyl

Dogs: 2 μg/kg, then constant‐rate infusion
(CRI) at 2–5 μg/kg/h
Cats: 1 μg/kg, then CRI at 1–2 μg/kg/h

Morphine

Dogs: 0.15–0.5 mg/kg slow, then CRI at
0.1–1 mg/kg/h

Ketamine

0.1–1 mg/kg, then CRI at 2–10 μg/kg/min

Lidocaine

Dogs: 1–2 mg/kg, then CRI at
25–80 μg/kg/min

Dexmedetomidine

0.5–1 μg/kg/h

745

VetBooks.ir

746

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

Intraspinal olfactory
glial cell transplantation in dogs with thoracolumbar
SCI has been shown to have promise with respect to
improved functional outcome. The rationale for this
approach stems from the unique ability of these cells to
promote regeneration in experimentally induced injured
spinal cord and foster a more hospitable environment for
axonal growth, increase tissue sparing after SCI, increase
tissue bridging and reduce cavity formation following
experimental SCI, and improve angiogenesis within
the injured spinal cord. Olfactory ensheathing glia can
be harvested from the olfactory epithelium and transplanted in the same animal, thereby minimizing the likelihood of rejection. Autologous bone marrow stromal
cell transplantation has been evaluated in dogs with vertebral fracture luxation and found to be feasible and safe,
with no complications noted.
Although such techniques are currently in the early
stages of development, they may represent the future for
patients with acute SCI.

Cellular Transplantation Therapy

Surgical Therapy

A significant body of animal research has demonstrated
neurologic benefit from early decompression of the
injured spinal cord; however, such benefit is less clear in
polytrauma patients, who are often medically unstable in
the acute postinjury phase. Despite the fact that early
spine surgery appears to be safe in polytrauma patients,
the question of whether early decompression for acute

SCI is or is not beneficial for neurologic recovery remains
incompletely answered. Cord compression can be due to
displaced vertebral fragments, herniated intervertebral
disk or hematomas. Decompression may be achieved by
realignment of vertebrae alone; a laminectomy or hemilaminectomy may be necessary to remove material from
the vertebral canal. Decompressive procedures could
produce or exacerbate instability in the injured spine,
thus requiring surgical stabilization.
Instability can be addressed surgically, by placement
of an external splint, or simply by cage rest (Table 69.2).
Surgical stabilization is the most effective method of
stabilizing an unstable spine, but is associated with significant surgical risks. A variety of different techniques
are used; in one of the most easily adaptable techniques,
screws or pins are placed in the vertebral bodies adjacent to the injury and cement is applied to hold the
structure in alignment (Figure 69.7). Another popular
technique, sometimes known as “spinal ­stapling” or
“segmental stabilization,” uses pins wired to articular
facets and dorsal spinous processes to stabilize dorsally.
Different plates can be used; difficulty contouring
plates to the vertebral bodies limits options, but more
recently locking plates such as the string of pearls (SOP)
plate have been described which can offer more
flexibility.
Sacrocaudal luxations in cats are typically addressed
by amputation of the tail if the tail is paralyzed and has
no nociception. Prompt removal of the tail may limit

Table 69.2 Advantages and disadvantages of different stabilization techniques
Technique

Advantages

Cage rest

●●
●●

External splint

●●
●●

Screws/pins and
PMMA; plates

Segmental
stabilization

●●
●●

Inexpensive
No anesthetic or surgical risk

Inexpensive
No anesthetic or surgical risk

Excellent stabilization
Can combine with
decompression

Good stabilization against
flexion and extension.
●● Reduced risk of iatrogenic
injury.
●● Readily applied in the
lumbosacral region
●●

PMMA, polymethylmethacrylate cement.

Disadvantages
●●
●●

No stability provided
No decompression

Splint complications
Limited protection against
axial or rotational forces
●● No decompression

Indications

Stable fracture (articular facet, dorsal
spinous and transverse processes)
●● No spinal cord compression
●● Mild neurologic deficits
●●

Unstable fracture
Limited spinal cord compression
●● Mild neurologic deficits

●●

●●

●●

●●

Cost
Risk of iatrogenic injury
during implant placement
●● Infection
●● Implant failure
●●

●●

Unstable fractures

●●

Suboptimal protection against
rotational and axial forces
●● Implant failure/migration
●● Infection
●●

●●

Unstable lumbosacral/caudal lumbar
fractures

69 Central Nervous System Trauma

VetBooks.ir

splint movement that occurs in the first 24 hours. Splints
should be checked daily by the owner for development of
decubital ulcers and should be checked and potentially
changed by the veterinarian after the first 3–5 days and
then on a weekly basis for six weeks. Splints do not protect from compressive loading of the spine, and offer
poor protection against rotatory forces. In addition, it is
not possible to stabilize the lumbosacral spine with an
external splint. Splints are inappropriate if there are open
wounds affecting areas that would be incorporated into
the bandage.
Figure 69.7 Multiple internal fixation materials and methods exist
to stabilize vertebral fractures and luxations. This lateral
radiograph demonstrates the use of screws and
polymethylmethacrylate to stabilize a lumbosacral vertebral
fracture luxation.

ongoing damage to the sacral nerve roots that could
result from inadvertent movement of the tail.
Surgical complications from any spinal stabilization
procedure can be serious and include iatrogenic injury to
the spinal cord, damage to the vasculature immediately
ventral to the vertebral column, failure of the fixation
(Figure 69.8), and infection.
Placement of the splint is achieved by wrapping the
appropriate part of the body in cast padding and then
forming the splint from a material such as Vetcast® (3M)
to cover the dorsal aspect of the thoracolumbar spine or
the ventral aspect of the neck (from below the chin to the
sternum). Following padding of the splint to ensure that
there are no sharp edges, it is incorporated into the
bandage with a cover of bandaging material such as
Vetwrap®. Pressure points, particularly between thoracic
and pelvic limbs, should be checked and padded carefully. The patient should always be hospitalized overnight after the first placement of a splint to ensure that
the splint is tolerated, and to allow adjustment for any
Figure 69.8 Fixation failure can be due to
breakage or migration of the implants as
can be seen to have occurred with these
transarticular pins which needed to be
removed.

Bladder Management

Urinary tract infections (UTI) in dogs being treated for
SCI should be considered. Female dogs, dogs that cannot
ambulate or voluntarily void urine, dogs which are not
given antimicrobials during surgery, and dogs whose
body temperature falls below 35 °C during surgical
decompression of the spinal cord all have an increased
likelihood of developing a UTI. The frequency of UTIs in
dogs with an indwelling urinary catheter may approach
50%. Indiscriminate antimicrobial use for animals with
an indwelling catheter should be avoided, though intraoperative antimicrobials should be administered at the
time of surgical decompression of the spinal cord.
If the patient is unable to urinate, the owner must be
able to express or catheterize their pet three times a day.
Addition of phenoxybenzamine (0.25–0.5 mg/kg orally
q8–12h) or prazosin (dog: 1 mg if less than 15 kg body
weight or 2 mg if over 15 kg PO q8–12h; cat: 0.25–0.5 mg
PO q12–24h) and diazepam (0.5 mg/kg orally 20 min
prior to expression) may help to reduce urethral
sphincter tone and facilitate expression. Since marked
hypotension can result from prazosin, patients should
be monitored for lethargy, collapse, pallor, syncope or
seizures. Skin should be kept clean and dry and checked
regularly for development of decubital ulcers over pressure points, or urine scald.

747

VetBooks.ir

748

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

Prognosis for Animals with Spinal Trauma
Prognosis associated with SCI is influenced by the severity
of cord injury and the presence of injuries to other organs
(e.g., lungs, heart, and bladder). The form of treatment
(surgical versus conservative) does not appear to influence
outcome, although in published case series, the more
severely affected patients tend to be treated surgically, and
so a true comparison is difficult. Prognostic indicators
based on the neurologic examination are somewhat different for different regions of the spine.
Thoracolumbar injuries carry a guarded to grave prognosis for recovery of pelvic limb function and fecal and
urinary continence if the animal is paraplegic with
loss of nociception to its pelvic limbs. If nociception is
still present, these animals do have a good chance of
recovery.
●● Cervical injuries are associated with a guarded to grave
prognosis if the animal is tetraplegic and unable to
ventilate adequately. If treated surgically, the risk of
perioperative death can be as high as 36% in cervical
injuries. Note that it is extremely unusual to see tetraplegic animals that lack nociception because cervical
spinal cord transection usually causes death by respiratory failure and bradyarrhythmias. Delaying referral,
diagnosis, and treatment does worsen the prognosis.
Less severe injuries carry a much better prognosis,
with the majority of cases making a recovery if managed appropriately.
●● The prognosis for recovery of fecal and urinary continence in lumbosacral and sacrocaudal fractures is
approximately 50% if there is absent anal tone and no
nociception in the perineal region or the tail at the
time of presentation. Positive tail base sensation is
useful to identify cases that will recover within 30 days
of the injury, but it is not very useful to discriminate
the cases that will recover despite not having tail base
sensation. Because the cauda equina is largely composed of peripheral nerves, displacement of fracture
fragments is less likely to cause complete transection
but severe pain due to nerve root entrapment is common and can be a reason for euthanasia.
●●

­Head Trauma
Traumatic brain injury in veterinary patients occurs
most commonly secondary to automobile accidents.
Other common causes of traumatic brain injury include
kicks to the head, falls, gunshot wounds, and animal
bites. Immediate and appropriate treatment is critical to
potentiate an acceptable recovery. Although treatment
recommendations remain controversial, there are several
guidelines for head trauma management. Accurate and

frequent assessment of both systemic and neurologic
injuries can allow for a successful outcome. Additionally,
treatment strategies should remain flexible, adjusting to
the patient’s needs and changes in neurologic status.
A complete understanding of intracranial physiology and
the effects of injury will aid in the management of dogs
and cats with head trauma.
Injury‐Related Intracranial Physiology
Following injury, cerebral blood flow is often significantly
reduced due to associated elevations of intracranial pressure (ICP) (>/= (greater than or = to)12–20 mmHg). Specific
factors that decrease cerebral blood flow (CBF) include the
presence of edema, hematomas, compression of vessels
from mass effect, and vasospasm. Additionally, trauma
significant enough to cause brain injury likely causes some
degree of systemic shock and hypotension. The presence of
hypotension further reduces cerebral blood flow.
Reduction of CBF due to elevation of ICP can lead to
brain ischemia. A series of physiologic responses are in
place to try to prevent this when CBF declines. Reduced
blood flow to the vasomotor centers in the brainstem
leads to reduced carbon dioxide removal. A subsequent
elevation in local carbon dioxide concentrations stimulates the sympathetic nervous system to increase mean
arterial pressure. The result is systemic hypertension in
an effort to maintain blood flow to the brain. However, as
the baroreceptors located in the aorta and carotid sinus
both detect systemic hypertension, a signal is sent to the
vagal centers of the brainstem. A reflex bradycardia
occurs as a consequence. This phenomenon is referred
to as the Cushing reflex. Therefore, concurrent systemic
hypertension and bradycardia can indicate elevated ICP
in head trauma patients.
Additionally, an elevation in ICP and the subsequent
reduction of cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) stimulates
the release of catecholamines. This catecholamine surge
can lead to the brain–heart syndrome, which causes
arrhythmias and myocardial ischemia.
Pathophysiology of Brain Injury
After trauma, the brain parenchyma is susceptible to two
types of injury: primary injury and secondary injury.
Primary or Biomechanical Injury

This is injury to the brain tissue from direct trauma and
the forces applied to the brain at impact. An impact to
the skull exerts the following forces on the brain: acceleration, deceleration, and rotational forces. The brain is
unable to tolerate these forces because of its composition
and lack of internal support. The superficial gray matter
is most susceptible to the forces of acceleration, leading

VetBooks.ir

69 Central Nervous System Trauma

to hemorrhage or contusion and tearing of neuronal tissue. The rotational forces have more of an impact on the
deeper white matter of the brain, causing concussive
injuries and axonal damage. The spherical shape of the
skull and the propagation of rotational forces after injury
direct these forces into the deeper tissues of the brain.
Additionally, penetrating injuries can cause direct damage to the brain parenchyma, fractures, and hemorrhage.
Skull Fractures

Skull fractures are described based on pattern (depressed,
comminuted, linear), location, and type (open vs closed).
A depressed fracture is one where the inner shelf of
bone is driven into the brain to a depth equivalent to the
width of the skull. Depressed fractures are most common on the dorsal and lateral aspects of the skull.
Fractures may also occur at the base of the skull, middle
ear, and temporomandibular joint; however, fractures in
these locations are difficult to evaluate. Bullae fractures
can result in neurologic signs such as vestibular syndrome, facial paresis/paralysis, and Horner syndrome
on the side of the fracture. Fractures of the temporomandibular joint, mandible, and zygomatic arch may require
additional treatment, but are unlikely to cause neurologic signs alone.
Brain Hemorrhage

Hemorrhage following trauma may be located in an
extraparenchymal
or
intraparenchymal
location.
Extraparenchymal hemorrhage may occur in the epidural,
subarachnoid, or subdural space. The most common location of hemorrhage following trauma is within the brain
parenchyma (intraaxial) or subarachnoid space. Epidural
hemorrhage is frequently secondary to bleeding from
meningeal arteries, resulting in blood between the skull and
dura. Hematomas located in the subdural space (between
the arachnoid and dura) are typically secondary to venous
bleeding, resulting in slow accumulation of blood.
Hemorrhage into the cranial cavity has several deleterious effects. The presence of hematomas contributes to
elevations in ICP and reduction of CBF. Additionally,
hemorrhage provides a substrate for oxygen free radical
formation and promotes inflammation. Finally, hemorrhage promotes the release of excitatory amino acids
exacerbating secondary brain injury.
Secondary Injury

After impact, a cascade of biomolecular events occurs
causing continued and progressive brain pathology. The
presence of hematomas and edema from the primary
injury distorts normal brain parenchyma, and decreases
CBF. Additionally, a series of cellular reactions begins
at the time of impact and continues after the injury. This
secondary brain injury has a significant effect on out-

come and can lead to continued death of neurons and
glial cells. The primary mediators involved in secondary
brain injury include oxygen free radicals, excitatory
amino acids (i.e., glutamate), and nitric oxide.
Cerebral Edema

Edema develops after primary brain injury and continues
to develop as secondary brain injury ensues. Typically,
brain edema is most severe 24–48 hours after injury.
There are two main types of edema: vasogenic and cytotoxic (intracellular).
Vasogenic edema occurs secondary to failure of the
blood–brain barrier and vasodilation. Vasodilation is
frequently secondary to hypercapnia, which is often
associated with head injury. Initially, the brain is able
to compensate for this increase in fluid through the
compliance strategies discussed earlier.
●● Cytotoxic edema occurs secondary to failure of cellular
ion pumps and damage to cellular membranes.
Cytotoxic edema can lead to cellular death.
●●

Intracranial Pressure

The brain is protected within the bony confines of the
skull, where it exists in equilibrium with cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) and blood. The pressure exerted between the
brain and the skull is the ICP, which is normally 5–12
mmHg in dogs and cats. The skull is relatively inelastic,
limiting the volume that can exist within the cranial cavity. The space within the cranial vault is occupied primarily by three components: brain parenchyma, CSF,
and blood.
The Monro–Kellie hypothesis describes the relationship between these compartments and their ability to
compensate for increases in volume within the cranial
cavity. After head trauma, the volume of the intracranial
contents within the skull may increase due to hemorrhage, edema, or CSF accumulation. The brain has the
capacity to tolerate small increases in volume by adjusting the size of one of the three components, primarily
the CSF compartment. Shunting CSF to the spinal
­subarachnoid space, decreasing CSF production, and
increasing CSF absorption can rapidly decrease the CSF
compartment. CSF production does not typically affect
elevations in ICP unless its drainage is obstructed, leading to obstructive hydrocephalus. Additionally, venous
blood can be redirected out of the cranial cavity and cerebral blood flow will decrease to compensate for ICP
elevation. The ability of the brain to adjust for increases
in intracranial pressure by decreasing the volume of
CSF and blood is called compliance. During this time of
compensation, the patient’s clinical signs will remain relatively normal, unless the trauma primarily injured the
parenchyma via laceration, puncture wounds, etc. Once

749

VetBooks.ir

750

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

compliance is exhausted, small increases in volume will
result in dramatic elevations in ICP, which will be accompanied by a rapid decline in the patient’s neurologic
status.
This ability to compensate is more effective if the
increase in volume occurs slowly. With continued elevation of ICP, brain herniation can result. There are four
types of brain herniation.
Falcine herniation: herniation of one cerebral hemisphere ventral to the falx cerebri.
●● Transtentorial herniation: herniation of the parahippocampal gyrus below the tentorium ­cerebelli which
causes compression of the midbrain, leading to
mydriatic, unresponsive pupils, loss of consciousness,
and subsequent failure of the cardiorespiratory centers. A sign of developing transtentorial herniation is
asymmetric mydriasis followed by symmetric mydriasis as the parasympathetic portion of the cranial nerve
III nucleus is compressed. Transtentorial herniation
can be life‐threatening, leading to sudden cardiopulmonary arrest.
●● Foramenal herniation: cerebellar herniation into the
foramen magnum (see Figure 69.9). This is frequently
fatal, causing respiratory arrest by compressing the
respiratory centers of the medulla.
●● Calvarial herniation: the brain can also herniate
through a defect in the skull.
●●

Clinical Assessment
The ability to recognize signs consistent with elevated
ICP or a declining neurologic status is critical in the
management of dogs and cats following head trauma.
Trauma significant enough to cause brain injury will
have systemic effects, which may be life‐threatening.
Additionally, systemic injuries and shock will cause

continued decline in the head trauma patient. Therefore,
a complete systemic evaluation and stabilization is
required in addition to a thorough neurologic assessment (Table 69.3).
Systemic Assessment

Initial assessment should involve evaluation of the
patient’s respiratory and cardiovascular system. An airway must be established, if necessary through endotracheal intubation. Breathing patterns may be affected by
thoracic trauma, but may also be secondary to brain
injury. Auscultation of the thorax may detect pulmonary
pathology or cardiac arrhythmias. Oxygen support
should be given as necessary and mechanical or manual
ventilation may be required with severe pulmonary injuries. Traumatic pneumothorax may require thoracocentesis or chest tube placement to allow proper ventilation.
The cardiovascular system should be evaluated by monitoring heart rate, blood pressure, and electrocardiography. An electrocardiogram may demonstrate cardiac
arrhythmias secondary to traumatic myocarditis, systemic shock, or brain injury. Arterial blood analysis and
lactate concentrations may provide additional information regarding systemic perfusion and respiratory
function.
Temperature assessment on a frequent basis is important in all patients. Cerebral metabolic rate is proportional to body temperature and increases 5–7% per
degree centigrade. Hyperthermia should be avoided in
all patients and cooling techniques should be considered
if this is noted. Hypothermia reduces the cerebral
­metabolic rate and although this may be advantageous to
the injured brain, it also increases the risk of cardiac
abnormalities.
Once the patient is stable, CT or radiographs of the chest
and abdomen are recommended to evaluate for pulmonary
Figure 69.9 A sagittal T2‐weighted MRI
confirms cerebellar vermal herniation
through the foramen (arrow).

VetBooks.ir

69 Central Nervous System Trauma

Table 69.3 Monitoring parameters for the cat and dog following head trauma
Monitoring parameters

Suggested goal

Suggested treatment

Neurologic examination

MGCS >15

Ensure head elevation (30°)
Ensure all points below are addressed
Consider mannitol (see below)
Consider surgery (see text)

Blood pressure

MAP 80–120 mmHg

Adjust fluid therapy
Pressor support (dopamine 2–10 μg/kg/min)

Blood gases

PaO2 >/=90 mmHg
PaCO2 <35–40 mmHg

Oxygen supplementation
Consider active ventilation

Pulse oximetry (SpO2)

SpO2 >/=95%

Oxygen supplementation
Consider active ventilation

Heart rate and rhythm

Avoid tachy‐ and bradycardias
Avoid arrhythmias

Adjust fluid therapy
Treat for pain
Address ICP
Treat arrhythmias specifically

Central venous pressure

5–12 cmH2O

Adjust fluid therapy

Respiratory rate and rhythm

10–25/min

Ventilate if necessary

Body temperature

37–38.5 °C

Passive warming or cooling
NSAIDs if hyperthermic

Electrolytes

See individual laboratory normal values

Adjust fluid therapy

Blood glucose

4–6 mmol/L

Adjust fluid therapy
Consider dextrose administration

Intracranial pressure

5–12 mmHg

As for MGCS abnormalities

ICP, intracranial pressure; MAP, mean arterial pressure; MGCS, Modified Glasgow Coma Scale; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug.

contusions, pneumothorax, and abdominal injuries.
Pulmonary contusions are common following trauma
and may not be most severe until 24 hours after injury.
Trauma can also result in injury to abdominal organs.
The abdomen should be evaluated with CT or radiography and ultrasonography for the presence of free fluid,
blood, or urine, which may require additional therapy.
Radiographs of the cervical vertebrae should also be considered as head trauma can often be accompanied by
fractures and luxations of these bones.
Neurologic Assessment

Neurologic assessment should be undertaken on any
animal which has experienced a trauma. Assessment of
neurologic status in a patient after head trauma should
initially be performed every 30–60 minutes. Frequent
assessment allows for monitoring the efficacy of treatment and early recognition of deteriorating status.
Primarily, neurologic evaluation of the patient serves to
determine whether there are deficits suggesting structural neurologic lesions, where the lesions are located
(i.e., at least intracranial, spinal, and peripheral nerve),
and the severity of the lesion(s). Detection of a spinal
and/or peripheral nerve (e.g., brachial plexus) lesion can
affect the prognosis of any patient with head trauma.

Without any extracranial lesions, the prognosis associated with head trauma is dependent on the location and
severity of the parenchymal lesions.
The assessment should include evaluation of state of
consciousness, motor function and reflexes, pupil size
and responsiveness, position and movement of the
eyes, and breathing pattern. The evaluation of pupil and
eye function is the most accurate manner in which
brainstem function can be assessed and this is the most
important part of the examination prognostically. A
scoring system has been developed in veterinary patients
to provide an objective assessment and allow for rational
diagnostic and treatment decisions.
Modified Glasgow Coma Scale

The Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) is used in human medicine to assess head trauma patients by evaluating eye,
verbal, and motor responses. This scale has been modified and applied to veterinary patients. The Modified
Glasgow Coma Scale (MGCS) evaluates motor activity,
brainstem reflexes, and level of consciousness in veterinary patients, enabling initial and serial monitoring
following injury. The three categories evaluated using
the MGCS provide objective standards for scoring a
patient between 1 and 6, with lower scores assigned to

751

VetBooks.ir

752

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

Table 69.4 Modified Glasgow Coma Scale
Score

Motor activity
Normal gait, normal spinal reflexes

6

Hemiparesis, tetraparesis

5

Recumbent, intermittent extensor rigidity

4

Recumbent, constant extensor rigidity

3

Recumbent, constant extensor rigidity with
opisthotonus

2

Recumbent, hypotonia of muscles, depressed or absent
spinal reflexes

1

Brainstem reflexes
Normal pupillary light reflexes and oculocephalic reflexes

6

Slow pupillary light reflexes and normal to reduced
oculocephalic reflexes

5

Bilateral unresponsive miosis with normal to reduced
oculocephalic reflexes

4

Pinpoint pupils with reduced to absent oculocephalic
reflexes

3

Unilateral, unresponsive mydriasis with reduced to
absent oculocephalic reflexes

2

Bilateral, unresponsive mydriasis with reduced to absent 1
oculocephalic reflexes
Level of consciousness
Occasional periods of alertness and responsive to
environment

6

Depression or delirium, capable of responding but
response may be inappropriate

5

Semicomatose, responsive to visual stimuli

4

Semicomatose, responsive to auditory stimuli

3

Semicomatose, responsive only to repeated noxious
stimuli

2

Comatose, unresponsive to repeated noxious stimuli

1

Tone is evaluated by placing the limbs through passive
range of motion. Increased tone can be seen following
cranial trauma, as CNS inhibitory modulation to the
lower motor neurons is lost. However, severe brain injury
leading to coma will be associated with decreased tone in
all limbs. Spinal reflexes are evaluated to primarily assess
nerve function, but may provide some information
regarding cerebral activity. Animals may have exaggerated reflexes following cerebral injury and absent reflexes
when comatose.
An animal’s posture after head trauma can also provide
information about location and degree of brain injury.
Decerebrate rigidity can occur following cerebral trauma
and suggests severe brain injury and a poor prognosis as
this posture reflects loss of communication between the
cerebrum and the brainstem. Animals with decerebrate
rigidity have opisthotonus with hyperextension of all
four limbs and are stuporous or comatose, with abnormal pupillary light reactions (Figure 69.10). Decerebellate
rigidity suggests acute cerebellar damage and may cause
either flexion or extension of the pelvic limbs; however,
consciousness may be normal.
Assessment of Brainstem Reflexes Pupil size, the pupillary
light reflex, and the oculocephalic reflex should all be
immediately evaluated in all head trauma patients. Pupil
size, symmetry, and reactivity can provide valuable information about severity of brain injury and prognosis.
These parameters should be frequently assessed as they
can signal a deteriorating neurologic status. Response of
the pupils to a bright light indicates sufficient function of

more severe clinical signs (Table 69.4). The score from
each category is added together to determine a patient’s
coma score ranging from 3 to 18, which may be used to
guide treatment decisions and prognosis.
The first category of the
MGCS describes a patient’s motor activity, limb tone,
and posture. Voluntary motor activity is characterized
as normal, paretic, or recumbent. Patients typically
maintain some degree of voluntary motor activity even
in altered states of consciousness unless they are comatose. Abnormal motor function usually reflects either
brainstem injury or spinal cord injury; the latter may
complicate the assessment of head trauma

Assessment of Limb Function

Figure 69.10 Extensor rigidity of the limbs as seen in this cat can
be compatible with severe brain injury following trauma.

VetBooks.ir

69 Central Nervous System Trauma

the retina, optic nerves, optic chiasm, and rostral brainstem. The presence of miosis may indicate a lesion in the
diencephalon, as the sympathetic innervation to the eye
originates in the hypothalamus. The peripheral sympathetic innervation to the eye can also be affected by
injury anywhere along its pathway through the brachial
plexus, anterior mediastinum, cervical soft tissues, and
tympanic bulla which often causes concurrent third eyelid elevation, enophthalmos, and ptosis as part of a
Horner syndrome. A miotic pupil may also be seen
with ocular injury and spasm of the ciliary muscles of
the iris; therefore, an ocular cause of miosis should be
investigated.
Bilateral mydriasis that is unresponsive to light can
indicate permanent midbrain damage or brain herniation and a poor prognosis. Other causes of mydriasis
include decreased cerebral perfusion, postictal changes,
trauma to the iris or retina, periorbital trauma or hematoma and previous ocular abnormalities.
Progression from miosis to mydriasis indicates a deteriorating neurologic status and is an indication for immediate, aggressive therapy. Unilateral changes in pupil size
may be seen early in deterioration. Paralysis of cranial
nerve (CN) III can lead to mydriasis, loss of direct pupillary light reflex, ptosis, and ventrolateral strabismus. The
CN III nucleus is located in the midbrain so damage to
this nucleus can be seen as a result of midbrain injury or
compression secondary to transtentorial herniation.
The oculocephalic reflex (physiologic nystagmus) is
tested by moving the animal’s head in vertical and horizontal planes to assess brainstem function and function
of the cranial nerve nuclei innervating the extraocular
eye muscles. If the animal’s head cannot be moved without risk, a visual stimulus such as food or the owner
should move around the animal. Absence of the oculocephalic reflex reflects injury to the brainstem. This reflex
may also be delayed with cerebral injuries.
Assessment of Consciousness

A patient’s level of consciousness provides information
regarding function of the cerebral cortex and the
ascending reticular activating system (ARAS) of the
brainstem. Consciousness can be described as normal,
depressed or obtunded, stuporous, or comatose. An
animal in a stupor is partially or completely unconscious, but will respond to noxious stimuli. A patient in
a coma is unconscious and cannot be roused with noxious stimuli. Coma typically indicates severe cerebral
injury or brainstem damage, which carries a guarded
prognosis. These terms describe different levels or
“quantities” of consciousness and provide information
regarding degree of cerebral impairment. The quality
of consciousness may be more difficult to objectively
evaluate. Inappropriate activity suggesting confused or

exaggerated responses to routine stimuli often confirms prosencephalon damage. It is important to note
that the patient’s blood pressure, oxygenation status,
and temperature may all affect its level of consciousness and so the latter should be reevaluated after correction of the former vital parameters.
After evaluation, the patient should be assigned a score
for each category to determine its overall coma score.
This score can be used to monitor for improvement or
deterioration of neurologic status, guide diagnosis and
treatment decisions (see later), and provide information
about prognosis.
Confirmation of Injury and Diagnosis
A diagnosis of head trauma is based primarily on a
compatible history and clinical signs of intracranial neurologic dysfunction. However, additional tests can be
used to confirm location and extent of injury. It is important to understand that advanced imaging of the brain
(computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging) should be reserved for patients that do not respond
to initial treatment or who deteriorate despite aggressive
therapy. Both of these imaging modalities require anesthesia, which can destabilize the head trauma patient,
unless the patient is in a coma on presentation.
Significant injury to the brain can occur, leading to
neurologic signs without causing skull fractures or
hematoma formation. Advanced imaging of the brain
may be performed to evaluate for fractures, hemorrhage,
or parenchymal lesions; however, changes may not be
seen even in a patient with severe neurologic deficits.
Imaging modalities available include skull radiography,
ultrasonography, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Advanced imaging can
be helpful in identification of hematomas (extraaxial vs
intraaxial), calvarial fractures, edema, and parenchymal
contusions.
Skull Radiographs

Skull radiography may reveal calvarial fractures, but
provides no information regarding the brain parenchyma
(Figure 69.11). Radiographs of the skull can be difficult
to interpret due to the irregularity of the skull bones and
require anesthesia for accurate positioning, which may
be contraindicated in the acutely injured patient.
Radiography should not be limited to the skull following
head trauma. Radiographs of the vertebral column, thorax, and abdomen are indicated to evaluate for evidence
of other injuries.
Advanced Imaging

Computed tomography allows superior evaluation of
bony structures and is preferred over conventional

753

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

VetBooks.ir

754

Figure 69.11 A lateral skull radiograph shows a frontal bone
fracture (arrow) in this dog after being bitten by another dog.

Figure 69.13 A transverse T2‐weighted MRI of the dog in
Fig. 69.11 confirms the extent of the soft tissue injury associated
with frontal bone fractures. Hyperintensity seen in the brain
(arrow) is compatible with edema secondary to the bite injury.

Figure 69.12 A transverse bone windowed CT scan of the dog in
Fig. 69.11 confirms a comminuted frontal bone fracture associated
with soft tissue damage and air pockets dorsal to the skull.

radiography, especially considering the 3D reconstruction capabilities (Figure 69.12). Additionally, CT can be
used to diagnose intracranial hemorrhage, alterations in
ventricular size or shape, midline shift of the falx cerebri,
and edema. CT does not provide good soft tissue detail
of the brain parenchyma, but is frequently the preferred
modality for evaluation of human head trauma patients
for surgical intervention because of the speed of image
acquisition. Typically, hemorrhage is hyperattenuating
(hyperdense) on a CT in the acute stages. Over time, the

density decreases, with clot resorption creating a hypoattenuating lesion similar to edema. A CT can provide
images for surgical planning, but should only be pursued
in patients who are severely affected or deteriorating
requiring surgical intervention.
Magnetic resonance imaging allows superior soft
tissue detail and is preferred for evaluation of the brain,
especially the caudal fossa which does not image well
with CT (Figure 69.13). MRI can detect more subtle
parenchymal changes that may be missed on a CT and
may provide information about prognosis. Hematomas
or hemorrhage, parenchymal contusions, and edema
are readily apparent on MRI images. Although CT is
preferred for evaluation of bony structures, fractures can
also be identified on an MRI, most proficiently using
STIR and gradient echo sequences.
Typically, CT and MRI are only pursued in patients
who fail to respond to aggressive medical therapy or who
deteriorate and may require surgical intervention. Both
MRI and CT findings were recently correlated with
prognosis in veterinary head trauma patients so their use
may be of specific additional benefit.
Intracranial Pressure Monitoring

Intracranial pressure may be monitored through placement of a pressure transducer or fiberoptic transducer

VetBooks.ir

69 Central Nervous System Trauma

into the epidural, intraaxial, or intraventricular space.
ICP monitoring is frequently pursued in human head
trauma patients, but may have its limitations in veterinary
patients. ICP monitoring is not without risks and may
lead to development of edema, hemorrhage, parenchymal
damage, and infection.
Treatment of Head Trauma Patients
Treatment strategies should be directed toward both
systemic and neurologic stabilization in an effort to minimize secondary damage. Several aspects of treatment
exist. Systemic stabilization involves correction of systemic shock and respiratory abnormalities with fluid
therapy and oxygen therapy/management of ventilation
respectively. The second aspect of treatment involves
measures to reduce elevations in intracranial pressure
and cerebral metabolic rate. Finally, some animals
require surgical intervention because of lack of improvement or a declining neurologic status.
Although once used as a treatment following head
trauma, corticosteroids are no longer recommended in
head trauma patients. Their use has been extensively
evaluated in people and has shown no beneficial effect
and may even result in worse morbidity and mortality
rates. Detrimental effects of corticosteroids include
immunosuppression, hyperglycemia, and gastrointestinal disturbances.
Fluid Therapy

The goal of fluid therapy of the head trauma patient is to
restore a normovolemic state. It is deleterious to dehydrate an animal in an attempt to reduce cerebral edema.
Aggressive fluid therapy and systemic monitoring are
required to ensure normovolemia to maintain adequate
cerebral perfusion pressure.
Crystalloid, hypertonic, and colloid fluids should be
given concurrently to help restore and maintain blood
volume following trauma. Crystalloids are usually given
initially for the treatment of systemic shock. These balanced electrolyte solutions may be given at shock doses
(90 mL/kg for dogs, 60 mL/kg for cats). Typically, it is
recommended that the shock dose be given in fractions
starting with one‐third to one‐fourth of the calculated
volume, frequently reassessing the patient for normalization of mean arterial blood pressure, mentation and central
venous pressure, if monitored, and giving additional
fractions if needed. Unfortunately, crystalloid solutions
will extravasate into the interstitium within one hour of
administration, requiring additional fluid resuscitation.
Hypertonic and colloid fluid therapy can rapidly restore
blood volume using low‐volume fluid resuscitation;
additionally, colloids remain in the vasculature longer
than crystalloid fluids. These fluids should be used with

caution as without concurrent administration of crystalloid solutions, hypertonic and colloid solutions can
lead to dehydration. Other benefits of hypertonic fluids
include the ability to improve cardiac output, restore
normovolemia, and reduce inflammation after trauma.
Hypertonic saline may be preferred in hypovolemic,
hypotensive patients with increased ICP.
Hypertonic saline improves cerebral perfusion pressure
and blood flow by rapidly restoring intravascular blood
volume. Additionally, the high sodium content of
hypertonic saline draws fluid from the interstitial and
intracellular spaces, subsequently reducing intracranial
pressure. Contraindications to administration of hypertonic saline include systemic dehydration and hypernatremia. Hypertonic saline only remains within the
vasculature for about one hour so it should be followed
by colloids to maximize its effects. A dose of 5–6 mL/kg
(dogs) and 2–4 mL/kg (cats) of 7.5% NaCl should be
given over 5–10 minutes.
Colloids (i.e., Hetastarch, Dextran‐70) allow for low‐
volume fluid resuscitation, especially if total protein concentrations are below 50 g/L or 5 g/dL. These fluids
also draw fluid from the interstitial and intracellular
spaces, but have the added benefit of staying within the
intravascular space longer than crystalloids. Hetastarch
is typically given at 5–6 mL/kg boluses in dogs and
2–4 mL/kg in cats over 5–10 minutes, with frequent
patient reevaluation. A total dose of 20 mL/kg/day may
be given. In addition to volume resuscitation, oxygen‐
carrying capacity should be considered, especially if the
packed cell volume <30%. The use of oxyglobin and other
hemoglobin‐based oxygen carriers has not been well
evaluated in head trauma but initial studies suggest that
they could play a valuable role.
Systemic blood pressure may require additional treatment to maintain adequate cerebral perfusion pressure.
A mean arterial pressure of 80–100 mmHg should be
the target. Hypotension should initially be treated with
fluid resuscitation but persistent hypotension may
require treatment with vasoactive agents (i.e., dopamine
2–10 μg/kg/min). Additionally, systemic hypertension
may occur as a sequela to intracranial hypertension as a
result of the Cushing reflex. Systemic hypertension secondary to ICP elevation should be treated by aggressively treating elevated ICP; the use of additional drugs
to modulate the blood pressure should be avoided unless
all attempts to lower ICP have been exhausted.
Head trauma patients should be positioned to maximize arterial circulation to the brain and improve venous
drainage. This goal is best achieved by elevating the
animal’s head at a 30° angle. It is important to ensure the
jugular veins are not occluded and that no restrictive
collars are placed around the neck, which would elevate
ICP.

755

VetBooks.ir

756

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

Oxygen Therapy and Management of Ventilation

Diuretics

Oxygen supplementation is recommended in all patients
following head trauma. Control of PaO2 and PaCO2 is
mandatory and will affect both cerebral hemodynamics and ICP. Permissive hypercapnia should be avoided
because of its cerebral vasodilatory effect that increases
ICP. Hypocapnia can produce cerebral vasoconstriction
through serum and CSF alkalosis. Reduction in CBF
and ICP is almost immediate although peak ICP reduction may take up to 30 minutes after PCO2 has been
changed.
The amount of oxygen within the blood can be assessed
by measuring oxyhemoglobin saturation with a pulse
oximeter (SpO2), measuring the PaO2 with blood gas
analysis in conjunction with measurement of circulating
haemoglobin concentration. Calculation of oxygen delivery to the tissues requires measurement of both arterial
oxygen content and cardiac output. Measurement of
mixed venous oxygen can provide an indirect measure of
adequacy of oxygen supply to the tissues. The amount of
carbon dioxide within the blood can also be assessed by
arterial blood gas analysis as well as via capnography.
Capnography provides breath‐by‐breath assessment of
adequacy of ventilation assuming normal cardiovascular
function. This technique measures CO2 in the expired
patient gases (P’ETCO2), which approximates the CO2
tension in the alveoli. As alveolar gases should be in
equilibrium with arterial blood, P’ETCO2 can be used to
approximate PaCO2 unless severe pulmonary dysfunction is present.
The goal of oxygen therapy and management of ventilation is to maintain the partial pressure of oxygen in
the arterial blood supply (PaO2) greater than or equal to
90 mmHg and the PaCO2 below 35–40 mmHg. If the
patient is able to ventilate spontaneously and effectively,
supplemental oxygen should be delivered via “flow‐by”;
confinement within an oxygen cage prevents frequent
monitoring. Facemasks and nasal catheters should be
avoided if possible as they can cause anxiety which may
contribute to elevations of intracranial pressure.
Patients with severe head injury require mechanical
ventilation to maintain these arterial blood gas concentrations at their optimal levels. The absolute indications
for mechanical ventilation include loss of consciousness,
rising PaCO2 of >50 mmHg and falling SPO2 despite
appropriate treatment.
There are no contraindications to the use of positive
end‐expiratory pressure (PEEP) in hypoxemic patients.
With adequate volume resuscitation, PEEP does not
increase ICP nor does it lower CPP, and it may actually
decrease ICP as a result of improved cerebral oxygenation. Assessment of adequacy of ventilation can be made
by measurement of arterial CO2 or alternatively using
capnography.

Intracranial pressure can be aggressively addressed
with the administration of osmotic diuretics. Osmotic
diuretics such as mannitol should not be given to any
patient without being certain that the patient has been
volume resuscitated. If not, their use can precipitate
acute renal failure. For this reason, they are reserved as
tier 2 therapies.
Mannitol improves CBF and reduces ICP by decreasing
edema. After administration, mannitol expands the plasma
volume and reduces blood viscosity, which improves CBF
and delivery of oxygen to the brain. Additionally, mannitol
assists in scavenging free radicals, which contribute to secondary injury processes. Vasoconstriction occurs as a
sequela to the increased partial pressure of oxygen, leading
to an immediate decrease in ICP. Additionally, the osmotic
effect of mannitol reduces extracellular fluid volume within
the brain.
Mannitol (0.5–2.0 g/kg) should be given as a bolus over
15 minutes to optimize the plasma‐expanding effect.
Continuous infusions of mannitol increase the permeability of the blood–brain barrier, exacerbating edema.
Lower doses of mannitol are as effective at decreasing
ICP as higher doses, but may not last as long. Mannitol
reduces brain edema over about 15–30 minutes after
administration and has an effect for approximately 2–5
hours. Repeated dosing of mannitol can cause diuresis,
leading to reduced plasma volume, increased osmolarity,
intracellular dehydration, hypotension, and ischemia.
Therefore, adequate isotonic crystalloid and colloid
therapy is critical to maintain hydration. Additionally,
administration of mannitol should be reserved for the
critical patients (MGCS of <8), a deteriorating patient,
or a patient failing to respond to other treatment.
Administration of furosemide (0.7 mg/kg) prior to
administration of mannitol has a synergistic effect at
lowering ICP. Currently, there is no evidence to indicate
that mannitol is contraindicated in the presence of
intracranial hemorrhage, as has been suggested.
Seizure Therapy

Seizures should be aggressively treated to prevent
worsening of the secondary effects in the brain parenchyma due to associated brain hypoxia and subsequent
development of edema. Seizure activity may occur
immediately following trauma or may be delayed in
onset. The need for antiseizure prophylaxis after severe
brain trauma remains controversial in human medicine. Human patients treated in the first seven days
after head trauma with anticonvulsants have a significantly lower risk of posttraumatic seizures within this
time period than if not treated. Beyond seven days
from injury, there appears to be no benefit to prophylactic treatment.

VetBooks.ir

69 Central Nervous System Trauma

Diazepam (0.5–2.0 mg/kg) can be given intravenously
to treat seizures. Additionally, phenobarbital (2–3 mg/
kg) may also be given intravenously or intramuscularly and
continued parenterally following a loading dose (18–24
mg/kg over a 24–48‐hour period) if necessary. Recently, the
use of intravenous levetiracetam (20–60 mg/kg) has been
described for emergency seizure treatment as it may be
effective for up to eight hours without causing much
sedation and without needing hepatic metabolism.
Refractory seizures at the time of head trauma may
require additional therapy such as a continuous infusion of diazepam (0.5–1.0 mg/kg/h) or propofol (4–8
mg/kg bolus to effect followed by 1–5 mg/kg/h CRI).
Some patients may require long‐term management of
seizure activity with antiepileptic medications. However,
if maintenance therapy is continued beyond seven days
and seizure activity is not noted over a 3–6‐month
period, antiepileptic treatment may be slowly withdrawn.
Therapy should be reinstituted if seizures return with an
unacceptable frequency.
Refractory Head Trauma
Failure of fluid therapy, oxygenation and ventilation strategies, and osmotic diuretics to stabilize the patient and/
or improve the neurologic status significantly warrants
radical therapy and such cases should be considered for
advanced imaging such as MRI. The treatments discussed
here have not been evaluated in veterinary medicine in
terms of their efficacy and remain controversial or
unproven in human head trauma.
Hyperventilation

Hyperventilation has been suggested as a method of
quickly lowering ICP. Hypercapnia causes vasodilation
and subsequent increases in ICP so hypoventilation
should be avoided. Mechanical or manual ventilation
may be used to lower partial pressure of carbon dioxide
in the arterial blood (PaCO2 <35 mmHg) to reduce ICP
in deteriorating patients responsive to no other treatment and with no surgical lesions. The prolonged use of
hyperventilation should be avoided as reduction in cerebral PaCO2 less than 30–35 mmHg causes vasoconstriction which ultimately leads to decreased cerebral
blood flow and ischemia.
Hypothermia

At this time, hypothermia is an experimental treatment
which has not been validated in veterinary medicine and
remains controversial in human medicine. Following
trauma, the cerebral metabolic rate may be increased,
leading to exacerbating secondary effects. Controlled
hypothermia and induction of coma reduce cerebral
metabolic rate and have been reported in human head

trauma patients and recently in a veterinary patient.
Hypothermia can be achieved by cooling a patient to a
rectal temperature of 32–35 °C, which reduces cerebral
metabolic rate and oxygen consumption, leading to
decreased CBF and ICP. However, reduction of core
body temperature carries risks and may lead to the
development of cardiac arrhythmias, coagulopathies,
electrolyte disturbances, hypovolemia, and insulin resistance. Coma may also be induced using barbiturates, but
this prevents neurologic evaluation and requires
induction of mechanical ventilation.
Surgery

Surgical intervention is reserved for patients that do
not improve or deteriorate despite aggressive medical
therapy. Advanced imaging (CT or MRI) is necessary
for surgical planning and is also reserved for similar
patients. Surgery may be indicated to remove hematomas,
relieve intracranial pressure, or address skull fractures.
Ventricular obliteration and mass effect identified on
advanced imaging should be considered strong indicators for surgical treatment in any animal which does not
improve with medical therapy.
Extraaxial hematomas can be removed through a
­generous craniectomy. Surgery in these patients may
lead to significant hemorrhage requiring blood transfusions. Removal of hematomas may exacerbate bleeding
as compression of bleeding vessels is removed, leading
to reaccumulation of blood even after surgery. Intraaxial
hematomas are typically managed conservatively. Surgery
may be indicated in a deteriorating patient with subacute
enlargement of a previously small hematoma.
Hemorrhagic parenchymal contusions can cause
severe neurologic signs, depending on their location.
They are typically managed conservatively. Cerebellar
contusions causing fourth ventricle and brainstem compression are an indication for surgery in humans in an
effort to reduce continued compression and the risk of
herniation. Surgery for cerebellar contusions may be
indicated prior to neurologic deterioration because these
signs are less reversible with conservative management.
Intracranial hypertension should be treated initially
with the therapies discussed previously. However, in
about 20% of human head trauma patients, additional
decompressive surgery is also required. Surgery is beneficial in deteriorating patients before irreversible brain
damage occurs indicated by bilateral pupillary dilation.
Surgical intervention for intracranial hypertension
involves creation of a large craniectomy over the most
affected site followed by a durectomy or duraplasty to
allow the brain to swell.
Typically, skull fractures do not require surgical intervention. However, significantly contaminated, comminuted
fractures may require surgical debridement, especially if

757

VetBooks.ir

758

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

open. In dogs, such fractures of the frontal sinus may be
associated with traumatic pneumocephalus and this
should be considered in any dog deteriorating despite
aggressive medical therapy. If surgical intervention is
pursued, aggressive debridement should include removal
of all devitalized tissues and bone and should be guided
by imaging. Large bone fragments may be spared and
replaced after thorough debridement, cleaning, and
soaking in an antibiotic solution.
Following surgery, seizure and antibiotic prophylaxis
are recommended. Phenobarbital at 2–3 mg/kg IV every
6–8 hours for 48 hours followed by maintenance parenteral therapy is advised. An alternative approach is to use
levetiracetam at 20–60 mg/kg IV every 8 hours followed
by 20 mg/kg orally every 8 hours.
Prognosis for Animals with Head Trauma
Prognosis is dependent on severity of neurologic signs
and response to treatment. Potential complications
associated with brain trauma include coagulopathies,
pneumonia, sepsis, transient or permanent central diabetes insipidus, and seizures. Treatment in brain trauma
patients should be immediate and aggressive if the
animal is to survive and recover to a level that is functional and acceptable to the owner. The ultimate goal in
the management of brain trauma in veterinary medicine
is for the pet to maintain a good quality of life. Many
patients can recover if systemic and neurologic abnormalities are identified and treated early. Dogs and cats
have a remarkable ability to compensate for the loss of
cerebral tissue, making it important not to make rapid
prognostic conclusions based on the initial appearance
of a pet suffering from brain injury.

Predicting the outcome for an individual patient can be
difficult. Multiple prognostic factors have been identified
in human medicine. The most important factors identified include age, cause of injury, Glasgow Coma Scale
motor score, pupil response to light, and CT scan characteristics, including the presence of subarachnoid hemorrhage. Secondary insults of hypotension and hypoxia have
also been found to add important predictive information.
The association between a patient’s score using the
MGCS and prognosis has been evaluated. This evaluation
showed an almost linear correlation between score and
probability of survival within the first 72 hours. Therefore,
patients with a high score had a high probability of survival
while patients scoring low on the MGCS were unlikely to
survive. A score of 8 on the MGCS was associated with
about a 50% chance of survival. The MGCS was recently
evaluated with long‐term survival at one and six months
following injury. Again, a linear trend between MGCS and
survival at one and six months was demonstrated. An association between MGCS and long‐term patient outcome
could allow prediction of acceptable patient recovery and
aid in decision making at the time of injury.
In humans with head trauma, hyperglycemia on admission is a frequent component of the stress response to
the injury, a significant indicator of severity of injury, and
a potent predictor of the patient’s outcome. A recent
study in dogs and cats suggests that head trauma in these
species may be associated with hyperglycemia and that
the degree of hyperglycemia can be associated with
severity of head trauma. However, the degree of hyperglycemia does not seem to be associated with outcome for
dogs and cats with head trauma. Because hyperglycemia
can potentiate neurologic injury, iatrogenic hyperglycemia should be avoided in patients with head trauma.

VetBooks.ir

759

70
Seizures and Movement Disorders
Michael Podell, DVM, DACVIM (Neurology)
MedVet, Worthington, OH, USA

­Seizures
Pathophysiology
Epilepsy is a heterogeneous disease of diverse etiology,
electrophysiologic and behavioral seizure patterns, and
responses to treatment. As such, the pathogenesis of
epilepsy is multifactorial. Genetically determined seizure susceptibility factors play a crucial role in the
response of the brain to triggering or precipitating factors, also known as the seizure threshold.
A basic tenet in the mechanism of epilepsy is the presence of an imbalance in excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmission. A seizure develops when the balance shifts
towards excessive excitation. Glutamate is the principal
excitatory neurotransmitter and gamma‐aminobutyric
acid (GABA) is the main inhibitory neurotransmitter
involved in this process in the brain. Conditions leading
to excessive excitation or loss of inhibition result in
depolarization of neurons without normal regulatory
feedback mechanisms. The result is a paroxysmal depolarization shift of a neuronal aggregate. In response to
this sudden change in brain activity, local surrounding
inhibitory zones are established to try to prevent the
spread of this epileptogenic activity. If inhibition is
unsuccessful, other neuronal aggregates are excited
through thalamocortical recruitment, intrahemispheric
association pathways or interhemispheric commissural
pathways. Successful recruitment of a critical number of
areas with synchronized depolarization then leads to a
seizure (Figure 70.1).
History and Clinical Signs
Classification of seizures and epilepsy into a universally
accepted, coherent and relevant scheme for clinicians
has been an ongoing dynamic process in human epilepsy

since the early 1980s. The standardized classification
scheme for seizures and epilepsy established by the
International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) in the
1980s provided the first basis for a taxonomic foundation
for an analytic approach in the diagnosis and treatment
of epilepsy. The proposed diagnostic scheme consists of
five levels or axes as proposed by Engel and revised by
Berg et al. for people and Podell for dogs (Box 70.1).
Axis 1: Seizure (Ictal) Phenomenology

A seizure can be defined as a nonspecific, paroxysmal,
abnormal event of the body. An epileptic seizure is
defined by the ILAE as a transient occurrence of signs
and/or symptoms due to abnormal excessive or synchronous neuronal activity in the brain. Thus, an epileptic
seizure has a specific neural origin. Absolute confirmation that a seizure is epileptic may be difficult as it
requires simultaneous observation of behavioral and
electroencephalographic changes. As a result, historical
information is often used to diagnose an epileptic seizure. The clinical features of epileptic seizures can be
separated into four components.
1) The prodrome is the period prior to the onset of
­seizure activity. Owners report that they can “predict”
the onset of their pet’s seizures based on behavior
exhibited during this time, such as increased anxiety‐
related behavior (i.e., attention seeking, whining),
reluctance to perform normal activity patterns, and
increased hiding (especially in cats).
2) The aura is the initial manifestation of a seizure.
During this period, which can last from minutes to
hours, animals can exhibit stereotypical sensory or
motor behavior (e.g., pacing, licking), autonomic patterns
(e.g., salivating, urinating, vomiting) and even unusual psychiatric events (e.g., excessive barking,
increased/decreased attention seeking).

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

VetBooks.ir

760

REVERBERATING CIRCUITS

INHIBITORY SURROUND
FOCUS
INHIBITED
NEURONS

Multiple stimuli from thalamus
to bypass inhibited neurons

Figure 70.1 Pathophysiology of epileptic seizure generation.
Reverberating circuitry between the cerebrocortical epileptic focus
and the subcortical thalamic pathways provides a mechanism to
overcome the natural inhibitory surround defense against seizure
propagation that leads to expanding and propagating epileptic
seizure foci in epileptic patients. This process can become a
feed‐forward, self‐propagating mechanism of drug‐resistant
epilepsy when antiepileptic drug treatment is delayed.

3) The ictal period is the actual seizure event, manifested
by involuntary muscle tone or movement and/or
abnormal sensations or behavior, lasting usually from
seconds to minutes.
4) The postictal period follows the actual seizure and
can last from minutes to days. During this time, an
animal can exhibit unusual behavior, disorientation,
inappropriate bowel and/or bladder activity, excessive
or depressed thirst and appetite, or actual neurologic
deficits including weakness, blindness, and sensory/
motor disturbances. Often, owners observe only the
postictal period as evidence that their pet has had a
seizure.
Regardless of the cause, a patient’s epileptic seizures may
be recurrent over time or may occur as a single event. If
the patient has a chronic brain disorder characterized by
recurrent epileptic seizures, then that patient has epilepsy. Status epilepticus can be defined as a state of continuous seizure activity lasting for five minutes or longer,
or repeated seizures with failure to return to normality
within 30 minutes.

Box 70.1 Diagnostic categorization for epilepsy
Axis 1: Seizure (ictal) phenomenology
Seizure:
–– Epileptic seizure
–– Nonepileptic episodes
●● Epilepsy
●● Status epilepticus
●●

Axis 2: Seizure type
Focal:
–– Without impairment of consciousness or
awareness
○○ Sensory only (olfactory, hallucinatory)
○○ Motor and/or autonomic components
▪▪ Focal motor with or without automatisms
▪▪ Autonomic only
–– With impairment of consciousness or awareness
○○ Altered sensory and/or motor activity
○○ Evolving to generalized seizure
●● Generalized:
–– Tonic‐clonic
–– Tonic only
–– Clonic only
–– Atonic only
–– Myoclonic (or any combination with tonic, clonic, and/
or atonic)
●● Absence
●● Unknown cause
●●

Axis 3: Epilepsy syndromes
Electroclinical syndromes by age of onset
–– Neonatal
–– Infancy
–– Childhood
–– Adult
●● Structural or metabolic syndromes
●● Epileptic
encephalopathies (progressive neurologic
dysfunction)
●● Unknown cause (idiopathic)
●●

Axis 4: Etiology
Genetic
Structural (symptomatic)
–– Congenital
–– Acquired
●● Metabolic
●● Unknown
–– Cryptogenic
–– Idiopathic
●●
●●

Axis 5: Impairment from epilepsy
●●

Temporary (<1 week) vs prolonged (>1 week)
–– Motor: paresis, fatigue
–– Sensory: vision loss, somatosensory deficits
–– Behavioral: change in obedience, housebreaking,
altered attention seeking, agitation, anxiety

VetBooks.ir

70 Seizures and Movement Disorders

Axis 2: Seizure Type

Epileptic seizures are divided into focal and generalized
types. Focal seizures are the manifestation of a discrete,
epileptogenic event in the cerebral cortex. The focal
nature of this seizure type is associated with a higher
incidence of focal intracranial pathology. Focal seizures
can be associated with or without impaired consciousness or awareness and are typically characterized by
motor or sensory disturbances.
Focal motor seizures are commonly seen as facial muscle twitching whereas sensory focal seizures are manifested by more abnormal behavioral disorders.
More complex behavior patterns with focal seizures
include impaired consciousness, often with bizarre
behavioral activity. Previously termed complex partial or
psychomotor seizures, these events are now classified as
automatisms or automotor seizures. Animals may show
“fly‐biting” behavior patterns, become aggressive without provocation, howl incessantly, become restless or
exhibit a variety of motor disturbances. Cats may show a
variety of abnormal behaviors or motor signs, including
drooling, hippus, excessive vocalization or random,
rapid running behaviors indoors. Whenever a focal seizure is suspected, the clinician should be suspicious of a
focal cerebral disturbance and plan the diagnostic work‐
up accordingly.
Generalized seizures are subdivided into tonic‐clonic,
tonic, clonic, myoclonic, atonic or absence types. The
terms convulsive (grand mal) and nonconvulsive (petit
mal) seizures are no longer in use. Generalized seizures
originate from both cerebral hemispheres from the start,
or more commonly progress secondarily from focal seizures. Unlike focal seizures, generalized seizures are not
necessarily associated with focal cerebrocortical disease.
Epileptic spasms are currently classified as a discrete
seizure type, as it has yet to be determined whether these
events have a focal or generalized onset based on electroclinical data from humans.
Axis 3: Syndrome

By definition, a syndrome is a group of signs or characteristics that defines a particular combination of clinical
abnormalities, often due to a specific genetic disorder.
Epilepsy syndromes are not well defined in veterinary
medicine, although familial epilepsies are now being
identified with segregation analysis.
Axis 4: Etiology
Genetic (Idiopathic) Epilepsy

A diagnosis of genetic epilepsy is most common in pure‐
bred dogs with the first onset of seizures between 1 and
5 years old, a normal interictal neurologic examination,
and if there is a lengthy initial interictal period (>4
weeks). A high percentage of these patients also exhibit

cluster seizures. A genetic basis has been reported in
numerous dog breeds, including Belgian shepherd dogs,
border collies, poodles, beagles, springer spaniels,
Shetland sheepdogs, vizslas, Irish wolfhounds, lagotto
Romagnolos, and retrievers. True genetic epilepsy is
much less common in cats due to their more diverse
genetic background. As such, all cats should be evaluated
for underlying structural or metabolic seizures before a
diagnosis of genetic epilepsy is made.
Structural or Symptomatic Epilepsy

These types of epileptic seizures are the direct result of
either structural brain pathology or metabolic disease.
Younger animals are more prone to developmental and
encephalitic diseases, while older dogs (>7 years of age)
are more likely to develop intracranial neoplasia. As
expected with underlying cerebral pathology, these animals are more likely to exhibit focal or multifocal neurologic deficits. However, focal lesions in “silent” cortical
areas of the brain (e.g., olfactory, pyriform and occipital
lobes) may have seizures as the only neurologic problem.
This presentation has been seen in cats due to feline
infectious peritonitis (FIP) and meningioma. Metabolic
(formerly reactive) epileptic seizures are a reaction of the
normal brain to transient systemic insult, toxic reaction
or physiologic stresses. Animals of any age may be
affected. Small‐breed dogs are more predisposed to
develop seizures secondary to portosystemic shunts at a
younger age. Typically, a higher seizure frequency occurs
initially until the underlying metabolic or toxic insult is
corrected, but evidence of systemic illness is often
present concurrently.
Unknown Cause of Epileptic Seizures

A variety of epileptic seizures arise without an apparent
cause but are thought to have a more specific etiology.
Previously termed or cryptogenic epileptic seizures,
these events are believed to be due to an underlying unidentified brain disease. Many of these dogs are over the
age of 7 without identifiable brain lesions but with a high
prevalence of drug‐resistant epilepsy, with close to 90%
of the cases requiring more than one antiepileptic drug
(AED) for treatment.
Axis 5: Impairment from Epilepsy

The majority of postictal signs in cats and dogs are transient, such as disorientation, visual impairment, salivation, incontinence, and altered behavior. More prolonged
or recurrent seizure activity can lead to permanent sensory deficits (vision deficits), cognitive changes (altered
obedience), and loss of normal personality. Chronic seizures have been shown to induce microglial activation
and cerebral angiogenesis in Shetland sheepdogs with
familial epilepsy.

761

VetBooks.ir

762

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

Diagnosis
The most important component in approaching a ­seizure
case is acquiring a thorough and accurate history. The
purpose is to establish overall frequency, seizure type,
patterns of occurrence, relationship to daily activity (e.g.,
exercise, sleep) and severity of postictal effects. Inquiries
regarding the seizure event should address a description
of the event, time of day, duration, and postictal effects.
Video segments of events can be extremely helpful for
clinicians to determine whether an epileptic event has
occurred. Owners should be encouraged to video an
event if possible and to try and distract the animal to
determine whether the event can be terminated with
external stimuli. Distractability often implies a nonepileptic event. A charting technique measuring seizure frequency and severity should be developed to aid objective
evaluation of future therapeutic success. Owners should
be provided with a calendar to record the frequency and
description of all observed and suspected seizures.
The interictal status of cerebrocortical function
(between seizures and after the postictal period) can be
evaluated by asking questions concerning the animal’s
behavior, vision, gait, and sleep/wake patterns. For example, if the dog is more withdrawn or attention seeking,
showing any unusual episodes of aggression or irritability, or fails to follow simple commands, then a structural
cerebral problem should be suspected. Likewise, subtle
gait disturbances (stumbling up or down the stairs), visual disturbances (occasionally bumping into objects on
one side) and restless sleep patterns may indicate forebrain problems.
The sequence of diagnostic testing for any animal with
seizures should proceed from the least to the most invasive (and expensive) modality. A complete blood count
(CBC), biochemistry panel, urinalysis, and blood pressure measurement should be performed for all animals
being evaluated for an epileptic seizure.
For dogs, additional testing is based upon the age,
breed, seizure type, seizure frequency, and neurologic
examination findings.
Advanced Metabolic and Infectious Disease Testing

Pre‐ and postprandial serum bile acid study with serum
ammonia levels in dogs less than 1 year of age and those
being started on hepatic metabolized antiepileptic drug
(AED) therapy.
Other individual tests for toxin exposure (e.g., plasma
lead, serum cholinesterase assay), parasitic or rickettsial
infection, or systemic illness are based on the clinical
picture at the time of presentation. For cats, basic screening should include a retroviral screen for feline leukemia
and feline immunodeficiency virus and testing for serum
antibodies to Toxoplasma gondii. Testing for the virus

that causes feline infectious peritonitis is not recommended, as the correlation between a positive titer and
active CNS infection is low.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Brain Scan

All dogs 7 years of age or older and all cats with an initial onset of seizure(s), regardless of the seizure pattern
or frequency or outcome of neurologic examination.
●● Patients with an abnormal interictal exam or behavior.
●● Drug‐resistant epileptic patients.
●● Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis is recommended in
any animal with multifocal neurologic deficits or lesions
observed on MRI scans or if the scan is normal.
●●

Electroencephalogram (EEG)

Electroencephalogram analysis is beneficial for identifying underlying epileptic foci in the dog but the overall
usefulness of this test for determining diagnosis and
treatment has yet to be proven.
Therapy
Management of epilepsy in cats and dogs often requires
a lifetime commitment by the owners. The owner must
be willing to medicate their pet several times per day,
travel to emergency clinics at unpredictable times, follow
up with periodic reevaluations and diagnostic testing,
and watch their pet carefully for adverse effects of
therapy.
Despite all the time, financial, and emotional commitment, a significant number of dogs may still continue to
have seizures. Thus, proper client education is critical in
preparing owners for understanding their pet’s condition
and the potential associated lifestyle changes. In particular, owners need to know that a diagnosis of epilepsy
implies an increased risk of premature death with the
prognosis dependent on a combination of veterinary
expertise, therapeutic success, and owner motivation.
Decision‐Making Strategies for AED Therapy

The decision regarding when to start AED treatment is
based on a number of factors, including etiology, risk of
recurrence, seizure type and its effect on the patient, as
well as the risk of treatment. Risk factors for seizure
recurrence are not well established for cats and dogs. A
number of relative risk factors have been identified in
epileptic people, including current or previously defined
cerebral lesions or trauma, the presence of interictal EEG
epileptic discharges (up to 90% recurrence rate) and a
history of marked postictal adverse effects (Todd paralysis). Evidence‐based guidelines from several international groups are well established for humans based on
the risk:benefit ratio and predictability factors of drug

VetBooks.ir

70 Seizures and Movement Disorders

effect. From these guidelines, several commonalities
exist for guiding clinical practice, including confirmation
of an epileptic seizure event and seizure type, obtaining a
definitive diagnosis, knowledge that recurrent seizure
activity is correlated with poorer long‐term treatment
success, and the influence of treatment on the patient’s
quality of life. Thus, the decision to treat is a reflection of
the treatment goals to reduce or eliminate epileptic
events, reduce seizure severity, avoid adverse effects, and
reduce seizure‐related mortality and morbidity.
Initiating Treatment

Overwhelming evidence exists in humans that there is
no benefit in starting treatment after a single unprovoked event However, the earlier AED therapy is initiated, the better the potential outcome may be for seizure
control.
Reasons to initiate AED therapy include the following.
Structural epilepsy is diagnosed.
Status epilepticus has occurred (ictal event of five
minutes or longer).
●● Two or more isolated seizures occur within a six‐month
period.
●● Two or more cluster seizure events (two or more seizures within a 24‐hour period) occur within a 2–3‐
month period.
●● The first seizure is within one month of a traumatic event.
●● Severe or unusual postictal effects are present (e.g.,
prolonged blindness, aggression).
●●

●●

Drug Selection

Selection of AED is based on a number of factors, including seizure type, efficacy, and tolerability. No evidence
exists that any single AED provides a better outcome for
adults with unprovoked epilepsy when early treatment is
initiated. Monotherapy is still the recommendation for
new‐onset epilepsy. The use of a single AED has the
advantages of no drug interactions, more predictable
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties, less
potential for adverse effects, and less expense to the
client.
Antiepileptic drugs are classified into three broad
mechanistic categories which decrease either the seizure
onset or spread of seizures:
enhancement of inhibitory processes via facilitation of
GABA action
●● reduction of excitatory transmission
●● modulation of membrane cation conductance.
●●

Success Parameters

The treatment of epilepsy should be goal oriented and
approached in an objective fashion. Eliminating or significantly reducing the number and severity of seizures

and maintaining a normal lifestyle for both the patient
and owner are all important considerations. Whilst many
drugs may provide initial improvement in seizure
control, long‐term efficacy is dependent on many f­ actors.
With only approximately 60–80% of human and canine
epileptic patients responding to treatment, evaluating
the reasons for recurrent seizure activity (refractory
­epilepsy) is important.
These factors can be separated into three “Ds”:
Disease‐related, Drug‐related or Dynamic‐related factors. Disease‐related factors include the presence of an
undiagnosed underlying brain disease, such as cortical
dysplasia, prior trauma or an active disease process.
Occult conditions can lead to localization‐related epilepsy, where epileptic foci develop drug resistance due to
architectural brain changes.
Drug‐related factors include an ineffective mechanism
of action, development of tolerance and alteration of the
drug target or uptake over time. Seizure‐specific therapy
targets a drug for a specific seizure type, and inappropriate drug selection may result in poor control. The reasons for drug tolerance or loss of effectiveness can be
categorized as either metabolic (pharmacokinetic) or
functional (pharmacodynamic). Metabolic tolerance is
due to altered drug metabolism, which occurs in an
unpredictable fashion. As such, a change in drug dosage
does not result in a parallel change in serum drug level.
During this time, autoinduction of the cytochrome P450
enzyme system increases drug clearance and is not dose
dependent. Serum drug levels decline over time with the
same dose until steady‐state clearance is achieved.
Concomitant drug usage that either inhibits or stimulates the P450 system also alters hepatic metabolized
AED levels. Functional drug tolerance, also known as
pharmacoresistance, is due to reduced drug transport
through the blood–brain barrier, long‐term downregulation of the target receptor or genetic factors that alter
cellular metabolism of the drug.
Dynamic‐related factors are now being discovered in
relation to gene polymorphisms that affect AED pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic properties. As a
result, altered drug metabolism or action is no longer
predictable when compared with the general patient
population. In addition, a placebo effect has been demonstrated in epileptic dogs, indicating that nonpharmacologic therapeutic effects may play a role in canine
epilepsy treatment.
First‐Generation AEDs
Phenobarbital

Phenobarbital (PB) has the longest history of chronic use
of all AEDs in veterinary medicine. It is a relatively
inexpensive, well‐tolerated drug and has documented
success in preventing seizures. Phenobarbital has a high

763

VetBooks.ir

764

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

bioavailability, being rapidly absorbed within two hours
and with a maximal plasma concentration obtained
within 4–8 hours following oral administration. Almost
one‐half of the drug is protein bound. The majority of
phenobarbital is metabolized by the liver, with approximately one‐third excreted unchanged in the urine.
Phenobarbital is an autoinducer of hepatic microsomal
enzymes (P450 system), which can progressively reduce
the elimination half‐life with chronic dosing.
Adverse Effects Overall, phenobarbital is well tolerated
at therapeutic serum concentrations in the dog and cat.
Idiosyncratic drug reactions to phenobarbital can be
either behavioral or biochemically mediated. A more
serious idiosyncratic reaction is development of an
immune‐mediated neutropenia or thrombocytopenia in
dogs, as well as anemia. Rare acute, idiosyncratic hepatotoxic reactions may also be present, as evidenced by a
rapid elevation of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and
abnormal dynamic bile acid levels. The drug should be
stopped immediately if either neutropenia or dramatic
elevations in ALT are noted and replaced with a nonhepatic metabolized AED.
The most serious and potentially life‐threatening complications that can occur with long‐term phenobarbital
therapy are hepatotoxicity and development of superficial necrolytic dermatitis in dogs. Documentation of a
serum phenobarbital concentration >35 μg/mL had the
highest correlation with the development of hepatotoxicity. All animals on chronic phenobarbital therapy
should have a routine biochemistry panel performed
every 6–12 months to monitor for the development of
chronic hepatotoxicity. A bile acid tolerance test should
be performed to evaluate liver function if ALT levels suddenly increase or if the serum albumin level starts to
decrease. Hepatotoxicity is uncommon to occur in cats.
Dosage and Monitoring The appropriate starting dose of
phenobarbital is 2.5 mg/kg orally q12h in dogs and 2.5
mg/kg q24h in cats. An intravenous loading dose can be
used to produce a rapid rise in serum blood concentration. This starting dose is the only time a weight‐based
dosage is used. All future adjustments should be based
on serum drug concentrations in conjunction with clinical
assessment.
The goal of drug level monitoring is to be proactive
rather than reactive in seizure prophylaxis. Serial serum
trough phenobarbital concentrations should be evaluated at 14, 60,180, and 360 days after the initiation of
treatment, at six‐month intervals thereafter, if the pet
has more than two seizure events between these time
points, and at two weeks after a dosage change. Although
blood level fluctuations may not be dramatic throughout
the day in dogs with steady‐state concentrations, blood

samples are best taken in the early morning, prior to dosing, in a fasted dog, to increase consistency in comparison with published information, maintain consistency in
interpretation, and remove diurnal or dietary‐induced
fluctuations of absorption.
Adjustments in AED dosages are undertaken either to
enhance the effect or to reduce the adverse effects. The
most efficacious and safe trough therapeutic phenobarbital range is 15–30 μg/mL. An optimal starting level is
between 20 and 25 μg/mL. Increments of 5 μg/mL are
beneficial if seizures are occurring at an equal frequency
or worsening after 30 days of therapy. Cats in general can
tolerate higher serum levels in the 30–45 range without
complications.
Adjustments of the trough phenobarbital levels can be
calculated with the following formula:
Desired concentration / Actual concentration
total mg PB per day Oral daily dose of PB mg
Potassium Bromide

Potassium bromide can be used as either monotherapy
or as an add‐on AED of choice in the dog. Concomitant
potassium bromide and phenobarbital administration
decreased seizure number and severity in the majority of
dogs in several studies, with seizure‐free status ranging
from 21% to 72% of all treated dogs. In general, many
canine refractory idiopathic epileptic patients may benefit from potassium bromide. By allowing a reduction in
the use of drugs metabolized by the liver, potassium
­bromide therapy may also reduce the incidence of hepatotoxicity. Bromide is not recommended for use in cats
due to potential for life‐threatening allergic asthmatic
reaction.
A starting dose of 40 mg/kg/day potassium bromide is slowly metabolized in the dog, with a
median elimination half‐life of 15.2 days, Steady‐state
concentrations fluctuate between dogs, most likely due
to individual differences in clearance and bioavailability.
Dietary factors also alter serum drug concentrations,
with high‐chloride diets resulting in excessive renal
secretion and lower serum concentrations.

Pharmacology

Potassium bromide is generally well tolerated in the dog. The most common adverse effects
seen with potassium bromide and phenobarbital combination therapy are polydipsia, polyphagia, increased
lethargy, and mild ataxia with increasing serum concentration. Pancreatitis and gastrointestinal intolerance
have also been reported. Chronic use at higher serum
concentations can result in pelvic limb ataxia and excess
sedation.

Adverse Effects

VetBooks.ir

70 Seizures and Movement Disorders

Administration and Monitoring Potassium bromide can
be administered at a starting dose of 40 mg/kg/day when
used as sole therapy or 30 mg/kg/day when used as an
add‐on drug to phenobarbital. Potassium bromide serum
concentration should be measured at one month and at
the first steady‐state concentration (approximately 8–12
weeks). The recommended goal is to achieve steady‐state
trough serum concentrations of 25 μg/mL for phenobarbital and 2000 mg/L for potassium bromide. The range is
highly individualized according to the seizure pattern of
each dog. Further reductions in phenobarbital can be
attempted if a seizure‐free period is maintained for six
months. The dosage is adjusted according to the formulae given below.
Potassium bromide monotherapy is recommended for
dogs with underlying liver disease, less frequent seizure
activity (<3 per year) and for some dogs with idiopathic
epilepsy. The use of potassium bromide monotherapy is
not recommended for high initial frequency seizure
activity, if secondary epilepsy is present, or if unwarranted adverse effects persist (e.g., weakness, extreme
polydipsia).
Adjustment of bromide dose can be calculated with
the following formula:

Target Css Actual Css
Clearance/Bioavailability
2000 mg/L Actual Css 0.02
New mg/kg/day added to existing dose
where Css = steady‐state concentration.
Second‐Generation AEDs
Zonisamide

This is a substituted 1,2‐benzisoxazole derivative that
works by both blocking the propagation of epileptic
discharges and suppressing focal epileptogenic activity. Broad‐spectrum antiepileptic activity has been
reported against a variety of seizure types, with
particular improvement in the treatment of adult
­
myoclonus epilepsy. Zonisamide can be an efficacious
and well‐tolerated drug in dogs with recurrent
generalized seizures refractory to phenobarbital or
­
potassium bromide therapy. Over 70% of dogs
with refractory idiopathic epilepsy responded well to
zonisamide add‐on therapy in one study, with 58%
responding favorably in another.
Zonisamide is well absorbed, has a relatively long half‐life (18–28 hours) and high protein‐binding affinity (70%) in dogs. In cats, zonisamide is more
slowly metabolized, with a half‐life of 33 hours.
Zonisamide is hepatic metabolized and thus influenced
by concurrent administration of other similarly metabolized drugs. Phenobarbital dosages should be reduced by

Pharmacology

25% at the time of starting zonisamide due to the
enhanced hepatic enzyme induction and clearance of
zonisamide.
The major adverse effects include
sedation, dry eye, ataxia, inappetence, and vomiting,
often related to metabolic and renal tubular acidosis.
Cats are more likely to develop adverse effects of anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, and ataxia at doses over 10
mg/kg/day. A decrease in circulating total serum T4
levels can occur and acute ­idiosyncratic hepatic necrosis has been reported in the dog. Patients with a history
of sulfa drug hypersensitivity should not be prescribed
zonisamide.

Adverse Effects

Dosage and Monitoring Zonisamide is available as a
generic medication in dosages of 25 mg, 50 mg, and 100
mg. The starting dose in dogs is 10 mg/kg every 12 hours
and 5 mg/kg once daily in cats. Trough serum drug levels
should be obtained at 14 and 45 days, then every six
months if no seizures are observed or in 10 days after a
drug adjustment.
Levetiracetam

This is the S‐enantiomer of the ethyl analogue of
piracetam and has a unique mechanism of action mediated by binding to the presynaptic vesicular protein,
SV2A, which decreases glutamate neurotransmitter. The
drug has shown to be an effective add‐on AED in the cat
but not as conclusive in the dog.
In dogs, the drug is well absorbed, is rapidly metabolized with an estimated elimination half‐life
of 4–8 hours, and is predominantly renal excreted
(>80%). However, wide fluctuations of drug metabolism
occur in the dog. The oral dose should be increased
when dogs are receiving phenobarbital concurrently as
lower serum levels can potentially be related to the
­induction of serum hydrolases. A new extended‐release
formulation of levetiracetam has been shown to have a
half‐life in excess of seven hours in dogs following
oral administration, giving rise to the potential for
twice‐daily administration

Pharmacology

Adverse Effects Levetiracetam is the best tolerated of all
the current AEDs used in veterinary medicine. Sedation
is the most common initial adverse effect that typically
dissipates over time.
Dosage and Monitoring The initial dose of 10–20 mg/
kg orally q12h is gradually incremented to ≥20 mg/kg
orally q8h. The therapeutic range is not well defined
and drug monitoring is recommended only to establish
the pharmacokinetic pattern of the individual patient.

765

VetBooks.ir

766

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

Drug tolerance over time, known as the “honeymoon
effect,” can occur. However, wide individual patient
drug metabolism may be associated with this phenomenon. As such, this author advocates incremental escalation by 10 mg/kg/dose per week when seizures persist
to a maximal tolerated dose. No upper limit dosage
exists due to a high therapeutic index (safety) for
this drug. A parenteral formulation is available for
intravenous loading at 40–60 mg/kg over 15–30
­minutes in a 1:1 diluted saline solution.

dependence, compared to the full agonist AED drugs like
phenobarbital and diazepam. Imepitoin was recently
approved for use in canine epilepsy in Europe and is
undergoing clinical investigation for FDA approval in
the United States.

Third‐Generation AEDs
Lacosamide

Cats and dogs can develop a variety of unusual movement
disorders that bewilder even the most seasoned clinicians
due to the difficulty in determining their ­neuroanatomic
origin and etiology. Movement disorders include a wide
range of neurologic disturbances, characterized by either
excess (hyperkinesia) or reduced (bradykinesia) movements. These abnormal involuntary movements (AIMs)
refer to a number of muscle jerks, twitches, postures, and
oscillations that have been ­classified in human neurology
with official terms such as tic, chorea, tremor, dystonia,
and myoclonus. Uncontrolled muscle contractions may be
of muscle or neuronal origin.

This is a functionalized amino acid proven to decrease
neuronal discharge frequency and synaptic excitability.
The postulated mechanisms of action include selective
slow inactivation of sodium channels and novel binding
to collapsin response mediator protein‐2. In humans, the
drug is well absorbed, has minimal first‐pass effect with
predominant renal excretion, low protein binding,
favorable drug–drug interactions with other AEDs, and
is well tolerated. Clinical trials in humans have demonstrated a comparable decrease in seizure frequency with
that of levetiracetam and zonisamide at a dose of 100–
200 mg orally q12h. A parenteral formulation is available
for intravenous loading. The author has used lacosamide
to successfully treat refractory idiopathic epilepsy in
dogs at a dose range of 5–10 mg/kg q12h.
Rufinamide

This novel drug is structurally unrelated to any other
AED. Its main mechanism of action is related to prolongation of the inactive state of the sodium channel, thus
preventing neuronal depolarization. In humans, the drug
is absorbed slowly and has low bioavailability. Renal
excretion is high and no induction of the hepatic P450
system has been found, although other hepatically
metabolized drugs decrease the serum concentration. Of
a total of nine double‐blinded studies in humans, five
revealed a positive effect of rufinamide to treat refractory partial seizures but not generalized seizures. In beagle dogs, the mean terminal half‐life ranged between five
and 14 hours. In people, dose‐dependent adverse effects
include sedation, fatigue, and dizziness. Initial dosing in
the dog is 20 mg/kg q12h. Serum concentration can be
monitored to achieve a therapeutic range of 10–25 μg/
mL. A parenteral formulation is not currently available.
Imepitoin

This drug is the first AED that acts as a low‐affinity
­partial agonist at the GABA‐A benzodiazepine receptor
site. The advantage is that imepitoin is associated with
fewer adverse effects of sedation and ataxia, and is less
likely to develop functional drug tolerance or physical

A summary of AED therapy is shown in Table 70.1.

­Movement Disorders

History
The saying “A picture is worth a thousand words” is made
for movement disorders. The ability to visualize the
characteristics of AIMs should be supplemented with a
detailed history to characterize the nature of the movement disorder. Information regarding anatomic distribution, rhythmicity, amplitude, frequency, speed of onset
and offset of the movement, relationship to posture and
activity, situations that alleviate or exacerbate the movement, presence or absence during sleep, and affected
­littermates are all essential to help determine the neuroanatomic localization and potential etiology. If the
movement disorder is not present at the time of the
examination, owners should be encouraged to video
the events for future review. Many times, the initial few
minutes of observation will solidify the clinical perspective, allowing an accurate diagnostic and therapeutic
course of action to proceed.
Etiology and Pathophysiology
The process of initiation and completion of voluntary
movement is a complex one that relies on coordination
of serial communications between multiple components
of the central and peripheral nervous system. Failure of
any of these components to complete their assigned
tasks can result in either loss of the desired movement or
excessive, abnormal movements. A summary of movement disorders in dogs is provided in Box 70.2.

VetBooks.ir

Table 70.1 Summary of antiepileptic drug therapy in the dog
Clinical pharmacology

Vd (L/
kg)

Protein
binding
(%)

Drug

T1/2 (h)

Tss (d)

Therapeutic range

Dosage

IV load dose

Monitor

Guidance advice

Bromide

20–46
days

100–
200

0.45

0

Monotherapy: 1000–3000
mg/L; with phenobarbital at
1500–2500 mg/L

40–60 mg/
kg orally
q24h

3 % Sodium
bromide 800
mg/kg/24h

At 1 and 3 months and then
q6 months or q1 month
post dose change

Synergistic effect with
PB
No hepatotoxicity
Inexpensive

Clorazepate

5–6

1–2

1.6

85

20–75 μg/mL (nordiazepam)

2–4 mg/kg
PO q12h

No

NR

Longer acting than
diazepam
Complex partial
seizure therapy
Inexpensive

Felbamate

5–6

1–2

1.0

25

25–100 mg/L

20 mg/kg
PO q8h

No

NR

Complex partial
seizure therapy
Risk of blood dyscrasia
Expensive

Gabapentin

2–4

1

0.2

0

4–16 mg/L

10–20 mg/
kg PO
q8–12h

No

NR

For use with liver
compromised patients

Levetiracetam

4–8 and
2–4 with
PB

2–3

0.5

<10

Variable

10–40 mg/
kg orally
q8–12h

30–60 mg/
kg/15 min

Only to establish if
elimination half‐life is very
short

Very well tolerated
Minimal liver
metabolism
Use in older patients
first

Phenobarbital

24–40

10–14

0.8

40

15–35 mg/dL
Optimal level is 20 mg/dL

2.5 mg/kg
orally q12h

16 mg/kg/5
min

At 14, 45 and 180 days, then
q months or 14 day post
dose change

Effective and
predictable all seizure
types
Close monitoring first
3 months is essential

Zonisamide

15–20

3–4

1.5

50

10–40 μg/mL

5–10 mg/kg
PO q12h

No

At 2 and 6 weeks then q6
months or 14 day post dose
change

Effective and
predictable all seizure
types
Well tolerated Generic
available

Lacosamide

ND

ND

ND

ND

ND

5 mg/kg
q12h

3 mg/kg/15
min

ND

Well tolerated Very
expensive

Rufinamide

5–14

2–4

ND

ND

ND

20 mg/kg
PO q12h

No

At 1 week and q6 months

Well tolerated
Very expensive

IV, intravenous; ND, not determined; NR, not recommended; PB, phenobarbital; PO, by mouth (per os).

VetBooks.ir

768

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

Box 70.2 Classification of hyperkinetic movement disorder types
Neuromuscular disorders
Myotonia
Tetany and tremor
Hypocalcemia
Fasciculations
Benign
Exercise
Stress
Toxicity
Metabolic: hypercalcemia
Other causes of neuropathy
Myokimia
Environmental (hypothermia)
Central nervous system disorders
Noncerebellar
Myoclonus
Spinal
Proprioceptive
Epileptic
Toxicity
Tetanus
Tremor
Essential
Toxicity

Hyperkinetic Movement Disorders
Myotonia

Myotonia is a sustained muscle contraction with delayed
relaxation. Myotonia congenita has been reported in the
chow chow and miniature schnauzer dog breeds, and
seen sporadically in a number of other breeds. The disease is due to a failure of normal myocyte chloride conductance resulting in delayed muscle hyperpolarization,
and therefore delayed relaxation. As an inherited autosomnal recessive disease, puppies are affected from
birth. Clinical signs are seen within the first few months
of life and characterized by a stiff, “sawhorse” stance
upon ambulation, with improvement in gait as exercise
time increases. Some dogs may suffer from dysphagia
and respiratory problems due to contraction of the
tongue and oropharyngeal muscles. Affected dogs have
hypertrophied glossal and proximal appendicular muscles that exhibit percussion dimpling upon being struck
with a percussion hammer.
Electromyographic recordings demonstrate the classic
myotonic discharge of a high‐frequency waxing‐waning
spontaneous discharge that produces a “dive‐bomber” or
revving motorcycle sound. Muscle biopsy is typically
normal. Treatment revolves around avoiding excessive

Idiosyncratic drug‐induced
Metabolic
Hypoglycemia
Hepatic or uremic encephalopathy
Degenerative disease
Cerebellar‐related tremor disorders
Congenital
Neonatal syndromes
Hypoplasia
Malformation
Granuloprival degeneration
Hypo‐dysmyelinogenesis
Axonopathy
Postnatal syndromes
Abiotrophy
Lysosomal storage diseases
Acquired
Inflammatory
Infectious
Immune‐mediated
Neoplasm
Vascular/traumatic
Toxin
Idiopathic

exercise in the cold and maintaining a normal exercise
routine, as drug therapy has not been shown to be
effective.
Tetanus and Tetany

Tetanus is a continuous sustained extensor muscle
­contraction. The cause is the tetanus toxin released by
Clostridrium tetani bacterial infection of domestic
­animals. The disease occurs when the tetanus spores
localized to an anaerobic environment, such as a necrotic
wound, transform into the toxin‐producing form. The
exotoxin, tetanospasm, travels from the infected site via
peripheral nerves to the central nervous system. The
toxin prevents the release of the inhibitory neurotransmitter glycine from interneurons in the spinal cord and
brain, resulting in excessive excitation of brainstem and
motor neurons.
Both cats and dogs are fairly resistant to tetanus.
When infected, they can exhibit an extreme stiffness
progressing to extensor rigidity of all limbs, spastic facial
muscles and trismus within 5–10 days of infection. A
“grimacing” expression with the ears pulled back is usually seen. Occasionally, localized tetanus may affect only
a single limb or be confined to the facial muscles. Many

VetBooks.ir

70 Seizures and Movement Disorders

animals are hypersensitive to external stimuli. The diagnosis is based predominantly on a history of recent
wounds and clinical signs. Initial treatment consists of
aggressive wound debridement, parenteral penicillin
or metronidazole treatment, muscle relaxant therapy
(diazepam constant‐rate infusion at 0.3 mg/kg/h or
pentobarbital 3–10 mg/kg IV to effect) and nutritional
support. Tetanus antitoxin (100–1000 IU/kg IV) has
been reported to reduce the duration of clinical effects.
A test dose of 0.2 mL SC should be given first to test for
anaphylactic reaction. Careful attention should be given
to hydration and nutritional support, as the trismus can
prevent adequate fluid and food intake. Complete remission of clinical signs will usually occur within several
weeks to months.
Tetany is a variable and intermittent extensor muscle
contraction. It may accompany both central and peripheral nervous system diseases. In dogs, tetany is most
commonly seen with hypocalcemia‐associated parturition or hypoparathyroidism. Total calcium is typically
below 7.0 mg/dL. Dogs will often suffer from an inability
to rise, extensor muscle contractions, and hyperthermia
(from muscle contractions). Secondary hypoglycemia
may also be seen due to the excessive muscle movements. Treatment is focused on initial muscle relaxation
with benzodiazepines, followed by calcium and vitamin
D supplementation.

obese animals. One can usually detect a fine ­“rippling”
movement of the muscle as a sign of fasciculation.
The differential diagnoses of muscle fasciculations
range from the benign to the more severe neuromuscular disease. Benign, or contraction, fasciculations can be
seen after strenuous exercise and possibly in very tense
animals. Other transient muscle fasciculations can be
associated with hypercalemia, hypomagnesemia, and
certain toxic drug reactions, to include theophylline,
terbutaline, caffeine and methylxanthine (chocolate toxicity), and anticholinesterase agents (i.e., pyridostigmine
and neostigmine used for the treatment of myasthenia
gravis). Fasciculations associated with neuromuscular
disease are most likely to be present after the onset of
clinical signs of weakness. Degenerative feline and canine
motor unit disease and more advanced cases of distal
axonopathy in the dog are conditions that are more likely
to be associated with muscle fasciculations.
Myokimia is a pattern of abnormal muscle contraction
that produces a “rippling” or “writhing” appearance of
the area involved. The change is the result of spontaneous discharges of large motor units. Myokimia is an indication of neuronal disease followed by sprouting of the
motor unit territory in response to the denervation.
Myokimia or myokimia‐like syndrome has been
described in Jack Russell terriers and is associated with
hyperthermia and collapse.

Myoclonus

Tremor Syndromes

Myoclonus is defined as a sudden, rapid, involuntary
muscle movement of short duration caused by active
muscle contractions (positive myoclonus) or pauses in
muscle activity (negative myoclonus). Classification can
be by clinical presentation, site of origin, or etiology.
Reflex myoclonus to auditory stimuli has been reported
in the retriever dog breeds. Spinal myoclonus arises from
abnormal neuronal discharges originating in the spinal
cord and is of two main types: segmental and propriospinal. Segmental myoclonus can occur in canine distemper‐infected dogs, producing a repetitive, myoclonic jerk
motion of one or more limbs, even during sleep. Epileptic
and drug‐induced myoclonus in dogs are examples of an
etiologic classification.

A number of tremor syndromes have been described in
affected humans that are also seen in small animals.
Tremor is defined as a rhythmic oscillation of a body part
and classified according to its anatomic distribution, frequency (tremors/s, or Hertz) amplitude (fine or coarse
with increasing severity), presence at rest, standing (posture), or movement or performance of specific tasks
(intention), The degree of tremor (amplitude) is often
variable, and can be exacerbated with emotional (anxiety)
and physical activity and stimulant drugs (e.g., caffeine).
The two main types of tremor are known to occur either
at rest or with action. Rest tremor describes an involuntary, rhythmic oscillation of a body part completely supported against gravity. This tremor could be seen in a leg
with the animal lying down and not supporting weight.
Action tremor occurs during voluntary contraction of
skeletal muscle and is classified as postural, kinetic, isometric or task‐specific. Kinetic tremor describes oscillation during guided voluntary movement, also known as
an intentional tremor, and is the most common type seen
with cerebellar disease in small animals.

Fasciculations and Myokimia

Muscle fasciculations are spontaneous contractions of
muscle fibers within a motor unit and arise from ectopic
electrical activity in the distal axons. Fasciculations typically are the manifestation of irritability of the neuronal
cell body (motor neuron) or its accompanying axons. As
such, they are most often associated with motor neuron
disease and peripheral nerve disorders. Fasciculations can
be more readily observed in the distal appendicular muscles and the tongue but can be difficult to detect in more

Essential Tremors

Physiologic and essential tremor syndromes are the
most common in people and can occur in older dogs, in

769

VetBooks.ir

770

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

particular aging terrier breeds. In dogs, it is a pure clinical syndrome characterized by progressive action tremor
of pelvic limbs, starting with posture that worsens with
activity and excitement. Severity can range from barely
perceptible tremor to altered gait and balance problems.
Signs can progress as the dog ages.
Tremor Associated with Neuromuscular Disease

Tremor attributed to weakness is almost always associated with underlying nerve disease. Most likely, this type
of tremor is an exaggeration of the normal physiologic
tremor that results from the synchronized discharge of
enlarged motor units in patients with a reduced number
of surviving motor neurons. Dogs with advanced peripheral neuropathies can present with this type of tremor in
the pelvic limbs. The tremor is exaggerated after exercise
and while standing. Other conditions that directly affect
nerve function with this type of tremor include compressive neuropathy from lumbosacral disk disease or stenosis, nerve sheath tumors, and other mass effects or
entrapment syndromes involving the nerve.
Drug‐Induced Tremors

Drug‐induced tremor has been reported in the cat and
dog. Predictable tremor can be seen with stimulant toxicity (e.g., caffeine, amphetamines, cocaine, etc.). Other
potential drugs that have induced tremor in humans
include valproic acid, amiodarone, procainamide, and
lithium. Tardive dyskinesia represents a wide variety of
involuntary movements in humans, including chorea,
dystonia, akathisia, myoclonus, tremor, and stereotypies.
Stereotypy, or rhythmic involuntary movements, is the
most common manifestation resulting from exposure to
dopamine receptor‐blocking agents, such as phenothiazine (e.g., acepromazine) or antiemetic drugs (e.g.,
metoclopramide).
Cerebellar‐Related Tremors

By far the most common cause of tremor in small animals is cerebellar syndromes and disease. Cerebellar diseases are often associated with a conglomeration of signs
related to abnormal motor activity to include any or all of
the following: tremors, bilaterally symmetric ataxia without paresis, dysmetria, vestibular signs (head tilt, nystagmus, falling), absent menace with preservation of vision,
and pupillary changes. An altered resting posture is often
present, with affected animals demonstrating truncal
ataxia (swaying of the body back and forth or side to side)
and compensatory broad‐based stance for balance,
known at titubation (cerebellar postural tremor).
Cerebellar tremors are associated with diffuse cerebellar
cortical diseases. These intention tremors are characterized by a fine head tremor that worsens with initiation
of voluntary head movements. The more acute‐onset

diseases affecting the cerebellar cortex usually result in
more pronounced tremor disturbances. Severe action‐
related tremors may affect the entire body, with complete loss of all muscular coordination, and failure to
posture and prehend food. Ensuing hyperthermia, rhabdomyolysis, and related complications from continuous
muscle activity require that these patients be aggressively
treated on an emergency basis (see later). Fortunately,
many “pure” cerebellar diseases can be treated and/or
compensated for by the patient.
Cerebellar syndromes associated with tremor can be
divided into congenital and acquired diseases (see
Box 70.2). Congenital neonatal syndromes represent diseases of the newborn animal in which the clinical signs
are present from birth and nonprogressive. In contrast,
the clinical signs of congenital postnatal diseases begin
in the pediatric animal after birth and are slowly progressive. Acquired cerebellar diseases can be either acute or
chronic in onset, with rapid progression most commonly
seen with inflammatory diseases and toxic exposures
(e.g., mycotoxins, metaldehyde, macadamia nuts).
Diagnosis
The diagnostic approach to an animal with AIMs starts
with an evaluation of whether the movement disorder is
hyperknetic, hypokinetic or paroxysmal (Figure 70.2).
The next step is to determine if the animal exhibits any
signs of tremor of the head, neck or other areas of the
body. Animals without tremor should then be evaluated
for signs of excessive rigidity or stiffness. Constant extensor muscle rigidity is more likely to be a sign of tetanus,
while variable extensor muscle rigidity is associated with
tetany. An initial metabolic evaluation of a complete
blood count, serum chemistry panel, ionized calcium,
and creatine kinase should be performed. Tetanus is
diagnosed predominantly on clinical signs and history,
while tetany is diagnosed typically on the presence of
hypocalcemia or other metabolic disorder.
If no extensor muscle rigidity is detected, then signs of
abnormal muscle movement of myotonia, fasciculation,
or myokimia should be suspected. These signs are all
indicators of underlying neuromuscular disease, and as
such merit further specific diagnostic testing for either
peripheral neuropathy or myopathy. Again, an initial
metabolic evaluation of a complete blood count, serum
chemistry panel, ionized calcium, and creatine kinase
should be performed. The next level of testing would be
electrodiagnostic evaluation with electromyography and
nerve conduction testing. Electromyography (EMG)
tests the stability of the muscle membrane.
If tremor is present as part of the history or clinical
examination, then the next step is to determine if any
paresis is present. Care must be taken not to confuse

VetBooks.ir

70 Seizures and Movement Disorders

History:
Abnormal Involuntary Movement
Verbal or Video

HYPERKINETIC

No Tremor

Myotonia or
fasciculations

Metabolic evaluation
EMG and NCV testing
Consider muscle/nerve biopsy

Variable extensor muscle rigidity:
Tetany

Metabolic evaluation
Endocrine function testing
Diet evaluation

Constant extensor muscle rigidity:
Tetanus

Tremor

HYPOKINETIC

PAROXYSMAL

Evaluate for recent
drug exposure

Consider epileptic seizure

Paresis

No Paresis

Consider Multifocal
or noncerebellar disease

Consider Cerebellar
Disease

Metabolic evaluation

Acute onset

Progressive onset

Metabolic evaluation

Metabolic evaluation

Evaluate for toxicity

MRI scan of brain

Evaluate for toxicity
MRI scan and/or CSF analysis

Yes: Treat

Metabolic evaluation
Evaluate for wounds
Consider CSF analysis

If normal: CSF analysis

No: CSF Analysis

Normal:
Consider MRI scan

Figure 70.2 Diagnostic paradigm for hyperkinetic movement disorders.

weakness with falling from incoordination. A reliable
test is to hop an animal on each leg individually to see if
it will collapse on that leg during testing. A weak animal
will not be able to support weight on that limb, while an
uncoordinated one will. If paresis is present, then one
should consider either a multifocal or noncerebellar central nervous system disease. A history of possible toxicity
exposure should be ruled out prior to pursuing more
advanced testing. If the metabolic evaluation is normal
as stated above, then a MRI scan of the brain and/or spinal cord with possible cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis
is warranted to evaluate for the underlying etiology.
If paresis is not present with the tremor syndrome,
then it is most likely that the animal is suffering from a
pure cerebellar disease process. Acute onset of clinical
signs is now more suggestive of either a toxic reaction or
inflammatory disease process. If toxicity is documented,
then no further diagnostic testing may be needed, and
symptomatic therapy can be instituted. If toxicity cannot
be documented, then a CSF analysis is recommended. If
the CSF is normal, then MRI scanning of the brain may
be necessary. If the disease process is more chronic and
progressive in nature, then the patient should be evaluated for a possible mass lesion of the cerebellum with an
MRI scan prior to collection of CSF for analysis.

Treatment
The goal for the control of tremors in small animals is
to determine the etiology, remove any inciting cause
(toxin or iatrogenic), and provide immediate and
­prolonged symptomatic relief for acquired diseases.
A number of treatments for essential tremor have
been proposed for people, with varying results. First‐
line treatments useful in the dog include phenobarbital at 2.5 mg/kg PO BID, or a beta‐adrenergic
antagonist (propranolol 2.5–10 mg PO BID to TID).
Benzodiaze­pines appear not be effective in humans or
dogs (personal experience). Topiramate, has recently
been shown to be efficacious in refractory essential
tremor cases in humans at a dose range of 100–200
mg/day.
Recommended emergency treatment for acute onset
of suspected acquired tremor disease should be based
on an IV loading dose of diazepam or midazolam at 0.5
mg/kg IV followed by constant‐rate infusion (CRI) of
either drug at 0.5 mg/kg/h in 0.9% saline at 1.5 times the
maintenance fluid rate. This situation can be life‐threatening and requires a rapid therapeutic approach.
Adjuvant therapy to stabilize hyperthermia should be
given.

771

VetBooks.ir

772

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

­Further Reading
Brauer C, Jambroszyk M, Tipold A. Metabolic and toxic
causes of canine seizure disorders: a retrospective study
of 96 cases. Vet J 2011; 187(2): 272–5.
Monteiro R, Adams V, Keys D, et al. Canine idiopathic
epilepsy: prevalence, risk factors and outcome associated
with cluster seizures and status epilepticus. J Small
Animal Pract 2012; 53: 526–30.
Munana KR, Thomas WB, Inzana KD, et al. Evaluation of
levetiracetam as an adjunctive treatment for refractory

canine epilepsy: a randomized, placebo‐
controlled, crossover trial. J Vet Intern Med 2012;
26: 341–8.
Podell M. Antiepileptic drug therapy and monitoring.
Topics Compan Anim Med 2013; 28: 59–66.
Schwartz M, Munana KR, Nettifee‐Osborne J. Assessment
of the prevalence and clinical features of cryptogenic
epilepsy in dogs: 45 cases (2003–2011). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2013; 242: 651–7.

VetBooks.ir

773

71
Disorders of the Forebrain
Sam N. Long, BVSc, PhD, DipECVN
Centre for Animal Referral and Emergency, Melbourne, Australia

­Anatomy/Function
The forebrain, also known as the prosencephalon,
encompasses the two cerebral hemispheres, together
with the diencephalon (the most rostral part of the brainstem, itself consisting of the thalamus, hypothalamus,
and epithalamus). It is regarded as a region of the brain
separate from the rest of the brainstem because it is
separated in part by the tentorium cerebelli from the
other main compartment within the cranial vault, the
caudal fossa. In addition, the forebrain is responsible for
those functions in both animals and humans which are
commonly thought of as the “higher” functions: memory, behavior, personality, learning, and integration. It is
the forebrain that receives information from the outside
world, integrates it with memory and other functions,
makes decisions based on this information and predicts
the outcomes of those decisions in order to select the
most appropriate one. Anatomically, this occurs within
what are known as the association areas. Rather than
being a distinct area of the brain, the association areas
are a dense, interconnecting network of interneurons
with short axons and widespread dendrites that essentially have no beginning and no end. In dogs and cats, the
association areas represent approximately 20% of the
cerebral cortex compared with approximately 85% in
humans.
The other main areas within the cerebral cortex are the
projection areas. These regions are the primary sensory
and motor cortex (responsible for receiving sensation
and generating motor program output), the primary visual
and auditory centers (for receiving vision and hearing),
and the rhinencephalon (responsible for receiving
olfactory information – evolutionarily this is the most
primitive part of the brain).

Sitting between and below the cerebral hemispheres,
and connecting them to the rest of the brainstem, is the
diencephalon. The most important functional components of the diencephalon are the thalamus, a major
gateway for all information entering and leaving the
cortex, and the hypothalamus, which houses higher
control over the major endocrine systems such as the
pituitary–adrenal axis and thyroid function, amongst
others, as well as regulating temperature, appetite, and
sodium homeostasis.
The clinical significance of these anatomic structures
is that disorders affecting the forebrain result in the
clinical signs detailed in Table 71.1.

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Lesions within the forebrain can arise as one of a number
of pathologic processes, often categorized using the
DAMNIT‐V system (Degenerative, Anomalous, Metabolic,
Neoplastic/Nutritional, Inflammatory, Traumatic/Toxic
and Vascular). A complete list of differential diagnoses is
provided in Box 71.1.
It is important to note that clinical signs are dependent
not on the nature of the lesion/disease, but on where it
arises (and how rapidly). A patient presenting with signs
of right‐sided forebrain disease (e.g., circling, unilateral
blindness in the left eye with normal pupillary light
reflexes, left‐sided proprioceptive deficits) may be
­suffering from any one of the following diagnoses: an
ischemic infarct, a primary brain tumor, granulomatous
meningoencephalitis, or a bacterial abscess. For this reason, details of history and signalment are extremely
important to collect since they provide the only way of
narrowing this list of differentials.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

Table 71.1 Clinical signs of forebrain disease
Clinical sign

Notes

Seizures

Can occur with lesions in the cerebral hemispheres, thalamus or hypothalamus

Propulsive walking
Circling

Patients with forebrain disease circle towards the side of the lesion, but without signs of vestibular disease
(no head tilt or nystagmus present)

Head pressing
Obtundation

Obtundation describes decreased responsiveness to normal stimuli. This is often a sign of bilaterally
symmetric, global cerebral hemisphere disturbance. Further disturbance of level of consciousness (i.e., stupor
or coma) is more likely to signify the presence of a brainstem lesion

Contralateral cortical Absent menace response (as a result of absent vision) with normal consensual and indirect pupillary light reflex
blindness
occurs as a result of lesions in the occipital cortex or affecting the internal capsule, caudal to the level of the
lateral geniculate nucleus, on the side opposite the affected eye
Proprioceptive
deficits

Patients with forebrain disease often have a relatively normal gait but significant proprioceptive deficits that are
only evident on testing or on negotiating stairs or other difficult terrain

Decerebrate rigidity

Decerebrate rigidity (increased extensor tone in all four limbs with opisthotonus) indicates severe, bilateral
forebrain disease and is a reflection of functional disconnection of the cerebral peduncles from the brainstem

Hemi‐inattention
syndrome

This occurs rarely as a result of lesions affecting the sensory cortex and is most commonly evident while eating.
Patients with hemi‐inattention syndrome will eat one half of a bowl of food, apparently ignoring the other half unless
it is rotated 180°. The lesion is situated within the cerebral hemisphere contralateral to the “ignored” side of the body

Behavioral/memory
changes

The most commonly noted behavioral and memory changes seen in patients with forebrain disease include loss
of toilet training, loss of recognition of family members or toys, and changes in personality

Vestibular signs

Lesions in the thalamus will rarely produce vestibular signs. This is most commonly reported in patients with
cerebrovascular accidents

Box 71.1 Differential diagnoses for forebrain disease according to underlying etiology
Degenerative
Anomalous

Metabolic

Neoplastic

Nutritional
Infectious/inflammatory

Inflammatory (noninfectious)
Idiopathic
Toxins

Vascular

Lysosomal storage diseases
L2‐hydroxyglutaric aciduria in Staffordshire terriers
Hydrocephalus
Lissencephaly
Porencephaly
Hydranencephaly
Meningoencephalocele (Dandy‐Walker syndrome)
Hepatic encephalopathy
Renal (uremic) encephalopathy
Hypoglycemia
Electrolyte abnormalities: hypo/hypernatremia
Hypothyroid myxedema coma
Meningiomas
Glial tumors:
Oligodendrogliomas
Astrocytomas
Ependymomas
Choroid plexus tumors
Pituitary tumors
Metastatic disease
Lymphosarcoma
Thiamine deficiency
Viral: distemper, feline infectious peritonitis, rabies, Borna disease virus
Protozoal: Toxoplasma, Neospora
Fungal: Cryptococcus, Aspergillus, blastomycosis, others (pheohyphomycotic encephalitis)
Rickettsial: Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Ehrlichia
Bacterial: abscess; meningitis
Parasitic: Cuterebra, verminous encephalitis
Granulomatous meningomyeloencephalitis
Necrotizing encephalitides
Idiopathic epilepsy
Lead
Organophosphate
Metronidazole
Cyanide, sodium fluoroacetate, hydrocarbons, other heavy metals
Hemorrhagic and ischemic infarcts
Feline ischemic encephalopathy

VetBooks.ir

71 Disorders of the Forebrain

­Degenerative and
Developmental Causes
Storage Diseases
There are a large number of diseases caused by congenital
deficiencies in the enzymatic pathways that are involved
in degrading lysosomal waste products within cells. The
biochemical pathways involved are complex but the
majority of described storage diseases involve a deficiency of a lysosomal acid hydrolase enzyme. A deficiency
in any one enzyme leads to a build‐up of undegraded
products within lysosomes in the cell’s cytoplasm which
ultimately enlarge and cause the death of the cell.
Although cells in all body organs are affected, neurons are
especially vulnerable since they are postmitotic, permanent cells. Most of these conditions affect young animals
at early ages, affect both males and females, and are
autosomal recessively inherited. Most commonly, the initial clinical signs are referable to cerebellar dysfunction
but two in particular, alpha‐fucosidosis and ceroid lipofuscinosis, may show up with signs of forebrain disease
initially, including behavioral changes, dullness and vision
abnormalities (typically abnormal depth of vision or inability to focus rather than blindness), followed by generalized ataxia, dementia, tetraparesis, tremors, and seizures.
Affected breeds include border collies, Tibetan terriers,
English setters (ceroid lipofuscinosis), and springer spaniels (alpha‐fucosidosis).
In alpha‐fucosidosis, the diagnosis can occasionally be
made on hematologic examination (40% of lymphocytes
may have cytoplasmic vacuoles) or genetic testing. In
ceroid lipofuscinosis, skin biopsy and demonstration of
autofluorescent pigment may confirm the diagnosis.
Imaging studies and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) taps are
typically normal and CSF may be normal or show vacuolated macrophages (alpha‐fucosidosis). Generally, these
diseases are progressive and nontreatable, with death
occurring by the second or third year of life, although
gene therapy has been shown to reverse clinical signs in
a feline model of alpha‐mannosidosis, suggesting gene
therapy may one day become available.
L2‐Hydroxyglutaric Aciduria
This is a poorly characterized condition reported over
the past 10 years in young to middle‐aged Staffordshire
terriers. Initially reported in the UK, the disease has now
been seen worldwide. Clinical indications include vague
prosencephalic signs – abnormal behavior, anxiety, difficulty/slowness in learning (owners may describe these
dogs as dull), and an abnormal, ataxic gait (difficult to
localize). Signs may also include seizures in some cases.
The onset of the condition is from 6 months onwards,

Figure 71.1 Histopathology of the cerebellum of a dog with L2‐
hydroxyglutaric aciduria. Note the vacuoles in the Purkinje cell layer
and molecular layer as well as the deep cerebellar white matter.

with both males and females affected and with some
dogs presenting in middle age.
The condition is caused by an inborn error of metabolism leading to widespread vacuolation within neurons
in the brain with excess secretion of L2‐hydroxyglutaric
acid in the urine (organic acid). Diagnosis may be
suggested by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) finding
(lack of distinction between gray and white matter on
T2‐weighted MRI scans with diffuse cerebral atrophy)
and demonstration of excess organic acid in the urine,
and genetic testing is now available (Figure 71.1). Overall,
the long‐term prognosis is guarded as the condition is
untreatable but some dogs with mild signs may live a
relatively normal life if seizures are controlled with anticonvulsant medication.

­Anomalous Causes
Hydrocephalus
Hydrocephalus is a pathologic enlargement of the ventricles as distinct from ventriculomegaly which describes
enlargement of the ventricles which may or may not be
pathologic (there is considerable breed‐related variation
in ventricular size, with brachycephalic dogs such as
boxers and bulldogs often having larger ventricles than
other breeds). True hydrocephalus may occur due to
obstruction in the ventricular system (obstructive or
noncommunicating form; most common) or overproduction of CSF from tumors of the arachnoid granulations
and choroid plexus (nonobstructive or communicating
hydrocephalus; less common).

775

VetBooks.ir

776

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

Causes of obstruction may be either congenital (stenosis of the mesencephalic aqueduct, failure of opening of
the lateral apertures of the fourth ventricle) or acquired
(secondary to inflammatory disease or neoplasia or other
cysts obstructing part of the system). Dilation of the ventricular system upstream of the obstruction results in
clinical signs. In mature animals with acquired hydrocephalus, the cause may not be determinable and is often
presumed to be the result of clinically inapparent inflammation or hemorrhage within the ventricular system.
Enlargement of the ventricular system can also occur
with age – as the cerebral cortex tissue volume decreases,
so ventricles get larger to take up the extra space available (this is also known as hydrocephalus ex vacuo).
Clinical signs predominantly refer to the area affected,
most commonly the forebrain but potentially also hindbrain if the fourth ventricle is affected. Seizures,
behavioral changes, cortical blindness, dullness, head
pressing, and circling are all reported in association
with this condition. Occasionally vestibular signs are
also present. Diagnosis requires imaging – either MRI
or CT, or ultrasound in dogs where an open fontanelle is
present for placement of the ultrasound probe. This
applies to congenital cases in particular, and often the
skull is abnormally large and dome‐shaped with divergent strabismus as a result of displacement of the orbits.
On all imaging modalities, the lateral ventricles appear
abnormally enlarged, and in congenital cases a very thin
rim of cerebral cortex may surround these (Figure 71.2).
Depending on the level of obstruction, the third and/or

fourth ventricle and mesencephalic aqueduct may also
be enlarged. MRI may reveal the presence of increased
fluid signal (on T2‐weighted or FLAIR scans) in the
periventricular tissue if the development of the hydrocephalus is acute. The septum pellucidum which
­normally separates the lateral ventricles on midline may
be absent.
Treatment is either medical or surgical; reasonable
long‐term management is possible with corticosteroid
therapy at antiinflammatory doses. Carbonic anhydrase
inhibitors have also been used in acute stages of disease
but cause significant electrolyte disturbances in the long
term so are not recommended for chronic management.
Recently, some authors have described omeprazole in
some cases of acquired hydrocephalus based on experimental studies that suggest it may reduce CSF production by 26% but no evidence supports its use in dogs with
hydrocephalus. Surgical treatment is also commonly
performed which involves placement of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt via a small craniotomy which transfers
fluid via a one‐way, pressure‐sensitive valve into the
abdominal cavity for absorption by mesentery.
Long‐term prognosis is generally good, with approximately 75% of cases improving or resolving following
shunt placement. However, up to 22% may require subsequent revision to deal with blockage or infection which
are common complications

­Metabolic Causes
Hepatic and Uremic Encephalopathy

Figure 71.2 Dorsal plane CT scan of the brain of a dog with
obstructive hydrocephalus. Note the extreme paucity of cerebral
cortex.

The pathogenesis of hepatic encephalopathy (HE) is
poorly understood. Hepatic insufficiency from a number
of causes, including acute liver failure, chronic liver
failure (including cirrhosis), congenital portosystemic
shunts and congenital urea cycle enzyme abnormalities,
can all result in secondary prosencephalic disease. As a
consequence, various substances pass from the portal
circulation directly into the systemic circulation without
undergoing detoxification. These include ammonia
(probably integral to the pathogenesis of dysfunction),
various amino acids (especially the aromatic amino acids
phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan), short‐chain fatty
acids, mercaptan and various biogenic amines, indoles
and skatoles, incriminated in causing HE. Increased intracellular osmolality from too‐rapid glutamine accumulation (ammonia is metabolized by astrocytes to glutamine)
may result in cerebral edema, which also may play a role
in development of cerebral hyperemia and increased
intracranial pressure. Glutamine, short‐chain fatty acids,
aromatic amino acids, and mercaptans are sodium/
potassium ATPase inhibitors.

VetBooks.ir

71 Disorders of the Forebrain

Other theories pertaining to the pathogenesis of HE
include perturbed monoamine neurotransmission as a
result of altered plasma amino acid metabolism; imbalance between excitatory amino acid neurotransmission
(glutamate) and inhibitory amino acid neurotransmission (gamma‐aminobutyric acid, GABA); and increased
cerebral concentration of an endogenous benzodiazepine‐like substance.
Clinical signs relate to prosencephalic disease:
behavioral changes (vocalizing, aggression), dullness,
ataxia, circling, aimless wandering, blindness, seizures,
and head pressing. In severe cases this can progress to
stupor or coma. Diagnosis is made on biochemistry
panels together with pre‐ and postprandial bile acid
tolerance tests. Ammonia levels can also be measured
but are very labile and should only be relied on if quality control standards associated with performing the
test are high. If imaging studies are performed, MRI
may show (precontrast) T1‐weighted hyperintensities
in the caudate nucleus, amgydala and hippocampus
and/or cingulate gyrus. Treatment is directed at the
underlying hepatic disease. Ligation of portosystemic
shunts (or coil embolism) is the treatment of choice for
animals with congenital shunts.
It is also important to note that when treating animals
with seizures secondary to hepatic insufficiency, anticonvulsants that are metabolized by the liver should be
avoided (e.g., phenobarbitone, diazepam). Potassium
bromide or levetiracetam are preferable as first‐line
therapy. In addition, animals that have portosystemic
shunts ligated may develop seizures shortly postoperatively, for reasons that are poorly understood (and independent of whether the patient has HE prior to shunt
ligation). Various causes have been postulated, including
the existence of endogenous benzodiazepine‐like ligands
within the brain of these patients. These seizures are frequently very difficult to control if they occur; potassium
bromide at 100 mg/kg PO QID for 24 hours followed by
30 mg/kg PO SID dosing has been recommended but is
not always effective, and levetiracetam has also been
proposed as a useful treatment. Propofol constant‐rate
infusions (CRIs) have also been reported to be effective.
In addition to HE, a rare encephalopathy associated
with end‐stage renal disease is also reported, with clinical
signs including depression or stupor, seizures, muscle
fasciculations, and myoclonic head‐bobbing movements.
The diagnosis is usually straightforward, with profound
uremia evident on biochemistry panels, usually with
accompanying hyperphosphatemia. The underlying
cause is unknown, with suggested mechanisms including
depressed cerebral oxygen consumption, cerebral
hypoxia, increased brain calcium levels, and increased
blood levels of parathyroid hormone (PTH). In experimental uremia, the electroencephalogram (EEG) changes

associated with disease can be abolished if parathyroidectomy is performed before induction of uremia.
Prognosis is poor as a result of the underlying renal disease but treatment with calcitriol (1.5–3.4 ng/kg/day
PO) can reduce signs of neurologic depression in animals
with chronic uremia, as long as phosphate levels are normal to prevent renal mineralization.
Electrolyte Disturbances
Hypoglycemia

There are two main causes for hypoglycemia: insulin‐
secreting tumors (insulinomas) of the pancreas, and
overdosage of diabetic patients with insulin (especially
when not eating). Young puppies (less than 3 months of
age) are also prone to hypoglycemia in association with
cold, starvation or gastrointestinal (GI) disease, and
hypoglycemia may also be seen in animals with portosystemic shunts. Clinical signs associated with hypoglycemia include behavioral changes, weakness, ataxia,
collapse, transient blindness, and seizures. Signs are
often intermittent, becoming more frequent as the disease progresses, and may be associated with periods of
fasting, exercise or excitement. Rarely, polyneuropathies
may also occur with hypoglycemia; tetraparesis/plegia,
facial nerve signs, hyporeflexia, and hypotonia are the
most commonly seen signs associated with these. Central
nervous system (CNS) signs occur because neurons are
unable to synthesize or store glucose and rely almost
entirely on glucose derived from the blood.
Diagnosis of hypoglycemia secondary to insulinoma
requires demonstration of hypoglycemia in a fasting
blood sample, together with elevated insulin levels (from
paired samples). Treatment is directed at removing the
underlying cause of hypoglycemia plus administration of
dextrose solutions (5%). In animals with inoperable
insulinomas, prednisolone and diazoxide can be used
but the prognosis is guarded to poor, with survival of
90 days only (vs 12–14 months for resectable tumors).
Sodium Abnormalities

Neurologic signs may be seen in association with both
hypernatremia and hyponatremia.
Hypernatremia

Hypernatremia occurs with sodium >156 mEq/L (dogs)
or >161 mEq/L (cats). Causes include:
●●

excess water loss: diabetes insipidus (central or nephrogenic), burns, fever, osmotic diuresis (acute/chronic
renal failure, diabetes mellitus, diuretics, or IV solute
administration such as mannitol, glucose or urea),
osmotic diarrhea (lactulose therapy, malabsorption
syndromes, infectious enteritides), hot weather

777

VetBooks.ir

778

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

excess salt intake: salt poisoning, administration of IV
hypertonic solutions (NaCl), sodium bicarbonate, or
saline emetics
●● insufficient water intake: lack of access, inability to
drink, CNS disease resulting in primary adipsia (absence
of thirst), mental depression, congenital adipsia.
●●

Marked hypernatremia may induce cerebral signs,
such as depression, weakness, irritability, uncharacteristic aggression, confusion, propulsive circling, dementia, seizures, coma, and death as the result of cellular
dehydration of neurons. Neurologic signs may not
occur until serum Na levels exceed 170–175 mEq/L
(>350 mOsm/kg), although the severity of neurologic
signs depends especially on the rate of increase, with
signs being most severe in animals with rapidly developing hyperosmolality.
Treatment depends on the rate at which hypernatremia
develops; overrapid correction can lead to worsening
clinical signs (due to a relative hyponatremia and movement of water from the vascular spaces into the brain).
Replacement of the water deficit should be undertaken
using 5% dextrose with the aim of correction of the deficit
over 24 hours (or longer). In animals with acute‐onset
hypernatremia, correction of Na levels at a rate of 1.0
mEq/h is acceptable. However, if the hypernatremia is
more chronic, Na levels should not be allowed to change
at more than 0.5 mEq/h. In animals with excess salt
intake, diuretics should be given in conjunction with fluid
therapy to avoid pulmonary edema.
Hyponatremia

Hyponatremia occurs when serum Na levels are less than
146 mEq/L in dogs (151 mEq/L in cats). Hyponatremia
can be further divided into true hyponatremia (associated with total body water in excess of Na – serum osmolality is low, <290 mOsm/L) and pseudohyponatremia
(low Na with normal or increased serum osmolality).
Clinical signs of hyponatremia relate primarily to the
rate of onset of hyponatremia. In acute hyponatremia,
sodium levels within the brain are relatively normal
while sodium levels within the vascular spaces are low.
Water flows down its concentration gradient into the
brain, producing cerebral edema and raised intracranial
pressure (ICP). Signs include generalized weakness,
depression, stupor, coma, seizures, and dementia.
Treatment is aimed at increasing sodium levels: use
hypertonic saline (3–5%) when serum Na <115 mEq/L.
The Na deficit is calculated using:
Defect mEq /l

140 measured Na

bodyweight kg

0.3

The replacement fluid should be given slowly over
12–24 hours. For animals with hypovolemic hyponatremia, normal isotonic saline can be used. For animals

with normovolemic or hypervolemic hyponatremia
associated with excessive water intake or renal retention, water restriction (i.e., limiting water intake to less
than urine output) can be performed. In instances where
severe neurologic signs are seen associated with normal
or excessive intravascular fluid, frusemide (2–4 mg/kg
IV) can be used to promote renal water excretion.
Chronic hyponatremia may be more difficult to treat
since overrapid correction of the deficit can result in a
worsening of clinical signs associated with central pontine myelinolysis. Lesions appear in white matter
associated with death of oligodendrocytes and loss of
myelin, resulting in bilaterally symmetric lesions in the
pons and rarely (10% of cases) thalamus, subthalamic
nuclei, striatum, internal capsule, amygdala, lateral
geniculate body, white matter of the cerebellum and deep
layers of the cerebral cortex. The postulated hypothesis
is that with chronicity, cells within the brain extrude
intracellular electrolytes followed by organic osmolytes
(“idiogenic osmoles”), in order to reduce the risk of brain
edema. When sodium is replaced intravascularly as part
of fluid therapy, osmotic attraction of water out of cells
in the brain results in dehydration of brain tissue. Clinical
signs occur several days after fluid treatment: ataxia,
weakness, hypermetria, visual deficits, depressed menace response (with normal pupillary light response
[PLR]), reduced proprioception, exaggerated licking
movements, episodic myoclonus, whole‐body spasms,
obtundation, and tetraparesis. Prognosis for recovery is
reasonable; in one study of two dogs, one died but the
other recovered over 4–7 weeks. As a result, it is important to stick to the guideline of replacing Na at a rate no
greater than 0.5 mEq/L/h.

­Neoplastic Causes
Brain Tumors
Tumors affecting the brain can arise as one of several
forms.
Primary tumors arise from cells and structures of the
brain itself.
●● Secondary tumors arise from cells and structures adjacent to the brain.
●● Metastatic tumors arise from spread of a tumor at a
distant site.
●●

The most common tumors that affect dogs (and humans)
are primary tumors. They occur with a slightly greater incidence than in people (14–15 per 100 000 dogs vs 8–9 per
100 000 people at risk). The most common types include:
●●
●●

meningiomas
astrocytomas

VetBooks.ir

71 Disorders of the Forebrain

oligodendrogliomas
choroid plexus papillomas
●● pituitary macroadenomas
●● ependymomas
●● primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs).
●●
●●

Meningiomas are the most common brain tumors seen
in both dogs and cats (approximately 45% of all primary brain tumors in dogs). They are thought to arise
from arachnoid cap cells of the meninges and occur
anywhere along a meningeal surface (e.g., cerebral convexity, falx cerebri, at the cerebellopontine angle, in the
olfactory lobe), or within a ventricle. They can occur as a
discrete focal mass, as an en plaque form or with large
cystic components within them. On imaging, they have a
broad‐based dural attachment and are often associated
with hyperostosis of the overlying bone (approximately
50% of the time in cats). Contrast enhancement is typically homogenous. Noncontrast‐enhancing areas associated with necrosis are not uncommon in dogs.
Histopathologically, they appear benign; in cats, they are
often well encapsulated and removable surgically but in
dogs tend to creep into the Virchow‐Robin spaces
­surrounding meningeal vessels so microscopic disease
usually remains after debulking.
Astrocytomas and oligodendrogliomas together are
often referred to as gliomas. Astrocytomas are thought
to arise from an astrocyte precursor cell while oligodendrogliomas are thought to arise from an oligodendrocyte
precursor, although this is by no means certain. They
occur with approximately equal frequency – approximately 17% and 14% of all primary brain tumors in dogs,
respectively. Astrocytomas in humans are graded using a
four‐grade classification scheme created by the World
Health Organization, WHO Grade I being a very small
subset (pilocytic astrocytomas), grade II encompassing
most astrocytomas, Grade III anaplastic astrocytoma,
and Grade IV glioblastoma multiforme.
Oligodendrogliomas may occur more frequently in
boxers and more commonly in periventricular white matter. They can also spread along CSF pathways. Imaging
features of both types suggest an intraaxial tumor (arising
from within the brain tissue). On MRI, oligodendrogliomas are frequently hypointense on T1‐weighted scans
and hyperintense on T2‐weighted scans, as befitting their
gross mucinous appearance. Astrocytomas tend to be
more solid in appearance on imaging with greater and
more heterogenous contrast uptake.
Choroid plexus papillomas arise from the choroid
plexus of the lateral, third or fourth ventricles. Since they
arise from essentially a collection of blood vessels, they
tend to enhance very strongly and uniformly following
contrast administration on imaging studies. Most are
histologically benign but a few can be anaplastic (choroid

plexus carcinoma). They can also seed along CSF pathways and implant in other parts of the neuraxis.
Pituitary macroadenomas arise from the hypophyseal
stalk and expand dorsally into the thalamus/hypothalamus, and on imaging appearance commonly look like
“mushroom clouds.”
Ependymomas and PNETs occur relatively uncommonly; ependymomas arise from ependymal cells lining
the ventricular system, whilst the PNET’s origin is currently unknown.
Secondary tumors most commonly include adenocarcinomas arising from the nasal epithelium and invading
the brain, and osteosarcomas, fibrosarcomas or multilobulated tumors of bone arising from the skull that
compress the brain.
Metastatic tumors arise from tumors that spread hematogenously (since there is no lymphatic drainage within
the brain). Common candidates include lymphoma, metastatic carcinoma (from mammary gland, lung, and GI
tract, most commonly) and hemangiosarcoma.
Histiocytic sarcoma can also occur in the brain (both as a
metastatic tumor and as a primary brain tumor).
Clinical signs associated with tumors reflect their site
of origin. In the case of meningiomas, it is common for
tumors to have been present for several months before
the onset of clinical signs as these tumors grow slowly,
allowing the brain to accommodate. Tumors arising in
the prosencephalon often cause seizures and cortical
blindness. Seizures without interictal abnormalities may
be seen with tumors arising on the ventral midline or in
the rostral parts of the prosencephalon.
Diagnosis requires either MRI or computed tomography (CT) scanning. CSF taps may show albuminocytologic dissociation (increased protein with normal cell
counts) in tumors with significant necrosis, and very
occasionally may reveal neoplastic cells (with lymphoma
most commonly, but also metastatic carcinomas and
very occasionally with oligodendrogliomas or choroid
plexus papillomas).
Treatment requires surgical debulking (where location allows) followed by irradiation with megavoltage
sources. Typical hyperfractionated dose schedules
include 2–3 Gy daily doses up to a maximum of approximately 50 Gy. Survival times in dogs are reported to
approach a median of two years, with some patients living three or four years following diagnosis. At present,
there is little evidence to support different treatment
modalities for different tumor types, with the exception
of meningiomas in cats, for whom surgical debulking
alone often results in survival times of up to 4–5 years.
However, in people some tumor types (particularly oligodendrogliomas) are chemosensitive, associated with particular patterns of genetic rearrangements in these tumors
(loss of heterozygosity of the short arm of chromosome

779

VetBooks.ir

780

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

1 and the long arm of chromosome 19) and it may be
that in the future the same features may be identified in
canine oligodendrogliomas.

­Nutritional Causes
Thiamine Deficiency
Thiamine (vitamin B1) deficiency occurs sporadically in
dogs and cats either if commercial rations are naturally
low in thiamine or if food is treated with excessive heat
or sulfites/sulfur dioxide preservatives. One recent
report also describes a series of cats fed a commercial
dry‐food diet without any obvious problems in formulation. All‐fish diets in particular are a risk factor since
many species of fish contain thiaminases. Thiamine is
essential for carbohydrate metabolism (especially glucose) via the Krebs cycle and deficiency leads to increased
levels of pyruvate and lactate, together with reduced red
blood cell transketolase activity. The brain is particularly
susceptible since it is dependent on glucose or lactate‐
pyruvate for energy.
Clinical signs of thiamine deficiency include anorexia,
vomiting, depression, wide‐based hindlimb stance,
ataxia, progressive paraparesis, crouching hindlimb
gait, torticollis, head ventroflexion, circling, generalized
tonic‐clonic seizures, weakness, opisthotonus, coma,
and death. Proprioceptive and menace deficits may be
seen, along with tremors and occasionally nystagmus.
Some dogs show signs of hysteria. In cats, vestibular
signs, head tremors, dilated poorly responsive pupils
and absent menace response are common. With severe
lesions, semicoma, persistent crying, opisthotonus, limb
spasticity, and death may occur. Lesions consist of polioencephalomalacia, bilaterally symmetric in periventricular gray matter, brainstem nuclei (the red nucleus
and vestibular nuclei are commonly affected), cerebellar
peduncles, and cerebral cortex.
Treatment requires prompt administration of thiamine hydrochloride 25–50 mg/day IM in dogs (10–20
mg IM cats) over several days. Complete remission of
clinical signs usually occurs if treatment is initiated
promptly, although some cats have been reported to
have residual visual and proprioceptive deficits.

­Inflammatory/Idiopathic Causes
Noninfectious Inflammatory Diseases
Meningoencephalomyelitis of Unknown Origin

Meningoencephalomyelitis of unknown origin (MUO)
in the dog comprises a variety of conditions that are
thought to be immune mediated in nature and which

involve inflammation of the brain, meninges, and/or
spinal cord. MUO is the umbrella term used to encompass granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis (GME),
necrotizing leukoencephalitis (NLE), and necrotizing
meningoencephalitis (NME). GME is an angiocentric,
mixed lymphoid, infiltrative process that predominantly
affects the CNS white matter and leptomeninges. The
clinical signs of all these conditions vary depending on
those parts of the nervous system where the lesions are
most severe. Commonly, however, the clinical picture is
one of multifocal, asymmetric, intracranial disease seen
in a young to middle‐aged (or older) small‐breed dog.
Granulomatous Meningoencephalitis

Three forms of GME have been described based on morphologic and clinical characteristics: disseminated, focal,
and ocular. The disseminated form typically manifests
with acute onset of rapidly progressive clinical signs suggestive of a multifocal CNS disorder whereas focal GME
is associated with clinical signs suggestive of a single
space‐occupying mass with an insidious onset and slowly
progressive course. The ocular form of GME manifests
with acute onset of visual impairment and dilated nonresponsive pupils caused by optic neuritis. Dogs with the
ocular form can subsequently develop CNS lesions.
The cause of GME is unknown, with immune‐mediated,
infectious, and neoplastic causes proposed as possible
etiologies. Historically, GME was once classified within a
group of conditions known as reticulosis, the neoplastic
form of which has since been reclassified as B cell lymphoma occurring within the brain, suggesting that
there are features of the disease which are common to
cancer. Other investigations have focused on the nature
of the immune system attack on the brain which appears
to be similar to a delayed‐type hypersensitivity and
which involves antibodies directed at astrocytes. So far,
efforts to identify an underlying infectious trigger for the
immune response have been unsuccessful.
Necrotizing Leukoencephalitis and Necrotizing
Meningoencephalitis

Necrotizing leukoencephalitis and NME both started
out as conditions identified in certain breeds, with NLE
being called Yorkshire terrier encephalitis and NME
called pug encephalitis. Since these early reports in
specific breeds, an increasing number of dogs of other
(and mixed) breeds have been identified with these conditions, including Yorkshire terriers with pug encephalitis and vice versa. The necrotizing meningoencephalitides
differ from those in GME in distribution and severity.
Both are characterized by extensive necrosis and nonsuppurative inflammation. In NME, the lesions tend to
involve more of the cerebral gray and subcortical white
matter. The neurologic signs are acute and progressive

VetBooks.ir

71 Disorders of the Forebrain

and reflect a forebrain disorder, with seizures observed
in most dogs. NLE is characterized histologically by multifocal areas of extremely severe mononuclear inflammation surrounding a large malaciac gliotic center,
predominantly affecting the brainstem and periventricular cerebral white matter. Brainstem signs with central
vestibular dysfunction predominate, although a mixture
of forebrain and brainstem signs also occurs.
The etiopathogenesis of GME, NME, and NLE likely is
multifactorial: familial predisposition, infectious agents,
and immunopathologic mechanisms all may play roles in
disease pathogeneses. GME is responsible for up to 25%
of canine CNS disease.
Diagnosis and Treatment

A female predisposition for GME has been reported and
the disease is most common in young to middle‐aged dogs.
Most cases of the necrotizing meningoencephalitides
described so far have occurred in young and adult animals
(6 months to 7 years) with no gender predisposition.
Confirmation of a diagnosis of GME, NME, and NLE
requires histopathologic confirmation, and as such is
infrequently achieved antemortem. Extraneural signs
such as hyperthermia are rare. Blood examination may
be normal or reveal a stress leukogram. CSF findings
include a pure mononuclear pleocytosis or a mixed cell
population (particularly in acute cases), bearing in
mind that cytology cannot discriminate between
immune‐mediated, infectious, and neoplastic considerations for canine meningoencephalitis. Similarly, the
absence of CSF abnormality does not rule out the possibility of GME, particularly in dogs pretreated with
corticosteroids or where the lesions are not in close
proximity to the ventricular system and subarachnoid
space. CSF findings in dogs with NME or NLE reveal a
moderate pleocytosis with mononuclear cells or mixed
cell pleocytosis and mild to marked elevation of protein
concentration.
Imaging findings in MUO are nonspecific but can help
to support the suspected clinical diagnosis. CT scan may
reveal hyperdense lesions after injection of contrast
medium intravenously. Most frequently, the diagnosis is
made following MRI scans. The most consistent MRI
finding in dogs with the multifocal form of GME is the
presence of multiple hyperintense T2‐weighted (T2W)
and fluid‐attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) lesions
scattered throughout the cerebral white matter. Contrast
enhancement may be present and may be strong (occasionally with ring enhancement) or mild. Central nervous system lymphosarcoma and, less commonly, glial
neoplasms and metastatic neoplasia can present with
similar clinical and imaging findings and should therefore be part of the differential diagnosis list. The focal
form of GME presents on CT or MRI as a nonspecific

single space‐occupying mass. The more characteristic
distribution of the lesions observed in breed‐specific
meningoencephalitis (NLE or NME) may aid in the
imaging diagnosis of these conditions.
At present, immunosuppression is the mainstay of
therapy for MUO. Most clinicians treat with corticosteroids together with adjunctive immunosuppression,
although whole‐brain radiation therapy has also shown
promise in the treatment of GME in some cases (supporting the hypothesis that neoplasia might be part of
the etiopathogenesis). Response to corticosteroids
is variable and may be temporary, but dogs often have
a favorable initial response to steroid monotherapy.
Typically, secondary immunomodulatory agents are
added once negative serology and PCR results have
ruled out other disease.
In a clinical setting, steroid monotherapy may resolve
signs associated with MUO in some dogs, but insufficiently or only transiently provides resolution in others.
Most studies suggest that longer survival is achieved
with additional therapy. The most commonly used
additional immunomodulatory drugs include cytosine
arabinoside (CA) at 50 mg/m2 q12h SC for two days
(using a regime that involves therapy initially at three‐
weekly intervals, then reducing to every four weeks,
every five weeks, and continuing every six weeks thereafter), ciclosporin at 5–10 mg/kg q12h PO, procarbazine at 25–50 mg/m2 q24h PO, azathioprine at 2 mg/
kg q24h PO for 14 days before tapering to every other
day, mycophenolate 10–20 mg/kg q12h PO, and leflunomide at 2–4 mg/kg q24h PO. A prednisone/vincristine/cyclophosphamide (COP) protocol has also been
described, although this has not been shown to provide
longer survival than a prednisone/CA protocol and is
associated with more adverse effects. Treatment is
monitored by clinical response and regression of neurologic deficits and occasionally repeated CSF analysis
and MRI.
The prognosis for long‐term remission in proven cases
of GME and the breed‐specific meningoencephalitides
has been reported as being poor. However, such reports
have been limited to histopathologically confirmed cases
of GME that died or were euthanized as a result of the
severity of their disease, so the poor prognosis in these
studies may be biased. Most recent studies have reported
several years survival in dogs with MUO with aggressive
immunosuppression, and potentially cure, although ultimately other side‐effects (predominantly hepatic failure)
may be life‐threatening.
Infectious Diseases
Encephalitis and meningitis often exist concurrently in
dogs and cats with infection of the CNS. Numerous

781

VetBooks.ir

782

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

infectious agents have been incriminated and include
viruses (distemper, rabies, parvovirus, parainfluenza,
herpes, feline leukemia, feline immunodeficiency virus),
bacteria, rickettsia (Ehrlichia, Rocky Mountain spotted
fever), protozoal (Toxoplasma, Neospora), fungi (blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, cryptococcosis, aspergillosis,
coccidioidomycosis), and spirochetes (Lyme disease,
leptospirosis). Adding to this list, a number of parasites
have been reported to affect the brain during aberrant
migration (Toxocara, heartworm, Cuterebra larvae) and
the incidence of these depends mainly on geographic
location. CSF and infectious titers or DNA testing
­performed on serum or CSF are the most reliable antemortem diagnostic tests for identifying infectious CNS
diseases.
Canine Distemper Virus Encephalomyelitis

Canine distemper virus (CDV) is a paramyxovirus that
commonly infects the CNS of dogs and other carnivores.
Unvaccinated and vaccinated dogs are at risk for this
disease, and although the prevalence of infection seems
to be decreasing in some countries, sporadic outbreaks
have been reported in several countries, particularly
where vaccination coverage is incomplete. Systemic
signs of disease such as respiratory and gastrointestinal
involvement are reported to precede the neurologic signs
by 2–3 weeks. However, many dogs have no previous
history of disease prior to the onset of neurologic signs.
Many dogs probably develop transient CNS infections
without concurrent clinical signs. Lesions may be found
in gray (polioencephalomyelopathy, PEM) and/or white
matter (leukoencephalomyelopathy, LEM). Since the
lesions are predominantly demyelinating in nature, it has
been proposed as a model for the study of multiple sclerosis. PEM is more frequently seen in immature dogs
while a combination of PEM and LEM is more common
in mature animals.
Infected dogs can present with a variety of neurologic
signs that tend to be progressive. Clinical signs in dogs
with chronic CDV encephalomyelitis may have a chronic
insidious or waxing and waning course, and are often not
associated with systemic signs of CDV. The classic syndrome of distemper myoclonus (repetitive and continual
myoclonic jerks that affect the whole body or just one
body part with a characteristic 1 Hz frequency) can be
pathognomonic.
The diagnosis of CDV can be difficult. CSF analysis is
often the most helpful diagnostic test. However, an
inflammatory response is often lacking in the acute
stage of the disease, with mononuclear pleocytosis
more often observed in the chronic stage.
Immunofluorescent staining of conjunctival tissues,
urine sediment, tracheal wash or CSF leukocytes for
CDV antigen is variably successful, but positive results

are occasionally obtained in dogs with chronic CDV
encephalomyelitis. Identification of neutralizing CDV
antibodies in serum is of questionable value in previously vaccinated dogs, and demonstration of CDV antibodies in CSF can be complicated if CSF is contaminated
with peripheral blood. Several PCR techniques have
been described for the detection of CDV in various tissues and body fluids, some of which are now commercially available, and these can be applied to CSF; this is
probably the most specific and sensitive test for the
antemortem diagnosis of CDV encephalomyelitis
regardless of the clinical form of disease present.
The chronic form of the disease is typically slowly
progressive, although clinical signs may be well tolerated
for long durations. Therapy is mainly supportive and
symptomatic. Overall, prognosis is poor although the
disease is not fatal in all dogs and some may recover.
Feline Infectious Peritonitis (FIP)

Two biotypes of feline coronavirus (FCoV) exist: feline
infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV) that causes FIP, and
feline enteric coronavirus (FECV) that induces mild
enteritis from which cats typically recover. FIPV has
been shown to arise within individual patients from a
spontaneous mutation of existing FECV infection. FIP
is a clinical disease that arises due to infection of macrophages by FIPV, which subsequently results in the
immune‐mediated formation of pyogranulomatous
lesions with an affinity for serosal, pleural, uveal,
meningeal, and ependymal membranes (surface‐related
disease).
The neurologic clinical variant of FIP is the most common infectious cause of meningoencephalomyelitis in
the cat, as well as being the most prevalent spinal cord
disease of cats. Although the effusive form is about four
times more common than the noneffusive form, neurologic involvement is more common with the noneffusive
(or “dry”) form of the disease and develops in cats with
humoral immunity, but with partial cell‐mediated
immunity (immunity sufficient to induce granulomatous inflammatory reaction around virus present in
macrophages, but not quite adequate to eliminate the
infection). The pathogenesis involves FIP virus inducing
a pyogranulomatous and immune complex‐mediated
vasculitis involving the meninges, ependymal lining,
periventricular brain tissue, and choroid plexus of the
CNS. As a result, clinical signs most commonly arise as
a result of hydrocephalus secondary to obstruction of
the ventricular pathways.
Cats with FIP are typically young (<3 years of age),
pure‐bred, from multiple cat households and the disease
is more common in sexually intact males. The main
route of infection with FCoV is oronasal from contact with
infected feces. Asymptomatic carriers are not common.

VetBooks.ir

71 Disorders of the Forebrain

Clinical signs most commonly relate to hydrocephalus
and associated forebrain syndrome (seizures, cortical
blindness, obtundation) although central vestibular
signs are often also reported, as the meningitis caused
by FIP may be more severe in the ventral brainstem
and at the base of the cerebellum, and choroid plexitis
and ependymitis are frequently severe in the caudal
fossa.
The diagnosis of FIP is challenging, especially when
signs are restricted to the CNS. Hematology findings
may include anemia, leukocytosis, and hyperglobulinemia. Serum tests for anticoronavirus antibodies have a
low specificity and a negative serum titer does not
exclude the possibility of FIP‐associated neurologic disease because soluble antibodies can form immune complexes and escape detection by standard tests. There is
also considerable overlap in titers in cats with and without FIP (some cats with FIP have low titers, while many
cats with high titers never develop FIP). The CT and MR
abnormalities present in the brains of cats are well
described and include meningeal contrast enhancement,
choroid plexitis (contrast enhancement), ependymitis,
granuloma formation, and obstructive hydrocephalus,
most commonly due to blockage of the mesencephalic
aqueduct. CSF analysis may reveal a predominantly neutrophilic or mixed cell pleocytosis, but can be normal.
CSF total protein concentration is often markedly elevated (>200 mg/dL). Documentation of elevated coronaviral antibody concentrations, especially in cerebrospinal
fluid, confirms exposure and is supportive of the diagnosis. However, this result must be interpreted with respect
to the integrity of the blood–brain barrier. Positive coronavirus‐specific PCR performed on CSF can be used as a
relatively reliable antemortem diagnostic tool.
Treatment of FIP is immunosuppressive or immunomodulatory in nature, but the disease should be
considered terminal in virtually all affected cats.
Corticosteroids, chlorambucil, cyclophosphamide, and
interferons have been used with variable efficacy in FIP
cases.
Protozoal Encephalitis

Toxoplasmosis and neosporosis are polysystemic protozoal diseases capable of causing heterogeneous signs
of peripheral and CNS dysfunction. Natural infection
with Toxoplasma gondii is more common in cats, but
also occurs in dogs. Ingestion of tissue from infected
intermediate hosts (ingestion of encysted bradyzoites)
is the most common cause of infection in both species.
Other forms of infection include fecal contamination
and in utero infection. With Neospora caninum, dogs
are affected, most commonly via in utero transmission,
although they may also be infected by ingestion of
intermediate host tissue.

Following acute systemic infection in intermediate
hosts in which the organism can be disseminated to
many body organs (this phase may be subclinical), tissue
cysts form most commonly in the CNS, skeletal muscle,
and heart muscle. The parasites are mainly intracellular
and subclinical infection may persist for the life of the
host, although activation of toxoplasmosis may occur in
association with severe immunosuppressive disorders.
These protozoal organisms have the potential to cause
an extremely variable number of clinical neurologic syndromes. Two main forms are observed:
encephalomyelitis – neurologic signs associated with
protozoal encephalomyelitis are variable and may
reflect a focal or multifocal disease process
●● Neospora myositis‐polyradiculoneuritis – this is probably the most commonly reported infectious myositis
in dogs and presents with severe pelvic limb paresis
and skeletal muscle fibrosis in young dogs, especially
those less than six months of age.
●●

A tentative antemortem diagnosis of toxoplasmosis is
established in dogs most commonly through elevated
IgM titers, IgG seroconversion, or documentation of a
positive clinical response to an antiprotozoal treatment
regimen. In cats, an elevated serum or CSF IgM titer is
considered diagnostic for toxoplasmosis. However, a
positive titer can be found in animals previously subclinically infected with either organism and demonstration
of a rising titer with serial (monthly) testing may be
required to confirm a diagnosis of active disease.
Neosporosis is diagnosed by serologic detection of indirect fluorescent antibody titers in dogs. Demonstration
of tachyzoites of either organism in various tissues or
body fluids is also diagnostic but rarely achieved. CSF
analysis typically demonstrates pleocytosis with a mixed
population of neutrophils and the presence of small and
large mononuclear cells. Eosinophils may also be seen.
Sensitive PCR assays have been reported for the detection of both Neospora caninum DNA and Toxoplasma
gondii DNA in biological samples. Muscle biopsy is
indicated in dogs with polyneuropathy/polymyositis and
may reveal nonsuppurative inflammation and tachyzoites within myocytes.
Treatment for both diseases is identical. Clindamycin
(10–15 mg/kg PO q812h for a minimum of 12 weeks) is
the preferred therapy. However, TMS (15 mg/kg PO
q12h) in combination with pyrimethamine (1 mg/kg/day
PO) may also be effective. Folic acid or brewer’s yeast
supplementation should be considered (5 mg/dog/day)
in animals receiving this latter therapy. The prognosis for
survival is fair to good, but recovery of neurologic function may be incomplete in those animals with severe
clinical signs. In the author’s experience, some cases may
require long‐term (a year or possibly longer) therapy,

783

VetBooks.ir

784

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

suggesting selective immunodeficiency in some animals
contributing to the presence of infection.
Bacterial Meningoencephalitis

Bacterial infection of the CNS is a relatively rare cause of
encephalitis and/or meningitis in dogs and cats compared
with other species. Bacterial infection of the brain can be
the consequence of hematogenous spread (metastasis
from distant foci of infection), penetrating injury to the
skull (bite wound, bullet, surgery) or direct extension of
infection from the middle/inner ear, eyes or nasal sinuses.
Infection of the CNS may result in an abscess and/or, much
less frequently, collection of pus (empyema) in subdural or
epidural locations. Brain abscesses are life threatening due
to systemic and local toxicity (in the early stages of cerebritis) and increased intracranial pressure (during/after capsule formation). Clinical signs are largely the result of the
inflammatory reaction that the bacteria provoke.
Affected animals can present with a wide variety of
neurologic signs of intracranial disease that reflect a
focal anatomic diagnosis suggesting a space‐occupying
lesion or a multifocal syndrome associated with many
small microabscesses. These signs are usually rapidly
progressive and frequently fatal if left untreated. Fever is
present in approximately 50% of cases at presentation.
Hematology usually reflects an inflammatory process
(leukocytosis with or without left shift) or can be normal.
Imaging of the brain (CT or MRI) may be suggestive of
an inflammatory process and may reveal a defect in the
skull suggestive of a penetrating injury or signs suggestive of otitis media/interna.
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis usually reveals an elevated
nucleated cell count, with the majority of cells being
degenerate neutrophils, and marked elevation in total
protein concentration. Bacteria may be visible in the spinal fluid. In some cases, CSF can be normal or may show
nonspecific inflammatory changes. CSF should be cultured if it contains degenerate neutrophils although it is
uncommon for culture to be positive. Urine and blood
culture should also be considered in animals in which
there is no obvious source of infection.
Treatment of abscesses centers around antibiotic therapy, often for long periods, based on culture and drug
sensitivity testing of organisms isolated from the abscess.
When cultures cannot be obtained, a broad‐spectrum
antibiotic, such as third‐generation cephalosporins and
enrofloxacin or metronidazole, can be used. In the early
stages antiinflammatory doses of corticosteroids to
reduce surrounding edema are indicated, and seizure
control with anticonvulsants may be required. Antibiotic
therapy should be maintained for several weeks after
clinical signs have resolved. Surgical decompression by
craniectomy is indicated in cases of brain abscess that do
not respond to medical management.

Mycotic Meningoencephalitis

Fungal CNS infections other than cryptococcosis are
uncommon in dogs and cats. Small animals with mycotic
CNS infections can have neurologic signs that range
from peracute in onset to insidiously progressive, and
lesion localization is often suggestive of multifocal
disease.
Cryptococcus neoformans is the most commonly implicated systemic mycotic agent causing CNS signs in both
dogs and cats. Extraneural organ involvement is often
present, but may be clinically occult, or absent in some
cases. Brainstem disease resulting in signs of vestibular
dysfunction is frequently reported. Peripheral vestibular
disease has also been reported to be a sequel of cryptococcosis in cats.
The diagnosis of cryptococosis is best established
by cytologic or histologic demonstration of the organism, with its characteristic capsule, from tissue aspirates or biopsies, or in body fluids, such as urine or CSF;
organisms can be identified in the CSF of more than
90% of dogs with CNS signs. In cases in which organisms cannot be demonstrated, serologic testing using
the latex agglutination procedure that identifies cryptococcal capsular antigen is recommended. Serologic
testing can be performed on blood or CSF, although
CSF is preferred. Latex agglutination testing is generally considered to be both highly sensitive and specific.
CT and MRI imaging of the brain in cats and dogs with
cryptococcosis have demonstrated numerous and
­variable abnormalities including single or multifocal
mass lesions, meningeal enhancement, intraparenchymal ring enhancement associated with “punch hole”
lesions in the gray matter, and choroid plexus
enhancement.
The recommended therapy for CNS cryptococcosis is
fluconazole (5 mg/kg PO q12h), as this agent effectively
penetrates CNS tissues. Intrathecal administration of
amphotericin B has also been described. The length of
therapy required is often protracted, and serial serologic
monitoring has been recommended. Treatment should
ideally be continued until clinical signs have resolved,
CSF analysis has normalized, and two consecutive titers
performed one month apart have been negative.
However, relapses have occurred after consecutively
negative serum titers, and it has been suggested that
when possible, treatment should continue until the
patient is seronegative and all previously documented
intracranial MR abnormalities have resolved. Newer
antifungal agents, such as voriconazole, offer advantages including excellent CNS penetration, a broader
antifungal spectrum, and greater potency than either
fluconazole or itraconazole, and thus may prove to be
beneficial for the treatment of CNS cryptococcosis in
dogs and cats.

VetBooks.ir

71 Disorders of the Forebrain

­Vascular Causes
Cerebrovascular Accidents
Cerebrovascular accident (CVA), also known as stroke,
is defined as a sudden onset of nonconvulsive and nonprogressive focal brain signs secondary to cerebrovascular disease (any pathology affecting the blood supply of
the brain). By convention, these signs must remain for
more than 24 hours to qualify for the diagnosis of CVA;
if the clinical signs resolve within 24 hours, the episode is
called a transient ischemic attack or TIA.
Causes and Pathophysiology

Ischemic strokes result from occlusion of cerebral blood
vessels by a thrombus or embolism while hemorrhagic
strokes result from rupture of blood vessel walls within
the brain parenchyma or subarachnoid space.
Ischemic Stroke

Ischemic strokes have been reported infrequently in the
veterinary medical literature when compared with the
human medical literature. Suspected underlying causes
identified in histopathologically confirmed cases include:
septic thromboemboli associated with bacterial endocarditis or other sources of infection
●● atherosclerosis associated with primary hypothyroidism
and miniature schnauzers with hypertriglyceridemia
●● aberrant parasite migration (Cuterebra) or parasitic
emboli (Dirofilaria immitis)
●● embolic metastatic tumor cells
●● intravascular lymphoma
●● fibrocartilaginous embolism
●● aortic or cardiac embolism.
●●

However, in those cases which are not severe enough to
warrant admission to the postmortem room, a concurrent medical condition can be found in just over 50% of
dogs. The most commonly encountered conditions are:
hyperadrenocorticism
chronic kidney disease
●● hypothyroidism
●● hypertension.
●●
●●

Chronic kidney disease and hyperadrenocorticism were
the most commonly suspected underlying causes for the
hypertension in one study. No underlying cause could be
identified antemortem in nearly half of the dogs; this type
of infarct of unknown origin is referred to in humans as
cryptogenic. No age, sex or breed predisposition has been
identified in dogs but Cavalier King Charles spaniels
(CKCS) and greyhounds appear to be overrepresented.
Reports of ischemic stroke in cats are scarce. The term
feline ischemic encephalopathy (FIE) has been used to

describe cases of peracute onset of clinical signs consistent with a unilateral cerebral or brainstem problem caused
by ischemia. Although the cause remains unknown in
most cases, some of them have been linked to Cuterebra
migration. It is believed that the migrating parasite, or
the host response to it, leads to vasospasm in the cerebral
vasculature (typically middle cerebral artery).
Failure of blood supply (which results in decreased
perfusion pressure within one area of the brain) leads to
the development of ischemia, progressing to infarction if
this is severe and persists. An infarct describes the area
of compromised brain parenchyma that results from this
process. The initial drop in perfusion pressure may occur
either secondary to vascular obstruction that develops
within the occluded vessels (thrombosis) or due to
obstructive material that originates from another vascular bed and travels to the brain (thromboembolism). Two
distinct regions of an infarct can be distinguished: the
core, where ischemia is severe and infarction develops
rapidly; and the penumbra surrounding the core, which
shows a more moderate decrease of cerebral blood flow
(CBF), allowing longer durations of ischemic stress to be
tolerated. Tissue within the penumbra has the potential
for recovery and therefore is the target for interventional
therapy in acute ischemic stroke.
Hemorrhagic Stroke

In contrast to the high incidence in humans, intracerebral hemorrhage resulting from spontaneous rupture of
vessels is considered rare in dogs and cats. Secondary
hemorrhage has been reported in dogs in association
with:
rupture of congenital vascular abnormalities
primary and secondary brain tumors
●● inflammatory
disease of the arteries and veins
(vasculitis)
●● intravascular lymphoma
●● brain infarction (hemorrhagic infarction)
●● impaired coagulation.
●●
●●

Nontraumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage has been
reported in dogs but remains very rare when compared
to its occurrence in humans, where aneurysmal rupture
is the most common underlying cause.
In hemorrhagic stroke, blood leaks from the vessel
directly into the brain, forming a hematoma within the
brain parenchyma, or into the subarachnoid space. The
mass of clotted blood causes physical disruption of the
tissue and pressure on the surrounding brain. This alters
CNS volume/pressure relationships with the possibility
of increasing intracranial pressure and decreasing cerebral blood flow. In addition, the tissue downstream of the
ruptured vessel(s) undergoes ischemia as a result of the
loss of blood supply. As the volume of the hematoma

785

VetBooks.ir

786

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

initially develops, ICP typically remains constant due to
a system of compensation known as cerebrovascular
autoregulation. However, with progressive expansion of
the hematoma, these mechanisms become exhausted,
after which further increases in the volume of the clot
become associated with a dramatic increase in ICP.
In severe cases, this increase in ICP causes a decrease in
perfusion of the brain and ultimately fatal herniation of
the brain at the level of the foramen magnum.
Clinical Presentation

Neurologic signs seen in stroke patients are characteristically peracute or acute in onset and nonprogressive or
regressive in their evolution. Initially, deficits observed
are usually focal, often asymmetric and ultimately related
to the area of the brain involved. The combination of
abrupt onset and focal, often asymmetric localization
should raise the index of suspicion for vascular disease.
The initial signs are then followed by an arrest and
regression of the neurologic deficits in all except the fatal
strokes, although worsening of edema (associated with
the secondary injury phenomena) can result in progression of neurologic signs for a short period of 24–72
hours. In addition, intracranial hemorrhage can present
with progression of signs for up to 24–72 hours before
regression as a result of reorganization of the hemorrhage and edema resorption.
Neurologic deficits usually reflect a focal anatomic
diagnosis and depend on the location of the vascular
insult (telencephalon, thalamus, midbrain, pons, medulla,
cerebellum). Infarction of an individual brain region is
associated with specific clinical signs that reflect the loss
of function of that specific region.
Diagnosis

Advanced imaging (CT, conventional and/or functional
MRI) is a prerequisite for confirming a diagnosis of
stroke, for defining both the vascular territory involved
and the extent of the lesion, as well as distinguishing
between ischemic and hemorrhagic disease. Imaging
studies are also necessary to rule out other causes of
neurologic deficit such as tumor, head trauma, and
encephalitis.
Computed tomography images are frequently normal
during the acute phase of ischemic stroke, making the
diagnosis of ischemic stroke using CT an exercise in the
exclusion of other differential diagnoses. In part, this is
due to the relatively noisy CT images of the brain in
animals with a large skull to brain ratio, compared with
people. Early CT signs of ischemia can be subtle and
difficult to detect even by very experienced readers and
include parenchymal hypodensity, loss of gray–white
matter differentiation, subtle effacement of the cortical
sulci, and local mass effect. By way of contrast, CT is

exquisitely sensitive for the detection of acute hemorrhage in hemorrhagic stroke. Acute hemorrhage is evident as a hyperdensity on CT due to hyperattenuation
of X‐rays by the globin portion of blood, particularly for
the first eight days following onset. The attenuation
decreases until the hematoma is isodense about one
month after the event. The periphery of the hematoma
contrast enhances from six days to six weeks after onset,
due to revascularization.
Magnetic resonance imaging can be used to identify
ischemic stroke within 12–24 hours of onset and to
distinguish hemorrhagic lesions from infarction. T2‐
weighted and FLAIR images are particularly useful in
imaging of ischemic stroke since they allow correlation
of the lesion with anatomic structures and vascular
­territories. With these sequences, ischemic infarction
appears as a hyperintense lesion. The conformity of an
infarct to a vascular territory is an important element in
the diagnosis that helps in distinguishing these lesions
from other differentials. Ischemic infarcts are limited
to the region of the brain vascularized by the affected
vessel, and are often wedge‐shaped in appearance with
resultant sharply demarcated borders. There is minimal
to no mass effect associated with these lesions. Changes
are best appreciated in the gray matter and are well visualized in deep gray matter structures such as the thalamus and basal ganglia due to their selective vulnerability
to ischemia. Contrast enhancement (associated with
reperfusion) is not usually seen until at least 7–10 days
but the inverse is a useful indicator – lack of contrast
uptake in the ischemic region often results in a noticeably darker area on postcontrast T1‐weighted scans.
In the case of hemorrhagic stroke, particular characteristics of hematoma evolution are useful in making the
diagnosis with conventional sequences. As the hematoma
ages, oxyhemoglobin sequentially breaks down into several paramagnetic products – first deoxyhemoglobin, followed by methemoglobin, and finally hemosiderin. The
earliest possible detection of hemorrhage depends on the
conversion of oxyhemoglobin to deoxyhemoglobin which
occurs after 12–24 hours. Whilst oxyhemoglobin provides a signal similar to that of normal brain parenchyma,
the iron exposed to surrounding water molecules in the
form of deoxyhemoglobin creates a signal loss, making it
easy to identify on T2‐weighted and susceptibility‐
weighted sequences. Gradient echo (T2‐weighted)
sequences are exquisitely sensitive to the disruption of
the local magnetic field that this creates and show hemorrhage as dense hypointense regions.
In addition to conventional MRI sequences, several
functional MRI (fMRI) techniques have been developed
for the early diagnosis of stroke. These include diffusion
and perfusion imaging and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA). Diffusion‐weighted imaging (DWI) is

VetBooks.ir

71 Disorders of the Forebrain

used commonly in humans in the diagnosis of acute
stroke. DWI sequences detect the random diffusion of
water molecules through tissues. When brain parenchyma loses its blood supply, energy delivery to neurons
fails and water becomes trapped within cells by cell
membranes. This can be detected on DWI sequences as
a hyperintense region within the brain representing
brain parenchyma in which water diffusion is restricted
as a result of this energy failure. In addition to DWI, perfusion‐weighted imaging is employed to depict regions
of hypoperfusion in the brain and can document the tissue “at risk” (i.e., penumbra) by comparing the results
with the findings on DWI. In addition, MRA can noninvasively assess the intracranial vessels of stroke patients.
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis is unlikely to confirm a
diagnosis of CVA but helps to rule out inflammatory
CNS disease. CSF is variable in dogs and cats with CVA.
In most cases, it is either normal or reflects a mild mononuclear or neutrophilic pleocytosis. CSF proteins are
occasionally elevated.
Identification of Underlying Causes of Stroke

In the case of presumptive or confirmed ischemic stroke,
ancillary diagnostic tests should focus on evaluating the
animal for hypertension (and its potential underlying
causes), endocrine disease (hyperadrenocorticism,
hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, diabetes mellitus),
kidney disease (especially protein‐losing nephropathy),
heart disease, and metastatic disease. Diagnostic tests in
presumptive or confirmed cases of hemorrhagic stroke
should focus on screening the animal for a coagulopathy,
hypertension (and potential underlying causes), and
metastatic disease (particularly hemangiosarcoma).
Treatment and Prognosis

Once the diagnosis of a stroke has been made, any potential underlying or associated disease should be identified
and treated accordingly. Generally, treatment of these
patients aims to provide supportive care, maintain adequate tissue oxygenation, and manage neurologic and
nonneurologic complications. Nursing management of a
recumbent dog will be vital to the success of more specific therapies. Such management includes attention to
the prevention of decubital ulceration, aspiration pneumonia, and urine scald, in addition to physical therapy
and enteral nutrition provision. More specific therapies
are aimed at preventing further neurologic deterioration.
Most cases of ischemic stroke recover within several
weeks with only supportive care. Potential underlying
causes should be investigated and treated accordingly to
limit the risk of recurrences. Definitive therapy in people
involves thrombolytic therapy in an attempt to salvage
the ischemic penumbra – tissue surrounding the
ischemic core in which rapid restoration of the blood

supply may reverse the initial damage. However, the window of opportunity for this to occur is approximately
six hours, making it very rarely achievable in animals.
Monitoring and correction of basic physiologic variables
are important, as is maintaining normal blood pressure.
The most important consideration in hemorrhagic
stroke is maintenance of cerebral perfusion by treatment
of hypotension and elevated ICP, as well as treating the
underlying cause if one has been identified. The medical
management of dogs with intracranial hemorrhage commonly includes:
stabilization of the patient (airway protection, monitoring and correction of vital signs)
●● assessment and monitoring of the neurologic status
●● determination and treatment of potential underlying
causes of the hemorrhage
●● assessment of the need for specific treatment measures, including management of increased ICP.
●●

The risk of neurologic deterioration and cardiovascular
instability is highest during the first 24 hours after the
onset of an intracranial hemorrhage, as the space‐occupying lesion slowly expands and cerebral vasogenic
edema develops. During this phase, if the neurologic status deteriorates, aggressive therapy to control ICP with
mannitol (0.25–1 g/kg administered IV over 20 min) or
other agents may need to be considered, and in rare cases
craniotomy to alleviate cerebral edema.
The prognosis for ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke
depends overall on the initial severity of the neurologic
deficit, the initial response to supportive care, and the
severity of the underlying cause if one has been identified.
Most cases of ischemic stroke recover within several
weeks with only supportive care and there appears to be
no association between the region of the brain involved,
the type of infarction (territorial or lacunar), and outcome. However, dogs with a concurrent medical condition have a significantly shorter survival time than those
with no identifiable medical condition. Dogs with a concurrent medical condition are also significantly more
likely to suffer from recurrent neurologic signs due to
subsequent infarcts.
Feline Ischemic Encephalopathy
Feline ischemic encephalopathy (FIE) represents a
peculiar variant of cerebrovascular disease. FIE is an
ischemic necrosis of cerebral tissue that has been
reported sporadically in male and female cats of all ages,
especially in summer months in the US. Clinical signs
are usually acute in onset, nonprogressive, and variable,
and typically suggest unilateral cerebral or brainstem
involvement. Signs may include depression, head tilt,
anisocoria, circling, seizures, and changes in attitude/

787

VetBooks.ir

788

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

behavior. Clinical signs may be modified or disappear
with time and, unlike other forms of cerebrovascular
accident, multiple episodes may occur. Hematology,
blood chemistries, and skull radiographs are usually
normal while MRI reveals classic signs of a major
ischemic infarct. CSF analysis may be normal or show
mild to moderate elevations in cell numbers (usually
monocytic) or protein levels. Lesions are usually unilateral and may involve up to 75% of one cerebral and/or
cerebellar hemisphere. The major area of infarction is
frequently in the distribution of the middle cerebral
artery.
The cause of this enigmatic ischemic condition has
been uncertain but clinical similarities between FIE and
Cuterebra infection of the brain have historically been
noted. Intriguingly, at postmortem some of these cats

have been found to harbor Cuterebra larvae within the cranial vault (commonly within the olfactory bulbs and
optic nerves following migration through the cribiform
plate) – and some of the changes visualized are associated with the migration track of the parasite. However,
much of the vascular compromise occurs in locations
distant to the parasite, suggesting an elaborated toxic factor
causing disseminated vasospasm and consequent
ischemia. It should be noted that although this association
has been noted in the US, some cats in other countries in
which Cuterebra is not found can also be affected with similar ischemic lesions.
Treatment is largely supportive. Prognosis is often
favorable since many of the signs seen initially will ameliorate; however, behavioral changes and uncontrollable
seizures may persist.

VetBooks.ir

789

72
Vestibular Disease
Tammy Stevenson, DVM, DACVIM (Neurology)
Veterinary Specialty Hospital, San Diego, CA, USA

The term vestibular disease is used to describe a neuro­
anatomic localization within the vestibular system of any
cause, and therefore, is not a specific diagnosis.
The purpose of the vestibular system is to provide
balance by adjusting limb extensor/flexor tone to accom­
modate for changing head and body positions. This results
in controlled and coordinated eye‐head‐trunk‐limb
movement with proper postural support.
The structures of the vestibular portion of the inner ear
include semicircular canals that are responsible for con­
veying information regarding acceleration in angular
planes, and the utriculus and sacculus which convey infor­
mation regarding linear acceleration and static head posi­
tion (relative to gravity). Information from these receptor
organs travels via the vestibular portion of the vestibuloc­
ochlear nerve (CN VIII) to the vestibular nuclei (four on
each side of the brainstem – rostral, caudal, medial, and
lateral), through the caudal cerebellar peduncle, to the
flocculonodular lobes of the cerebellar hemisphere. The
dorsal spinal nerves of C1–3 provide input to head posi­
tion and balance and can also cause vestibular signs when
dysfunctional.
Dysfunction of one or more parts of the vestibular
system may result in the signs we classically recognize as
“vestibular disease” – a head tilt, nystagmus, walking in
circles, ataxia/falling or even rolling, abnormal limb
extensor tone, and nausea/vomiting. These signs are due
to the vestibular system’s extensive connections with
various parts of the central nervous system (CNS).
Projections via the medial longitudinal fasciculus to
the nuclei of CN III, IV, and VI which control the
extraocular eye muscles. In homeostatic conditions,
these connections result in normal physiologic nystag­
mus (oculocephalic reflex), and with dysfunction,
pathological nystagmus.
●● Projections via the vestibulospinal tract, to the neck,
trunk, and limbs, resulting in appropriate head/neck
●●

position relative to gravity and with movement, and
appropriate limb tone and position relative to gravity
and head position. Dysfunction results in head tilt, and
imbalance in extensor tone such that the animal leans
or circles to the side with less tone.
●● Projections to the vomiting center (in the reticular for­
mation) leading to ptyalism, inappetence, and vomiting.
●● Projections to the cerebral cortex to provide conscious
awareness of the body’s position in space via the
thalamus (pathway not well identified), and awareness
of dysfunction such that the patient may “feel bad.”
●● Projections to the cerebellum (via the caudal cerebellar
peduncle, in the vestibulocerebellar tracts) which may
result in decreased extensor tone on one side of the
body and increased tone on the other (leaning).
As with all problems involving the CNS, the location of
the lesion, not what caused the lesion(s), determines the
signs you see. Therefore, a thorough neurological exami­
nation is critical to proper localization and an accurate
differential list which, in turn, guides the diagnostic plan.

­Peripheral versus Central Disease
For vestibular disease, the first step is differentiating
peripheral from central disease. Peripheral vestibular
disease is characterized by a head tilt and circling towards
the side of the lesion, and pathological nystagmus with
the fast phase away from the lesion. Unfortunately, cen­
tral vestibular disease cannot be definitively ruled out on
exam alone. However, any of the following abnormalities
can lead to a confident central localization.
●●

Cranial nerve deficits other than VII or VIII. Deficits
associated with VII or VIII alone can be seen with both
peripheral and central disease, as can sympathetic dys­
function (Horner syndrome). Involvement of other

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

790

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

cranial nerves is typically due to brainstem involve­
ment where the cranial nerve nuclei are situated and
there may also be concurrent mentation changes due
to the diffuse projections of the reticular activating
system (RAS) in this location.
●● Cerebrothalamic dysfunction – mentation changes,
seizures, head turn +/− wide circles, visual deficits,
proprioceptive deficits, etc. Signs are due to multifo­
cal/diffuse disease or increased intracranial
pressure.
●● Cerebellar signs – intention tremors, hypermetria,
truncal sway, absent menace with intact vision.
Cerebellar lesions produce ipsilateral signs (or bilateral
if diffuse/multifocal cerebellar involvement).
●● Proprioceptive deficits +/− paresis – proprioceptive
deficits may come from a lesion interrupting the flow
of information anywhere along the pathway from the
cortex through the thalamus and brainstem (which
may result in varying degrees of paresis) or from the
cerebellum (no paresis).
The presence of one or more of the above signs, by defi­
nition, localizes the problem to the CNS. Central disease
may be due to a multifocal problem (i.e., infections,
inflammatory disease, lymphoma, multiple metastatic
lesions), from increased ICP leading to compression of
adjacent vestibular structures, or from direct involve­
ment of the central vestibular system.
Examination of the vestibular patient can be challeng­
ing, making localization difficult. For example, patients
that are profoundly affected by nausea and imbalance
often feel/act mentally dull and lethargic. Supporting
patients to assess proprioception can be futile when they
are rolling and flailing. Finally, it is important to consider
any preexisting disease that may suggest two localiza­
tions or multifocal disease, such as a history of cervical
pain or seizures.
Nystagmus has been classically used to localize ves­
tibular disease as peripheral versus central, but this
should be undertaken with caution. Vertical nystagmus
is strongly suggestive of, but not definitive for, central
disease. Constant, unchanging horizontal nystagmus is
associated with peripheral disease.
Paradoxical vestibular disease is associated with
lesions in the rostral and medial vestibular nuclei, the
caudal cerebellar peduncle, or the flocculonodular lobe
of the cerebellum, and therefore it is always central in
origin. Lesions associated with any of these neuroana­
tomic localizations should produce lateralizing signs.
Once the side is determined (i.e., side of proprioceptive
deficits, hypermetria), if the head tilt/circling is away
from the lesion, +/− the fast phase of the nystagmus
towards the lesion, then it is considered paradoxical ves­
tibular disease.

­Etiology
To ensure a complete list of differential diagnoses,
breaking down differentials into larger categories and
then fitting specific differentials into those categories
will help limit oversights.
Degenerative
Anomalous/congenital
●● Metabolic
●● Neoplasia, nutritional
●● Infectious, inflammatory, idiopathic, iatrogenic
●● Toxic, traumatic
●● Vascular – hemorrhagic or ischemic
●●
●●

In general, acute versus chronic history should help
with ranking differentials. Acute histories are more com­
monly associated with idiopathic disease, vascular
events (ischemic vs hemorrhagic), toxin exposure (met­
ronidazole, ronidazole) +/− otitis interna (usually
with an associated chronic otitis externa/media).
Thiamine deficiency is often acute and can progress
rapidly in cats. Of course, there are always exceptions.
Peripheral Vestibular Disease
Anomalous/Congenital

Some animals are born with signs of peripheral ves­
tibular disease, either unilateral or bilateral. Bilaterally
affected animals are commonly deaf as well. The exact
cause is unknown, although both degeneration of the
vestibular nerve and inflammation of the labyrinth
have been described. Recent research suggests a possible
genetic mutation in a doberman puppy. The signs are
often noted when the animal first becomes mobile. Head
tilt and ataxia, +/− circling are seen. Bilaterally affected
animals may look more “cerebellar,” swinging the head
back and forth, and have a more generalized appear­
ance to the ataxia. Often pathological nystagmus is not
appreciated and physiological nystagmus is frequently
decreased/absent in these bilaterally affected patients.
Most animals will remain static or improve with time,
but deafness is typically permanent. Congenital ves­
tibular disease and deafness are possible in any breed,
but reported breeds include Siamese, Burmese, and
Tonkinese cats, Dobermans, cocker spaniels, akitas,
German shepherds, beagles, and smooth fox terriers.
Primary secretory otitis media is a disease most com­
monly seen in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels and less
commonly in other brachycephalic breeds, such as
french bulldogs. It results in a collection of mucoid effu­
sion in the tympanic bulla presumably due to these
breeds extreme nasopharyngeal confirmation compro­
mising normal drainage. It is rarely associated with ves­
tibular signs.

VetBooks.ir

72 Vestibular Disease

Idiopathic

Canine idiopathic vestibular disease is common in
older dogs. The history is often an acute onset of head
tilt, nystagmus (fast phase away from the head tilt),
ataxia/falling/rolling, drooling/nausea, inappetence,
and vomiting. The severity can be quite variable, from
mild to extreme. There is no specific treatment, but
symptomatic therapy with antinausea/antiemetic medi­
cations for apparent nausea, fluid support to maintain
hydration until they are eating, +/− diazepam (GABA
modulator acting centrally to suppress vestibular
responses) can help the patient feel better during recovery.
Appropriate recumbent care is necessary in nonambu­
latory patients, especially since they will often lie only
on one side. Improvement can be quick (hours) but
more commonly takes 1–3 weeks and often there is a
residual head tilt. Signs are exacerbated in the dark
since visual compensation is the primary means for
improved function. It is uncommon, but possible, for
idiopathic vestibular disease to recur. However,
repeated events should encourage diagnostic testing to
exclude other causes.
Feline idiopathic vestibular syndrome can occur in
cats of any age and affects outdoor cats more fre­
quently. It appears to be more common in the summer
and fall months in the northeastern United States,
although this timing is not appreciated in other parts
of the country. Clinical signs are similar to canine
idiopathic disease, but vomiting is less common.
­
Diagnosis is based on exclusion of other causes of
peripheral vestibular disease. Cats also spontaneously
recover within a few weeks.
Infectious
Otitis Media/Interna

Ascending infection via the auditory tube can result in
otitis media/interna in the absence of otitis externa.
Otoscopic exam may not be conclusive in these cases
unless there are obvious changes to the tympanic mem­
brane (bulging, rupture). Otitis externa is often present
without concurrent otitis media/interna. Therefore,
definitive diagnosis of otitis media/interna typically
requires advanced imaging. This may not be practical in
all cases. Cats with otitis media may also have evidence
of Horner’s syndrome as the sympathetic fibers pass
through the bullae in this species. Since the facial nerve
travels near the horizontal external ear canal and by the
bulla, severe and chronic ear disease may also result in
signs of facial paresis/paralysis if the periauricular tissues
are involved. Depending on the severity of the problem,
treatment may involve medical or surgical management.
Typically, the outcome is better for surgical management
with antibiotic/antifungal therapy based on culture and
sensitivity results. Clinical signs may still be present after

resolution of infection due to permanent nerve damage,
including deafness.
Inflammatory
Nasopharyngeal Polyps

A polyp is a fleshy mass composed of granulation tissue
covered with respiratory epithelium, that originates from
the lining of either the auditory tube or the middle ear.
The primary etiology is unknown, but viral and/or chronic
inflammatory processes are suspected to play a role. They
are most common in cats 1–5 years of age but have been
documented in much older cats as well, with an equal dis­
tribution in males and females. Polyps can also lead to sec­
ondary infection or inflammation of the middle and inner
ear, and therefore, patients may present with vestibular
signs. Since the mass can also grow into the pharyngeal
area, signs of sneezing and gagging may be the presenting
clinical complaint. Polyp removal is typically via traction
or surgical approach (ventral bullae osteotomy) but recur­
rence is possible. Rarely dogs are affected.
Cholesteatoma

A cholesteatoma is a nonneoplastic concretion of keratin
debris, keratinizing epithelium, and epidermoid cystic
structure(s) that is thought to be a rare sequela of chronic
inflammation and is reported infrequently in dogs with
otitis media. The cholesteatoma results in bullae expan­
sion and secondary osteolysis. Patients often present for
pain on opening the mouth, pain on palpation of the ear,
+/− peripheral vestibular signs. Surgical intervention is
necessary, so it should not be mistaken for primary infec­
tious otitis and managed medically. There are imaging
characteristics that can help differentiate it from primary
infectious otitis which should prompt surgical interven­
tion. Risk of recurrence after surgery is high. Monitoring
with advanced imaging every 6–12 months should be
considered.
Neoplasia

Any neoplastic process adjacent to the vestibular anatomy
(such as squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, oste­
osarcoma, fibrosarcoma, chondrosarcoma) can potentially
result in peripheral vestibular signs. The mass may track
along the skull base where cranial nerves exit their respec­
tive foramina, resulting in one or more of the following in
addition to vestibular signs: facial paralysis, change in
voice, stridor, difficulty swallowing, and tongue deviation
or dimpling/contracture. If there are no changes in menta­
tion and no proprioceptive deficits or paresis, localization
to the peripheral vestibular system would still be suspected
(i.e., the process has not yet invaded the cranial vault to any
appreciable degree on exam). Advanced imaging and
cytology/biopsy would be needed to determine the extent
of the disease, treatment options, and prognosis.

791

VetBooks.ir

792

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

Toxicity

Drug toxicity (topical, intravenous, and inhaled drugs)
can result in both deafness and vestibular signs by
damaging the hair cells or the vestibulocochlear nerve
itself. Antibiotics (aminoglycosides, erythromycin,
minocycline, topical choramphenicol, etc.), antiseptics
(chlorhexidine), diuretics (furosemide), and miscellaneous
other agents (salicylates, propylene glycol, ceruminolytic
agents, lead, mercury, etc.) are all recognized as causes of
ototoxicity in veterinary patients, with aminoglycoside
being the most commonly reported cause. NSAIDs are
a well‐recognized cause of reversible toxicity in people.
Early recognition and withdrawal of the medication may
limit damage, but by the time signs are recognized, the
damage may be permanent. Even when animals do not
recover fully from peripheral disease due to ototoxicity,
they usually compensate adequately to maintain a good
quality of life.

sive dilation of the fourth ventricle. Arachnoid divertic­
uli within the quadrigeminal cistern are more
commonly associated with seizures if clinical signs are
present at all, but vestibulocerebellar signs may be noted.
Caudal occipital malformation syndrome (also called a
Chiari‐like malformation) that leads to a degree of obstruc­
tive hydrocephalus and dilation of the fourth ventricle or
bulbomyelia may result in central vestibular signs. Severe
generalized hydrocephalus can occasionally be associ­
ated with vestibular signs because of fourth ventricle
involvement, but this would be an uncommon clinical
sign. Malformations leading to high cervical instability
(i.e., atlantooccipital or atlantoaxial subluxation/luxa­
tions) can rarely lead to secondary edema and inflamma­
tion extending cranial to involve the vestibular nuclei but
caudal nuclei involvement would also be present.
Infection

Since the vestibular apparatus is housed in the hardest
bone in the body, the petrous temporal bone, trauma is
not a common cause of vestibular disease. However,
blunt trauma, typically hit by car, can result in skull/bulla
fractures, hemorrhage in the soft tissues of the middle
and inner ear and lead to vestibular disease. Horner’s
syndrome and facial paralysis may also result from direct
trauma or soft tissue swelling/hemorrhage involving the
adjacent tissue as they are in close proximity to CN VIII.
Treatment for the vestibular signs would be supportive
care and time. Resolution of vestibular signs may be
incomplete.

Otitis can extend through the internal acoustic meatus
and result in intracranial disease with compression of
the brainstem from abscess formation or even active
meningitis/encephalitis, although this is less common.
Infectious agents are usually bacterial, but fungal dis­
ease is also possible.
Systemic infections involving the CNS or infections
apparently isolated to the CNS are uncommon in dogs,
with the exception of certain signalments and geographic
locations: Cryptococcus on the west coast, coccidiodio­
mycosis in desert locales, histoplasmosis and blastomy­
cosis in the Midwest, to name a few. Infections typically
cause multifocal signs that may include the vestibular
system.
Young dogs and cats are at higher risk for viral dis­
eases, with distemper and FIP being the most commonly
diagnosed.
Neospora and distemper appear to have a predilection
for cerebellar involvement which may result in vestibular
signs.

Central Vestibular Disease

Vascular

Metabolic

Hypothyroidism is often linked to peripheral vestibular
disease, although the association is tenuous. If hypothy­
roidism is detected in a patient with peripheral vestibu­
lar disease, treatment should be considered.
Trauma

Brain tumors, stroke‐like events, drug toxicities (such as
metronidazole and ronidazole), nutritional deficiencies
(thiamine), infections (such as distemper, feline infec­
tious peritonitis, Toxoplasma gondii, Neospora caninum,
and fungal infections) or diseases that cause inflammation
of the brain (such as granulomatous or necrotizing
meningoencephalitis) may all lead to central vestibular
disease in both the dog and the cat.
Anomalous/Congenital

Malformations resulting in central vestibular signs may
be present at birth but can progress over time due to
obstruction of CSF flow either within cystic structures
(i.e., arachnoid cysts/diverticuli) or leading to progres­

Vascular events (ischemic vs hemorrhagic) typically
have an acute onset, but may appear progressive over a
24‐hour period. Causes of vascular events often do not
have an underlying identifiable cause, but screening for
causes of thromboembolic disease, +/− bleeding disor­
ders, is warranted.
Hypertension, primary or secondary, can lead to ves­
tibular episodes. Many of these cases mimic idiopathic
vestibular disease in history and examination findings,
but the events will often recur, similar to TIAs in people,
and only resolve or improve once hypertension is
­controlled. In cases where there is an acute onset of ves­
tibular signs that clearly localize to the central vestibular
system, the cerebellum is most commonly involved, in

VetBooks.ir

72 Vestibular Disease

the author’s experience. MRI may be normal or show
evidence of ischemia within the vestibular system.
A normal MRI cannot exclude an ischemic event as the
area of compromised tissue may be smaller than the
resolution of the MRI (especially in small patients and
low field magnets), or sequencing that best highlights
tissue ischemia may not be available (software limita­
tions). MRI done in close temporal relationship to the
onset of signs could miss lesions that may be evident if
done a few hours to days later. Very small hemorrhages
or ischemic areas may be missed if gradient echo or dif­
fusion‐weighted sequences are not pursued.
Hypothyroidism can result in the formation of athero­
sclerosis, leading to vascular thrombosis and signs men­
tioned earlier.
Hemorrhagic vascular events are less common and
underlying causes such as thrombocytopenia, clotting
deficiencies (rodenticide toxicity, liver disease, etc.),
metastatic hemangiosarcoma, and hypertension should
be investigated.
Inflammatory

Inflammatory CNS disease (i.e., granulomatous meningo­
encephalitis, necrotizing meningoencephalomyelitis,
and breed‐specific encephalitides) is one of the more
common diseases neurologists diagnose. Young to
middle‐aged toy‐breed dogs are typically affected, but
any age and breed are susceptible. It usually presents as
multifocal disease and the patient may have one or more
of the following clinical signs: vestibular signs, cervical
pain, paresis, cranial nerve deficits, circling, obtunda­
tion, seizures. The cause is unknown but may be a com­
bination of genetic predisposition and an antigenic trigger
(recent illness, vaccination/medication, environmental
antigenic stimulation) resulting in an inappropriate
immune system attack on nervous tissue. MRI and spinal
fluid analysis are needed at a minimum to determine a
diagnosis. Often ruling out infectious disease (i.e., PCR
on CSF, serology, cultures, etc.) is necessary as the inflam­
mation may be secondary to another cause. Biopsy
would be needed for a definitive diagnosis and, given the
invasiveness, risk and cost associated, is not often pursued.
Therefore, treatment is based on the signalment, history,
and collection of diagnostic results supporting a sterile
inflammatory disease process.
As with other immune/inflammatory diseases, treatment
involves immunosuppression with one or more medica­
tions (i.e., prednisone, cytosar, azathioprine, cyclosporine,
etc.) for a prolonged period of time, often months, some­
times years. Response to treatment can be quite varia­
ble, but in the author’s experience many patients can be
weaned off drugs with the less severe forms of disease.
Inflammatory granulomas can cause mass lesions that
may be mistaken for neoplasia. These granulomas seem

to have a predilection for the cerebellar pontine angle,
leading to vestibulocerebellar signs, but can occur in
other locations as well.
Neoplasia

Neoplastic processes that affect the central vestibular sys­
tem include those that are commonly found at the cere­
bellar pontine angle (CPA), such as malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors of the trigeminal nerve that extend
intracranially, meningiomas, chorioid plexus tumors,
or ependymomas. Meningiomas, gliomas, round cell
tumors, and metastatic disease involving the cerebellum
(flocculonodular lobe) or brainstem vestibular nuclei can
also result in vestibular signs. Changes in intracranial
pressure due to neoplastic mass lesions elsewhere can
result in vestibular signs due to brainstem or cerebellar
compression (including cerebral herniation under the
tentorium cerebelli or cerebellar herniation from the
foramen magnum). MRI, +/−CSF, and surgical or CT‐
guided biopsy are necessary to confirm an antemortom
definitive diagnosis of neoplasia. However, most diagnoses
of intracranial neoplasia are made on imaging character­
istics and treated as such with radiation therapy, +/−
chemotherapy with definitive diagnosis only confirmed
after necropsy.
Nonneoplastic Mass Lesions

Epidermoid cysts, dermoid cysts, and teratomas are
thought to arise from trapped ectodermal embryonic
tissue as the neural tube is closing and therefore could be
included in the anomalous category. When found intrac­
ranially, they appear to have a predilection for the caudal
fossa and thus can produce vestibular signs. Other
nonneoplastic mass lesions that could produce vestibular
signs include arachnoid cysts/diverticuli, inflammatory
granulomas, cholesterol granulomas, infectious abscesses/
granulomas, parasitic cysts, and hematomas.
Nutritional

Thiamine deficiency (vitamin B1) in carnivores often
includes signs of central vestibular disease in addition
to cerebrothalamic signs (mental dullness, seizures) and
postural changes, cervical ventroflexion (in cats in par­
ticular), and paraparesis in dogs. Cat are more commonly
affected than dogs and signs can progress rapidly.
Unconventional diets (raw fish diets, diets cooked at very
high temperatures, diets with sulfur dioxide preserva­
tives) are typically the cause, but even commercial diets
can lead to thiamine deficiency. Bilaterally symmetric
changes on MRI (most apparent on FLAIR and gradient
echo sequences) within the brainstem nuclei (caudal
colliculi are most affected) are classic for thiamine
­
­deficiency. Histologic changes include petechial hemor­
rhages, edema, and neuronal necrosis.

793

VetBooks.ir

794

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

Ideally, patient thiamine levels +/− diet thiamine levels
would be pursued. Often, supplementation with thia­
mine and resolution of signs may be the only option. The
signs are completely reversible if treated in a timely
­manner and fatal if untreated.
Metronidazole and Ronidazole Toxicity

Toxicity associated with metronidazole is most often
found with high doses (15–30 mg/kg BID) or prolonged
therapy even at more conservative doses. Signs vary in
severity and often appear more cerebellar than vestibular,
but may include vertical nystagmus or ocular tremors,
intact vision with absent menace, mild to severe general­
ized ataxia, possibly progressing to a nonambulatory
state with decerebellate posturing, hypermetria in ambu­

latory patients (sometimes more severe in the PL), kypho­
sis, and proprioceptive deficits without loss of strength.
Discontinuation of the medication will result in resolution
of signs over days to weeks, but treating with IV or oral diaz­
epam (0.5 mg/kg TID 3–5 days) can expedite recovery.
Ronidazole is most commonly used for the treatment
of tritrichomonas foetus in cats and toxicity results in
similar signs as above.
The mechanism of toxicity is not known. In people,
changes on MRI show bilaterally symmetric alterations
in the cerebellar dentate nuclei signal intensity and often
the vestibular nuclei as well. There is speculation that it
may be mediated by thiamine deficiency due to similar
MRI changes in patients diagnosed with Wernicke
encephalopathy.

Further Reading
Bentley RT, March PA. Recurrent vestibular paroxysms
associated with systemichypertension in a dog. J Am Vet
Med Assoc. 2011 Sep 1; 239(5): 652–5.
Cornelis I, Van Ham L, Gielen I, De Decker S, Bhatti SFM.
Clinical presentation, diagnosticfindings, prognostic
factors, treatment and outcome in dogs with
meningoencephalomyelitis of unknown origin:
A review. VetJ. 2019 Feb; 244: 37–44.
de Lahunta A, Glass EN, Kent M (2015). Veterinary
Neuroanatomy and Clinical Neurology, 4thedition.
St. Louis, Missouri. Saunders Elsevier.
Guevar J, Olby NJ, Meurs KM, Yost O, Friedenberg SG.
(2018) Deafness and vestibular dysfunction in a
Doberman Pinscher puppy associated with a mutation
in the PTPRQ gene. J Vet Intern Med. Mar; 32(2):
665–669.
Hayes GM, Friend EJ, Jeffery ND. (2010) Relationship
between pharyngeal conformation and otitis media with

effusion in Cavalier King Charles spaniels. Vet Rec. Jul;
167(2): 55–8.
Hermanson JW, deLahunta A, Evans HE (2020). Miller
and Evan’s Anatomy of the Dog, 5th edition. St. Louis,
Missouri, Saunders Elsevier.
Kim E, Na DG, Kim EY, Kim JH, et al. (2007) MR Imaging
of Metronidazole-Induced Encephalopathy: Lesion
Distribution andDiffusion-Weighted Imaging Findings.
American Journal of Neuroradiology 28(9) 1652–1658
Marks SL, Lipsitz D, Vernau KM, Dickinson PJ, Draper W,
Larsen JA, Fascetti AJ. (2011) Reversible encephalopathy
secondary to thiamine deficiency in 3 cats ingesting
commercial diets. J Vet Intern Med. Jul-Aug; 25(4):
949–53.
Tauro A, Beltran E, Cherubini GB, Coelho AT, Wessmann
A, Driver CJ, Rusbridge CJ. (2018) Metronidazoleinduced neurotoxicity in 26 dogs. Aust Vet J. Dec;
96(12): 495–501.

VetBooks.ir

795

73
Meningoencephalitis and Meningomyelitis
Christopher L. Mariani, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Neurology)
College of Veterinary Medicine, NC State, Raleigh, NC, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
The meninges comprise three connective tissue layers
that surround the brain and spinal cord: the pia mater,
arachnoid mater (these collectively known as the
­leptomeninges), and the dura mater (or pachymeninx).
Inflammation of the meninges, known as meningitis,
may remain confined to these structures, or may also
involve the underlying brain and/or spinal cord, termed
meningoencephalitis and meningomyelitis respectively.
There are a whole host of infectious diseases that can
cause inflammation of the meninges or underlying
­central nervous system (CNS) in small animals. These
include viral, bacterial, fungal, rickettsial, protozoal, and
parasitic organisms (Table 73.1). These organisms may
infect the CNS as part of a systemic, multiorgan process
(e.g, Rickettsia rickettsia, canine distemper, Blastomyces
dermatitidis) although some agents display a notable
neurotropism with CNS entry via the bloodstream or nasal
passages (e.g., Cryptococcus neoformans, Cladophia­
lophora bantiana). Within the CNS, these infectious
agents may cause clinical signs through a variety of
mechanisms. Their presence often results in an immune
response with resulting inflammation. Such an inflammatory response can occasionally involve the vasculature supplying the CNS, leading to vascular injury and
resulting ischemic or hemorrhagic disease. Inflammation
of the ependymal surface and changes in the viscosity of
the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) can result in disruption of
CSF flow and obstructive hydrocephalus (e.g., with feline
infectious peritonitis [FIP]). Some organisms can infect
neurons or glia, causing direct dysfunction or death of
these cells (e.g., canine distemper virus).
Despite this large number of organisms that can cause
CNS disease, documented infections comprise a very
small proportion of small animal meningoencephalitis
and meningomyelitis cases. Cats are generally considered

more likely to develop infectious CNS disease than dogs,
although documentation of infectious agents is still difficult in this species. In dogs, the vast majority of meningoencephalitis and meningomyelitis cases appear not to
have a direct infectious cause, and are often termed “sterile” as a result. In these animals, invading immune cells
lead to CNS inflammation and resulting clinical signs.
Whether these represent a response to an as yet undetected infectious organism, an overactive immune‐mediated response to an unknown environmental trigger or a
true autoimmune process remains to be determined.
However, broad screening studies aimed at detecting previously unknown infectious agents have thus far been
relatively unrewarding, and an immune‐mediated process appears more likely for the majority of canine cases.
There are several well‐recognized syndromes that occur
in dogs where infectious agents have not been identified
(Table 73.2). Many of these conditions are highly breed
associated and a genetic role in their pathophysiology has
long been suspected. Such a role has been best investigated in pug dogs with necrotizing meningoencephalitis
(NME). Several studies in this breed have shown a strong
association of disease with a specific haplotype localized
in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) II region
of chromosome 12. This finding resembles what is seen in
many immune‐mediated diseases in humans, including
multiple sclerosis. How­
ever, this association probably
does not identify a strictly causative mutation, but likely
confers an increased risk of disease development, and it is
suspected that other factors, such as the presence of a
“trigger” to set the disease in motion, also play a role.
Interestingly, other dog breeds with NME that develop a
histologically identical lesion do not seem to share the
same at‐risk haplotypes as pugs and clearly more work to
define these underlying susceptibilities needs to be done.
The pathophysiology of most canine and feline
meningoencephalitides is relatively poorly understood,

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

796

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

Table 73.1 Infectious agents causing meningoencephalomyelitis
in small animals
Category
of agent

Examples of specific organisms

Viral

Canine distemper virus, feline infectious
peritonitis, feline immunodeficiency virus,
rabies, pseudorabies, West Nile virus

Fungal

Cryptococcus neoformans, Coccidioides immitis,
Blastomyces dermatidis, Aspergillus spp.,
Cladophialophora bantiana

Rickettsial

Ehrlichia canis, Rickettsia rickettsia, Anaplasma
phagocytophilum

Bacterial

Streptococcus spp., Bartonella spp., Borrellia
burgdorferi, Leptospira spp.

Protozoal

Neospora caninum, Toxoplasma gondii,
Entamoeba histolytica

Parasitic

Cuterebra spp., Dirofiliaria immitis, Baylisascaris
procyonis, Angiostrongylus spp., Prototheca spp.

and has been sparsely investigated. One exception is
steroid‐responsive meningitis‐arteritis (SRMA), which is
a systemic inflammatory condition with a focus of inflammation in the leptomeninges and its associated arteries.

­Epidemiology
Environmental conditions and exposures play an important
role in the transmission of many of the infectious organisms that cause meningoencephalitis or meningomyelitis.
These include housing density and animal‐to‐animal
transmission (e.g., canine distemper virus, FIP), transmission via wildlife bites (e.g., rabies, feline immunodeficiency virus [FIV]), exposure to soil or stagnant water
sources (e.g., Blastomyces dermatidis, Cryptococcus
neoformans, Entamoeba histolytica), or transmission
from insect or arthropod vectors (e.g., Dirofilaria immitis,
Ehrlichia canis, Rickettsia rickettsia). As mentioned
above, most of the CNS inflammatory diseases seen in

Table 73.2 Presumed noninfectious inflammatory central nervous system (CNS) conditions in dogs
Neuroanatomic
distribution

Typical cerebrospinal
fluid results

CNS imaging

Boxer, Bernese mountain
dog, beagle, petit basset
griffon Vendéen, Nova
Scotia duck tolling
retriever, Weimaraner

Meninges of cervical
region, rarely involves
underlying CNS

Marked neutrophilic
pleocytosis

Possible meningeal
enhancement, may be normal

Granulomatous
meningoencephalitis
(GME)

Terriers, miniature
poodle

Preferentially affects
medulla, cerebellum,
and cervical spinal cord

Moderate‐marked
mononuclear or
mixed pleocytosis

Meningeal enhancement,
contrast‐enhancing CNS
parenchymal lesions, focal
mass lesion possible

Necrotizing
meningoencephalitis
(NME)

Pug, Maltese,
Chihuahua, shih tzu,
papillon, Pekingese

Forebrain

Mild‐marked
mononuclear
pleocytosis;
occasionally normal

Meningeal enhancement, brain
parenchymal lesions with or
without enhancement, loss of
gray‐white matter distinction,
mass effect possible

Necrotizing
leukoencephalitis (NLE)

Yorkshire terrier, French
bulldog

White matter of
forebrain and
brainstem

Mild‐marked
mononuclear
pleocytosis;
occasionally normal

Brain white matter parenchymal
lesions with or without
enhancement

Idiopathic eosinophilic
meningoencephalitis

Rottweiler, golden
retriever

Brain usually involved,
occasionally spinal
cord

Eosinophilic
pleocytosis
(>20% eosinophils)

Possible meningeal
enhancement and parenchymal
CNS lesions; poorly described
and variable in literature

Generalized tremor
syndrome (“little white
shaker/shaky dog disease”)

Often small white dogs

Likely diffuse CNS

Mild mononuclear
pleocytosis or
normal

Possible meningeal
enhancement, often normal;
poorly described in literature

Greyhound
meningoencephalitis

Greyhounds

Forebrain (olfactory
bulbs, frontal and
temporal lobe gray
matter, caudate nuclei)

Mild‐moderate
mononuclear
pleocytosis, can be
normal

Brain parenchymal lesions
with minimal or absent
contrast enhancement

Condition

Breeds predisposed

Steroid‐responsive
meningitis‐arteritis
(SRMA)

VetBooks.ir

73 Meningoencephalitis and Meningomyelitis

dogs have no known infectious etiologies, and are likely
immune‐mediated processes that occur in individuals
with a genetic predisposition after some sort of antigenic
“trigger.” Such triggers remain unknown at this time but
might be related to exposure to environmental antigens
or to antigens from infectious agents not involving the
CNS (e.g., respiratory or gastrointestinal infection).

­Signalment
Although dogs and cats of any age or breed can be affected
by inflammatory CNS disease, certain populations are
predisposed to its development. Infectious diseases
occur more frequently in younger animals, which may be
related in part to maturation of the immune system or
vaccination failures. As mentioned above and detailed in
Table 73.2, many of the apparent noninfectious canine
meningoencephalitides have strong breed predispositions, and these diseases also have fairly consistent ages
of onset. As a general rule, meningoencephalitis occurs
more frequently in young to middle‐aged animals.
Gender seems to play a minor role in most of these diseases, although some early reports of GME and a more
recent study of NME have described a female predominance. In contrast, most of the dogs reported to develop
eosinophilic meningoencephalitis have been male.

­History and Clinical Signs
The history may reveal important predisposing factors
for some of the infectious diseases, including vaccination
history, exposure to ticks or mosquitoes, animal bites,
ingestion of raw food or carrion, and exposure to soil or
stagnant water. Obtaining a thorough travel history may
elucidate additional potential differential diagnoses as
some of the tick‐borne and fungal diseases have clear
geographic distributions.
Clinical signs of meningoencephalitis and meningomyelitis typically have an acute onset with progression
over time; chronic infection or inflammation of the CNS
is unusual. The signs seen are dependent on the region
of the nervous system that is involved. Animals with
meningitis (including SRMA) typically present for pain,
particularly cervical pain, and neurologic deficits are
frequently absent or subtle. Patients with forebrain
involvement may present with seizures, altered mentation, depressed consciousness, visual deficits, and compulsive pacing or circling. Brainstem disease can result
in cranial nerve deficits such as vestibular dysfunction,
facial nerve paralysis, pupillary abnormalities, strabismus,
dysphagia, megaesophagus or tongue atrophy together

with ataxia and paresis of all four limbs. Myelitis also
results in ataxia and paresis, together with spinal pain
and possibly deficits in segmental spinal reflexes.
Postural reaction deficits may be seen with lesions in
any of these regions. One hallmark of inflammatory
disease of the CNS is that it frequently results in a
­multifocal distribution of signs (i.e., multifocal lesion
localization), which is uncommonly seen with other
disease processes.
Occasionally, signs that are very characteristic for a
specific disease may be noted, such as distemper
“myoclonus” or rigid limb extension due to muscle
contractures in dogs with Neospora caninum infection.
In addition, some infectious diseases may involve multiple organ systems, producing signs referable to the
respiratory system (e.g., canine distemper, blastomycosis),
bone (Coccidioides immitis), integument (canine distemper, blastomycosis), gastrointestinal tract (canine distemper, Prototheca) or other systems. Involvement of
other systems is not typical for the “sterile” meningoencephalitides, although occasionally polyarthritis is seen
in dogs with SRMA.

­Diagnosis
A complete blood count may show abnormalities with
certain infectious agents, such as thrombocytopenia
with rickettsial infections or eosinophilia with some
parasite or protozoal diseases. If CNS inflammation is
part of a multisystemic infectious or inflammatory process, then a neutrophilic or monocytic leukocytosis may
be evident. Serum chemistry may similarly show abnormalities in certain conditions such as hyperglobulinemia
with FIP or Ehrlichia canis infections or changes indicative of renal or hepatic dysfunction in multisystemic
infections. However, in most animals with inflammatory
CNS disease, the complete blood count (CBC), serum
chemistry, and urinalysis are relatively unremarkable.
Although infrequently analyzed, acute phase proteins
may show changes in some animals, such as elevations in
serum C‐reactive protein, fibrinogen or serum amyloid
A protein.
A diagnosis of meningoencephalitis or meningomyelitis is most commonly made with advanced diagnostic
imaging and analysis of CSF. Conventional imaging tests
such as radiography or ultrasound have little role in the
diagnostic process outside of screening other organs
within the thoracic and abdominal cavities for disease.
Myelography is a technique that involves the injection of
contrast material into the subarachnoid space, followed by radiography of the vertebral column.
Interruptions in the flow of contrast material can result
in several imaging patterns indicating mass lesions in

797

VetBooks.ir

798

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

extradural, intradural‐extramedullary or intramedullary
locations. Although myelography may be abnormal with
meningomyelitis if a mass effect or spinal cord swelling is
a component of the disease process, these abnormalities
are nonspecific and rarely facilitate a definitive diagnosis.
In addition, myelography itself results in inflammation
of the meninges and spinal cord, which can worsen clinical signs, and so this intervention must be pursued with
caution. Therefore, more advanced imaging modalities
are preferred for patients with potential inflammatory
CNS disease, if available.
Computed tomography (CT) is a technique that utilizes X‐rays to produce cross‐sectional images of desired
anatomic structures. Software packages allow manipulation of images to highlight tissues of varying densities
(“windowing”) and images can be obtained both before
and after the administration of intravenous contrast
material, which can highlight areas within the CNS
where normal vascular barriers are compromised (e.g.,
neoplastic tissue, areas of inflammation). Computed
tomography can also be combined with myelography to
improve visualization of contrast within the subarachnoid space, which increases the diagnostic utility of this
latter technique. In animals with meningoencephalitis
or meningomyelitis, CT may show areas of hypodensity
within the brain or spinal cord parenchyma respectively,
corresponding to inflammation and associated edema;
these areas often show enhancement after contrast
administration. Meningeal enhancement, either occurring alone or in conjunction with parenchymal enhancement, may also be noted. There are some limitations
associated with CT imaging, including a relative lack of
sensitivity for inflammatory lesions when compared
with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and the occurrence of a phenomenon known as beam hardening
artifact, which compromises imaging of the medulla
oblongata due to the thick nature of the adjacent petrous
temporal bone.
Magnetic resonance imaging is currently the gold
standard for visual evaluation of CNS anatomy and associated disease states. Compared with CT, it has improved
sensitivity for the detection of most CNS pathology,
including inflammatory diseases. It utilizes a completely
novel technology that does not rely on ionizing radiation
but rather on placing the patient in a high magnetic field
and delivering radiofrequency pulses, which change the
movements and behavior of hydrogen atoms (protons)
within the patient. As these protons move, they create a
magnetic signal that is captured to generate images.
As protons are primarily concentrated within water in
biologic tissues, the differences in water content between
different tissues and different pathologic processes are
what determine the contrast within the images generated.
The parameters controlling delivery of the radiofrequency

pulse and capture of the resulting signal can be adjusted
to create many different sequences, which can highlight
or remove signals associated with certain tissues or
pathologies. Inflammatory lesions generally appear as
hypointense on T1‐weighted images and hyperintense
on T2‐weighted images, with some degree of enhancement after contrast administration. Enhancement of
both parenchymal lesions and meninges can be seen
after intravenous contrast administration. This enhancement varies in intensity and uniformity, and may be
influenced by a variety of factors including the degree of
inflammatory cell infiltrate, associated tissue edema and
the presence of necrotic tissue within the lesion.
The analysis of CSF is an integral part of the diagnostic
process for patients with inflammatory CNS disease.
Cerebrospinal fluid can be collected from the cerebellomedullary cistern or the lumbar subarachnoid
space. Normal CSF has very few leukocytes (0–5/μL), an
absence of erythrocytes, and a low protein concentration
(0–20 mg/dL). Meningeal, brain or spinal cord inflammation usually leads to increases in leukocytes (pleocytosis)
and protein concentration within the CSF. Occasionally,
an infectious (e.g., canine distemper) or noninfectious
meningoencephalitis or meningomyelitis will lead to an
increased protein without a corresponding increase in
white blood cell numbers, which is known as albuminocytologic dissociation. Cytologic evaluation of the CSF
can also provide valuable information to the clinician.
The composition of leukocytes within the CSF can
provide clues to an infectious etiology in some cases
(e.g., eosinophilic pleocytosis with parasitic and some
fungal infections, lymphocytic pleocytosis with viral
infections) or can be associated with presumed immune‐
mediated conditions in others (e.g., neutrophilic pleocytosis with SRMA, mononuclear pleocytosis with NME).
In rare cases, infectious organisms can be visualized on
CSF cytology (e.g., Cryptococcus neoformans).
It must be noted that CSF pleocytosis is not exclusive
to inflammatory disease, as such a pattern can also
be seen with other conditions, including neoplasia or
acute trauma. In addition, albuminocytologic dissociation is a common and relatively nonspecific change
seen with compressive, vascular, neoplastic, and
degenerative CNS diseases. As a result, CSF evaluation
is ideally performed in conjunction with advanced
diagnostic imaging (preferably MRI) in order to rule
out these other conditions.
Despite utilizing both CNS imaging and CSF analysis,
the diagnosis can remain elusive in some cases. The most
common scenario is difficulty in distinguishing inflammatory from neoplastic disease. In these situations,
obtaining meningeal and/or brain tissue for histologic
evaluation may be the best way to arrive at a definitive
diagnosis. Brain biopsy is rarely performed for suspected

VetBooks.ir

73 Meningoencephalitis and Meningomyelitis

meningoencephalitis, although advances in stereotactic
biopsy systems and minimally invasive methods may
help in making such an option more acceptable to both
clinicians and the owners of affected animals. As GME,
NME, and NLE are diagnoses that can only be made with
histopathology, many clinicians will refer to cases of
inflammatory CNS disease diagnosed with imaging and
CSF analysis as meningoencephalitis of unknown etiology
(MUE) or unknown origin (MUO). This designation
typically does not include dogs with SRMA, eosinophilic
meningoencephalitis, or greyhound meningoencephalitis as these patients have distinctive signalments, clinical
syndromes, imaging findings, and/or CSF abnormalities
(see Table 73.2).
A variety of assays are available to identify infectious
agents within the blood, CSF or other body fluids. These
include assays for organism antigens (e.g., Cryptococcus
neoformans), antibodies generated against the organism
(e.g., IgG and IgM for canine distemper or Toxoplasma
gondii), and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for organism DNA or RNA. Cytologic findings associated with
other body systems (e.g., inclusion bodies in cells from a
conjunctival swab in animals with canine distemper)
may also aid in the diagnosis of certain infectious
­diseases and prompt additional testing for suspected
organisms.

­Therapy
Therapy for meningoencephalitis and meningomyelitis
depends on the underlying etiology causing the inflammation, but typically involves antimicrobial, antiinflammatory or immunosuppressive medications. There are
no antiviral medications known to be effective or currently recommended for use in small animals with CNS
viral infections, and treatment for these patients remains
largely supportive. Animals with a documented or suspected bacterial meningoencephalitis are ideally treated
with an antibiotic that shows good penetration of the
blood–brain and blood–CSF barriers (Table 73.3).
Antifungal medications are indicated in some patients,
and these also vary in their ability to penetrate the CNS.
Doxycycline not only has antibacterial activity with
good CNS penetration, but also is the drug of choice for
animals with rickettsial infections. Animals with T. gondii
or N. caninum infections may respond to sulfa antibiotics, clindamycin and/or pyrimethamine. Animals with
infectious meningoencephalitis often benefit from
short‐term, antiinflammatory doses of glucocorticoids,
although immunosuppressive doses and prolonged
administration of these medications should be avoided
as they can impair clearance of the infecting organisms
and substantially worsen clinical signs.

Table 73.3 Antimicrobial medications for meningoencephalitis and meningomyelitis
Medication

Dosing

Indications

Additional considerations

Potentiated sulfonamides
(e.g., trimethoprim/sulfa)

15 mg/kg q12h

Bacterial meningitis, protozoal
disease of central nervous
system (CNS)

Consider concurrent folate
supplementation

Clindamycin

5–25 mg/kg q12h

Bacterial meningitis, protozoal
disease of CNS

Penetration of CNS controversial

Doxycycline

5–10 mg/kg q12–24h

Bacterial or rickettsial disease of
CNS

Third‐generation
cephalosporins

Variable

Bacterial meningitis

Chloramphenicol

25–50 mg/kg q8h (dog) or
12–25 mg/kg q12h (cat)

Bacterial meningitis

Concurrent use with phenobarbital
not recommended

Fluoroquinolones
(enrofloxacin, ciprofloxacin)

5–15 mg/kg q12h
(ciprofloxacin)
2.5–10 mg/kg q12h
(enrofloxacin)

Bacterial meningitis

Penetration of CNS controversial
Avoid higher doses in cats due to
retinal toxicity

Metronidazole

10–15 mg/kg q12h

Bacterial meningitis (anaerobic)

CNS toxicity possible at higher doses

Meropenem

25 mg/kg IV q8h

Bacterial meningitis

Doses up to 40 mg/kg q8h have been
suggested but not tested in veterinary
patients

Fluconazole

2.5–10 mg/kg q12–24h

Fungal infections

Pyrimethamine

0.5–1 mg/kg q24h

Protozoal infections

799

VetBooks.ir

800

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

Treatment of the “sterile” meningoencephalitides
focuses on the control of inflammation and suppression
of the immune system with glucocorticoids and in
some cases additional immunosuppressive medications.
Prednisone or dexamethasone is often started at antiinflammatory doses after imaging studies and CSF collection, pending the results of infectious disease testing.
Antimicrobial drugs are usually indicated while awaiting
these results. When the clinician has ruled out infectious
causes, the patient is reassessed and their response to
therapy is evaluated. Some animals will respond fully to
antiinflammatory glucocorticoids. However, those with
an absent or partial response will often benefit from
escalation to an immunosuppressive dose (Table 73.4).
If remission is achieved, this dose is continued for an
extended period and then the dose is slowly reduced over
a period of weeks to months. Some animals are eventually
able to have their glucocorticoid therapy discontinued,

although they must be monitored closely for relapse of
clinical signs. Conversely, many patients require long‐
term and often life‐long therapy.
Some conditions, such as SRMA, generalized tremor
syndrome and idiopathic eosinophilic meningoencephalitis, can typically be managed with glucocorticoids
alone. This strategy can also work for patients with
GME, NME or NLE although anecdotal evidence suggests that these dogs do not respond as well, and may
benefit from additional immunosuppressive therapy. This
benefit may occur due to additional mechanisms of
immunosuppression (typically interference with lymphocyte proliferation) or by allowing a decreased glucocorticoid dose, which reduces adverse effects and
improves overall management. Several different immunosuppressive drugs have been utilized in this scenario
(see Table 73.4), and choice is based primarily on clinician preference, as rigorous studies demonstrating a

Table 73.4 Antiinflammatory and immunosuppressive medications for meningoencephalitis and meningomyelitis
Medication

Dosing

Mechanism of action

Adverse effects

Additional considerations

Prednisone or
prednisolone

0.5–1.0 mg/kg q12–24h
(antiinflammatory);
2.2–6.6 mg/kg/day
(immunosuppressive)

Regulation of
inflammatory gene
expression, impaired
leukocyte migration,
interference with
arachidonic acid cascade
and cytokine production

Polyuria, polydipsia,
polyphagia,
gastrointestinal ulceration,
hypercoagulability,
hepatopathy

Prednisolone preferred in
cats

Dexamethasone

0.07–0.15 mg/kg
q12–24h
(antiinflammatory);
0.3–1.0 mg/kg/day
(immunosuppressive)

As for prednisone

As for prednisone

Cytosine
arabinoside

200 mg/m2 IV over
8–24 hours or 50 mg/m2
SC twice daily for 2 days

Interferes with pyrimidine
(DNA) synthesis

Nausea, vomiting, bone
marrow suppression,
hepatic toxicosis

Leflunomide

3–4 mg/kg/day

Interferes with pyrimidine
(DNA) synthesis

Nausea, diarrhea, lethargy,
bone marrow suppression
(rare)

Azathioprine

2 mg/kg q24h initially
(5–14 days) then
0.5–1.0 mg/kg q48h

Interferes with purine
(DNA) synthesis

Vomiting, diarrhea, bone
marrow suppression,
hepatic toxicosis

Mycophenolate
mofetil

10 mg/kg q8h or
20 mg/kg q12h (dogs)

Interferes with purine
(DNA) synthesis

Vomiting, diarrhea

Ciclosporin A

5 mg/kg q12–24h

Calcineurin inhibitor
(inhibits T cell
proliferation)

Inappetence, vomiting,
diarrhea, gingival
hyperplasia, papillomatosis,
hepatic or renal toxicosis
(rare)

Lomustine
(CCNU)

60–90 mg/m2 q4 weeks

Alkylating agent

Bone marrow suppression,
hepatic toxicosis

Procarbazine

25–50 mg/m2 q24h

Alkylating agent
(suspected)

Nausea, vomiting, bone
marrow suppression,
hepatic toxicosis

Clinical effect may be
delayed up to 4–6 weeks

May adjust according to
response or blood
concentrations; concurrent
ketoconazole administration
may allow lower dose

VetBooks.ir

73 Meningoencephalitis and Meningomyelitis

clear benefit of these medications have not yet been published. The use of other immunomodulatory interventions,
such as intravenous immunoglobulin and plasmapheresis, is an intriguing possibility that has yet to be investigated in small animal patients. Anticonvulsant therapy is
utilized in animals with seizures. Dogs with generalized
tremor syndrome may also benefit from concurrent diazepam therapy. Although the pain associated with meningoencephalitis or meningomyelitis usually improves
dramatically with glucocorticoid therapy, additional analgesics such as gabapentin or opioid medications may
prove beneficial until the inflammation subsides.
The primary means of monitoring response to therapy
in animals with inflammatory CNS disease is assessment
of clinical signs based on examination and questioning of
the owners. Although complete normalization is ideal and
achievable in many patients, some animals are left with
residual deficits. A significant challenge for the clinician is to determine if such deficits are the result of active
inflammation or permanent damage (i.e., loss of cells or
tissue) to the CNS. Periodic monitoring with a CBC and
serum biochemistry is indicated in patients receiving glucocorticoids or other immunosuppressive drugs to detect
adverse effects associated with therapy (e.g., myelosuppression, hepatic failure) as well as infections occurring
secondary to immunosuppression. Monitoring of serum
drug concentrations is not routinely performed, although
some clinicians will utilize this for ciclosporin A. Similarly,
repeat CNS imaging and/or CSF evaluation can be helpful
in some patients to assess the degree of ongoing inflammation and other pathology, although this is not routinely
performed by all clinicians and is obviously dependent on
the owner’s financial means. Serial monitoring of antibody or antigen titers can be useful in the monitoring of
some infectious diseases.

­Prognosis
The prognosis for animals with inflammatory CNS
­disease is highly variable, and depends on both the
underlying etiology as well as an individual’s response
to therapy. Some animals with viral disease may clear
the virus, and the prognosis depends on the amount
of damage that occurred to the CNS while infected
(e.g., canine distemper). These animals may survive,
although often with residual deficits (e.g., distemper
“myoclonus”). Conversely, some viral diseases such as
rabies, pseudorabies, and FIP are invariably fatal.
Fungal disease typically requires long‐term and often
life‐long therapy. Animals with bacterial or protozoal
diseases can be treated successfully although they may
be left with residual deficits and the prognosis is typically guarded.
Dogs with SRMA, generalized tremor syndrome, and
idiopathic eosinophilic meningoencephalitis, usually
have a good prognosis, with full resolution of clinical
signs and long‐term remission after therapy, although
relapses are possible. The prognosis for dogs with
GME, NME, and NLE is much more variable. Although
some of these patients may respond fully to treatment,
life‐long therapy is typical, and many dogs will have an
incomplete response. In addition, some dogs progress
and die in spite of aggressive treatment. However, the
prognosis for cases cited in the literature is likely to be
overly pessimistic, as there is a bias towards dogs that
have had disease confir­
mation via histopathology.
Finally, the prognosis for animals with greyhound
meningoencephalitis has been suggested to be poor,
although aggressive therapeutic intervention has not
yet been described in the literature.

­Further Reading
Barber RM, Porter BF, Li Q, et al. Broadly reactive polymerase
chain reaction for pathogen detection in canine
granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis and necrotizing
meningoencephalitis. J Vet Intern Med 2012; 26: 962–8.
Barber RM, Schatzberg SJ, Corneveaux JJ, et al.
Identification of risk loci for necrotizing
meningoencephalitis in pug dogs. J Heredity 2011;
102(Suppl 1): S40–S46.
Granger N, Smith PM, Jeffery ND. Clinical findings and
treatment of non‐infectious meningoencephalomyelitis

in dogs: a systematic review of 457 published cases from
1962 to 2008. Vet J 2010; 184: 290–7.
Lowrie M, Penderis J, McLaughlin M, Eckersall PD,
Anderson TJ. Steroid responsive meningitis‐arteritis: a
prospective study of potential disease markers,
prednisolone treatment, and long‐term outcome in 20
dogs (2006–2008). J Vet Intern Med 2009; 23: 862–70.
Tipold A, Schatzberg SJ. An update on steroid responsive
meningitis‐arteritis. J Small Anim Pract 2010; 51:
150–4.

801

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

803

74
Diseases of the Neuromuscular Junction
David Lipsitz, DVM, DACVIM (Neurology)
Veterinary Specialty Hospital, San Diego, CA, USA

The neuromuscular junction (NMJ) consists of the
efferent nerve terminals, the neuromuscular cleft, and
the postsynaptic membrane. As an action potential
reaches the presynaptic nerve terminal, voltage‐gated
calcium channels open, allowing Ca2+ ion efflux into the
presynaptic nerve terminal. This Ca2+ influx allows synaptic vesicles containing neurotransmitter to dock and
fuse with the sarcolemma in the process of exocytosis,
thereby releasing the neurotransmitter acetylcholine
(ACh) into the synaptic cleft. Fusion of the vesicular
and plasma membranes is mediated by SNARE (soluble
N‐ethylmaleimide‐sensitive fusion) proteins. Some of
the SNARE proteins that are used for synaptic vesicle
exocytosis include synaptobrevin (VAMP1), syntaxin 1a,
and synaptosome‐associated protein 25 (SNAP‐25).
These SNARE proteins may be the target of many disease
processes and toxins.
The ACh released from these vesicles then diffuses
through the synaptic cleft and binds to the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) located on the specially
folded postsynaptic muscle fiber sarcolemma. The adult
nACHR has been shown to have four different protein
subunits (α, β, δ, ε). The receptor is arranged in the fashion
of five subunits: 2 α1, β1, δ, ε. These subunits span the
lipid bilayer, creating a water‐filled pore which forms a
“hydrophobic girdle” that acts as a barrier to ion permeation. When ACh binds to the receptor, it undergoes
conformational change that allows a preferential influx
of Na+ > Ca++ and an efflux of potassium. This region is
also closely associated with a high density of sodium
channels in order to promote and amplify the signal to
assure the propagation of an action potential to generate
muscle contraction. As the sodium ions move into the
muscle membrane, local depolarization occurs in what is
termed an endplate potential (EPP) which spreads across
the surface of the sarcolemma, with the ensuing excitation‐contraction coupling allowing the muscle fiber to
contract. The magnitude of the EPP is dependent on the

amount of ACh released and the amount of nAChRs but
there is normally an abundance of both, resulting in a
large safety factor for neuromuscular transmission.
Acetylcholinesterase then breaks down the ACh (producing choline and esterase) and the ACh diffuses away
from the synapse, allowing the sodium channels to close.
New ACh molecules are synthesized when the choline
is transported, through reuptake into the presynaptic
terminal.
The clinical presentation in animals with neuromuscular transmission disease is very similar regardless of
whether the disorder is presynaptic (i.e., botulism) or
postsynaptic (i.e., myasthenia gravis). There is usually a
symmetric progressive generalized weakness in all limbs.
Exercise intolerance is often seen as well. Tendon reflexes
may or may not be intact. There is often facial muscle,
laryngeal, pharyngeal or esophageal weakness associated
with these disorders. Sensory function is unaffected, as
would be expected.

­Myasthenia Gravis
Myasthenia gravis (MG) is a neuromuscular transmission disorder caused by a reduction in the number of
functional nAChRs on the postsynaptic membrane. It is
usually the result of an acquired autoimmune disease
and much less commonly a congenital disorder.
Clinical Presentation
Myasthenia gravis should be a consideration in any animal
being examined for focal or generalized neuromuscular
weakness. The clinical signs may be focal in nature and
limited to esophageal dilation leading to regurgitation,
pharyngeal dysfunction causing dysphagia and laryngeal
paresis/paralysis causing dysphonia (voice change).
Multiple cranial nerve abnormalities may also occur in

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

804

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

the absence of generalized muscle weakness. One study
demonstrated that 43% of dogs with a confirmed diagnosis
of MG (positive AChR antibody titer) did not have clinically detectable limb muscle weakness. The remaining
57% of dogs had generalized weakness, with 13% of these
having no esophageal or pharyngeal dysfunction.
The classic presentation of a dog with MG is generalized
muscle weakness that worsens with activity but not all
animals display this exercise intolerance. Dogs are more
likely than humans or cats to develop megaesophagus
because the canine esophagus contains more skeletal
muscle than smooth muscle. If megaesophagus is present there is a higher risk of aspiration pneumonia.
An acute fulminating form of MG (<5% of cases) has
been described. These dogs present with acute onset of
rapidly developing signs. They are usually tetraparetic/
plegic with marked respiratory distress due to a combination of aspiration pneumonia and respiratory muscle
weakness. These animals require intensive care and
may need ventilatory support. For this reason, acute
fulminating MG has a higher mortality rate. This form
has also been associated with a higher rate of thymoma.
Thirty to 50% of dogs with thymoma may develop MG.
In order for these cases to resolve, thymectomy is
recommended.
The clinical signs of MG in cats are also variable, with
the two most common clinical signs being generalized
weakness without megaesophagus and generalized
weakness associated with a cranial mediastinal mass.
The incidence of megaesophagus and dysphagia was
lower compared to dogs. Myasthenia gravis was also
documented in five hyperthyroid cats. These cats
developed weakness 2–4 months after treatment with
methimazole and were seropositive (AChR antibodies).
It was postulated that the drug caused a reversible lack of
tolerance to self‐AChRs
Acquired Myasthenia Gravis
Acquired MG is an immune‐mediated disorder in which
autoantibodies (typically IgG) against postsynaptic nicotinic AChRs of skeletal muscle are produced, resulting in
impaired neuromuscular transmission.
In acquired MG, there is a T lymphocyte‐dependent
production of specific autoantibodies directed against
the main immunogenic region (MIR) of the nicotinic
ACHR, which is located at the extracellular tip of the
α1‐subunits, allowing antibodies to cross‐link AChRs
and induce antigenic modulation. These antibody
complexes result in immune‐mediated destruction of
the postsynaptic receptor via three main mechanisms:
●●

there is complement‐dependent lysis of the postsynaptic membrane caused by antibodies bound to AChRs

antibody cross‐linked AChRs result in increased internalization of AChRs, a decreased receptor lifespan and
a decrease in the total number of AChRs
●● direct inhibition of AChR function.
●●

A familial acquired MG has been reported in the
Newfoundland and Great Dane.
Diagnosis of Acquired Myasthenia Gravis

The diagnosis of MG cannot be made on clinical signs
alone and should be considered in any animal with signs
of neuromuscular disease. Other diseases that may have
similar clinical presenting signs include inflammatory
and noninflammatory myopathies, polyneuropathy,
especially acute ones such as polyradiculoneuritis,
endocrine disorders such as hypoadrenocorticism or
other diseases of neuromuscular transmission such as
tick paralysis, botulism, and organophosphate toxicity.
A minimum database including a complete blood count
(CBC), chemistry profile with creatine kinase (CK),
­urinalysis and potentially a thyroid panel should be done
to rule out other conditions resulting in or contributing
to weakness. Thoracic radiographs may identify megaesophagus, aspiration pneumonia, or a cranial mediastinal mass.
The use of the short‐acting anticholinesterase drug
edrophonium chloride (Tensilon®) (dogs 0.1–0.2 mg/kg
IV and cats 0.25–0.5 mg total dose) may provide a
­presumptive diagnosis of MG but there are both false‐
positive and false‐negative results. An overdose of edrophonium or its use in a nonmyasthenic patient may
cause parasympathetic overstimulation and necessitate
the use of atropine sulfate. Cats should be pretreated
with atropine as they appear to be more sensitive to
edrophonium. Dramatic improvement in muscle
strength after edrophonium administration provides a
presumptive diagnosis of MG but other myopathic or
neuropathic disorders may also show an improvement.
Dogs with fulminant MG may not have enough AChRs
available to elicit a noticeable response. In dogs with
focal MG, there may not be a positive response to the
edrophonium chloride test or it may be hard to judge
the improvement, for instance in a dog with megaesophagus alone. Unfortunately edrophonium chloride is
no longer clinically available therefore this type of testing would be limited to clinicians who have any remaining supply of edrophonium. It is the authors clinical
experience that injectable neostigmine can be used as a
diagnostic challenge as well. Standard dosing (dogs
0.04 mg/kg IM) is used and the time to respond skin may
be up to 30 minutes.
Electrodiagnostic testing may also be useful to add
supportive evidence to the diagnosis and exclude other
neuromuscular disorders. Electromyography (EMG) and

VetBooks.ir

74 Diseases of the Neuromuscular Junction

nerve conduction studies are normal in MG. Repetitive
nerve stimulation may show a decremental response of
the compound muscle action potential but does lack
sensitivity and specificity. More than one muscle group
should be tested, especially in patients with focal MG.
Single‐fiber EMG (SFEMG) is a sensitive test of neuromuscular transmission and techniques for recording
SFEMG have been described in both the cat and the dog.
SFEMG records the variability of consecutive discharges
of the interpotential interval between two muscle
fiber action potentials belonging to the same motor
unit (jitter). In MG, the jitter values are increased.
SFEMG is technically difficult to perform and not widely
available. All these electrodiagnostic tests need to be
performed under general anesthesia so may not be
suitable for all cases of neuromuscular weakness based
on their anesthetic risk assessment.
The gold standard for the diagnosis of MG is the
demonstration of serum autoantibodies directed against
muscle AChRs. The test is extremely sensitive and
specific but cannot predict the degree of weakness or
severity of the disease. Immunosuppressive drugs may
lower the antibody titers and serum should ideally be
submitted before the use of corticosteroids or other
immunosuppressive drugs. An AChR antibody titer of
greater than 0.6 nmol/L in the dog and 0.3 nmol/L in the
cat is diagnostic for MG, with rare false‐positive results.
Seronegative MG occurs in approximately 2% of dogs
with generalized MG but the incidence of seronegative
focal MG is unknown. The AChR assay is species specific
and while there is cross‐reactivity, canine or feline assay
systems should be used. Low‐positive titers may be
missed if a human AChR is used as an antigen.
Congenital Myasthenia Gravis
Congenital MG is characterized as a postsynaptic deficiency of ACh receptors with no evidence of autoimmune
destruction, with a congenital familial form (autosomal
recessive trait) having been described in Jack Russell terriers, springer spaniels, and smooth fox terriers. A congenital
MG was described in three 8‐week‐old miniature smooth‐
haired dachshunds. These dogs had decreased density of
ACh receptors in intercostal muscle biopsy samples with
no demonstrable AChR antibodies or antibody complexes
demonstrated against the AChR in muscle biopsies.
Interestingly, their clinical signs resolved spontaneously at
six months of age which is not typical but is similar to a
familial infantile myasthenia described in humans. There
are a few cats reported with congenital MG.
Diagnosis of Congenital MG

The diagnosis of congenital MG should be considered in
any young animal with the typical clinical presentation of

acquired MG (see later). Regurgitation associated with
megaesophagus has been reported in congenital MG but
not as commonly as in acquired MG. As expected based
on the pathology, serologic tests for AChR antibodies
would be negative. A positive edrophonium (Tensilon)
response test (0.1–0.2 mg/kg IV) can be consistent with
the diagnosis of congenital MG but does not allow for
differentiation of the acquired form of the disease and a
negative test does not exclude the diagnosis of congenital
MG. Other neuromuscular disorders may be excluded by
routine serologic and electrophysiologic testing and
muscle and nerve biopsy. Fresh‐frozen muscle biopsy
samples may also be evaluated for localization of AChE,
AChR, AChR subunits, IgG, and complement components
at the neuromuscular junction. Quantification of muscle
AChR may be done but requires a fresh muscle specimen
intact from origin to insertion, such as external intercostal or anconeus muscle.
Anticholinesterase drugs should be of benefit in animals with AChR deficiency. Congenital cases of MG do
not seem to respond as completely as the acquired disease with full return of strength being unusual. The
weakness can often progress to death within the first
year but with proper care and anticholinesterase therapy,
some affected Jack Russell terriers have survived several
years. Both cats reported with congenital MG survived
several years.
Seronegative Myasthenia Gravis
Seronegative MG does occur and the patients may have
the same clinical presentation as a seropositive case.
Seronegative MG in dogs is defined as a patient with
clinical signs suggestive of MG, a positive edrophonium
response, supportive electrodiagnostic testing (decremental response on repetitive nerve stimulation, increased
jitter on SFEMG), improvement of muscle weakness after
anticholinesterase therapy, and at least two negative serum
AChR antibody titers. The antibody titers should be
repeated 1–2 months apart as seroconversion may occur.
Seronegative MG may occur because there are antibodies directed against non‐ACHR end plate proteins,
the antibodies are all bound to the endplates with little to
no circulating antibodies, or the antibodies may be lost
during the AChR extraction procedure.
In humans, autoantibodies have been detected against
a receptor tyrosine kinase, MuSK, in about 70% of AChR
seronegative patients. The MuSK enzyme is located on
the postsynaptic membrane and induces acetylcholine
accumulation. A dog with a negative AChR antibody titer
and positive MuSK autoantibodies has been identified.
The ryanodine receptor (RyR) may also play a role in MG.
This channel receptor is responsible for the release of
calcium necessary for muscle contraction. Autoantibodies

805

VetBooks.ir

806

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

against RyR have been detected in both humans and dogs
and in conjunction with AChR antibodies can cause a
severe form of thymoma‐associated MG.
In people with MG, autoantibodies directed at striational muscle proteins (myosin, actin, alpha‐actinin,
titin, sarcoplasmic reticulum) have been described.
They have also been described in the dog. Since these
proteins are normally not exposed to circulating antibodies they are thought to be nonpathogenic but may
reflect muscle damage in cases where the AChR antibody titer is negative, thereby supporting a diagnosis of
MG. Eighty percent of human patients with thymoma
and MG, 24% of thymoma patients without MG, and
30% of MG patients without thymoma have antistriational antibodies. The incidence in dogs is not known.
Treatment
There are many reported treatments of MG but well‐
controlled prospective studies are not available. Many
canine patients will undergo spontaneous remission.
In one study, 47/53 (88.7%) AChR antibody‐positive
patients treated with anticholinesterase drugs alone
went into remission over an average of 6.4 months. This
included focal, generalized, and fulminating forms. The
presence of spontaneous remission needs to be considered when evaluating any treatment modality. Good
clinical judgment should be used when determining the
therapeutic options in a case of MG. The presence or
absence of dysphagia, esophageal weakness or megaesophagus may necessitate alternate feeding procedures
such as elevated feedings, a “Bailey Chair” (www.
baileychairs4dogs.com) or a gastrotomy tube.
Anticholinesterase inhibitor (AChEI) drugs are the key
therapy for MG and work by prolonging the action of
acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction. The dose
may need to be titrated to effect as these drugs have both
muscarinic and nicotinic effects. A return to full muscle
strength is the goal. Animals can develop a cholinergic
crisis (weakness, abdominal pain, salivation, and diarrhea)
and need treatment with atropine and a decrease in dosage
or discontinuation of the AChEI. The most commonly
used drugs are pyridostigmine bromide (Mestinon®
1–3 mg/kg PO BID‐TID) and neostigmine bromide
(Prostigmin® 2 mg/kg/day divided to effect). Pyridostigmine
is most commonly used because it has a longer duration
and fewer muscarinc effects. It is available as a tablet,
syrup, and timed‐release formulation. In critically ill
patients or those with regurgitation that cannot take oral
medication, a constant rate infusion (CRI) of pyridostigmine bromide (0.01–0.03 mg/kg/h) may be used. The
author has used neostigmine as a CRI at the same dosage
but found that it had many more adverse GI signs.

Corticosteroids may be used to treat MG if the patient
is not adequately responding to anticholinesterase therapy alone. The optimal dosing regimen has not been
determined prospectively in the dog, but large immunosuppressive doses are not recommended, especially in
the face of aspiration pneumonia. In mild to moderately
affected myasthenic dogs, a dose of 0.5 mg/kg daily to
every other day has been recommended. There are
reports of high‐dose methylprednisolone therapy benefiting people but this must be used with caution in dogs.
Other immunosuppressants and immunomodulators
that have been described in case studies/series in the veterinary literature are azathioprine, ciclosporin A, and
mycophenelate mofetil. These are uncontrolled retrospective case series and although success was noted in
many of these cases, the use of these drugs should be tailored to each individual case at this time. As an example,
a retrospective study of 27 dogs with AChR‐positive
antibody titers reported that there was no beneficial
effect in dogs treated with pyridostigmine in combination with mycophenelate mofetil compared to pyridostigmine alone. Plasmapheresis has been described as
a successful treatment in a single case report and more
recently has been described in several dogs that had
therapeutic plasma exhange. These were serologically
confirmed patients with marked generalized weakness,
megaesophagus, and aspiration pneumonia that were
not adequately responding to traditional treatment.
These dogs responded well to the therapy. Although
promising, this may have limited value due to cost and
the need for specialized equipment.
The management of severely compromised respiratory
patients due to aspiration pneumonia and intercostal or
diaphragm weakness usually needs to be done at facilities
with intensive care facilities and the ability to ventilate
patients if needed. Respiratory failure is the most common cause of death in these patients. Antibiotics with
the potential for neuromuscular blockade such as
­aminoglycosides and ampicillin should be avoided.
Serial monitoring of the AChR antibody titer should be
done in all patients and treatment should continue until
the antibody titer is negative. This would need to be interpreted in light of any concurrent immunosuppression.
Treating acquired feline MG is very similar to the dog
but since there is a higher incidence of thymoma in cats,
all patients should have thoracic radiographs whether or
not signs of megaesophagus or respiratory distress are
present. The natural course of the disease in cats is also
not known so we do not know if they also have spontaneous remission. Cats can be treated with anticholinesterase drugs but may also handle the adverse effects of
corticosteroids better than dogs and therefore these
may be more beneficial.

VetBooks.ir

74 Diseases of the Neuromuscular Junction

­Other Disorders of Neuromuscular
Transmission
Presynaptic Disorders
Tick Paralysis

A salivary neurotoxin secreted by certain tick species can
interfere with ACh release, resulting in impaired neuromuscular transmission and clinical weakness. The signs
are usually that of an acute progressive lower motor neuron (LMN) disease. The North American common wood
ticks, Dermacentor variabilis and Dermacentor andersoni (Rocky Mountain wood tick), are most often responsible for the disease. In Australia, Ixodes holocyclus is the
most important species. Less commonly associated ticks
are Ixodes cornuatus, I. hirsti, I. pacificus, and I.
scapularis.
The clinical signs are commonly seen as pelvic limb
ataxia that then progresses to involve the thoracic limbs,
leading to recumbency in 24–72 hours. Dysphonia and
dysphagia can be early signs, and masticatory muscle
weakness and facial paresis may also be present. Death
may occur within several days from respiratory paralysis.
The diagnosis is made by clinical signs and resolution of
signs following tick removal. Prognosis is usually good,
with recovery occurring in 1–3 days following complete
tick removal.
In Australia, the clinical signs with Ixodes spp tend to
be more severe and include autonomic disturbances
that include peripheral vasoconstriction, arterial
hypertension, increased pulmonary capillary hydrostatic pressure, pulmonary congestion and edema,
tachyarrhythmias, and pupillary dilation. In addition
to the previously described clinical presentation, other
signs may include voice change, depressed gag reflex,
megaesophagus, salivation, regurgitation and/or vomiting, dyspnea, and cyanosis. Death may occur within
1–2 days in untreated patients. In addition to tick
removal and supportive care, neutralization of circulating toxins can be attempted with tick antitoxin
serum. The antitoxin serum adverse effects are anaphylaxis and autonomic disturbance. The antiserum
treatment needs to be given in the early stages of the
disease and is expensive. Alpha‐adrenergic blocking
agents such as phenoxybenzamine hydrochloride and
prazosin may help with the hypertension. Severely
affected animals with respiratory compromise may
require ventilator support.
The prognosis can be guarded even with appropriate
treatment. The prognosis seems to be inversely related to
the severity of clinical signs, as dogs with mild disease
recovered more quickly than those with severe paresis/
paralysis and respiratory compromise.

Botulism

Botulism occurs by ingesting the preformed neurotoxin
(exotoxin) of Clostridium botulinum which is contained in
carrion or spoiled food. In rare cases, botulism may occur
as a result of colonization of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract
(toxico‐infectious) or wound infection. There are eight
botulinum toxins but type C1 is the most common in dogs
although there have been infrequent reports of type C2
and D. Botulism has not been reported in the cat.
Botulinum neurotoxins inhibit neurotransmitter
release from the presynaptic nerve terminals by cleaving
proteins required for synaptic vesicle fusion with the
plasma membrane. They may affect either the synaptic
vesicles (synaptobrevin) or the plasma membrane
(SNAP‐25 and syntaxin), depending on the neurotoxin
serotype. The neurotoxins enter the nerve terminal by
specifically interacting with the luminal domain of synaptic vesicle proteins (synaptotagmin or SV2, depending
on serotype) which are briefly exposed during exocytotic
membrane fusion. This leads to a presynaptic blockade
of ACH release and resulting muscle weakness. There
may be some disturbance in autonomic function as well.
The clinical signs may occur within hours to days and
are typically an acute onset of symmetric diffuse LMN
dysfunction starting in the pelvic limbs and progressing
forward. The severity of dysfunction may range from
mild weakness to complete tetraplegia with respiratory
paralysis. The spinal reflexes are not intact and there is
often paresis associated with cranial nerve functions
such as the facial musculature, laryngeal, pharyngeal and
esophageal musculature.
The diagnosis can be made by detection of the toxin
in ingested material, serum, vomit, and feces and by a
neutralization test in small mice. Samples should be
collected as early as possible in the course of the disease.
ELISA tests have been used in the detection of botulinum toxin in people but not for type C (reportedly used
in cattle) so obtaining a diagnosis by this method would
be difficult. Electrodiagnostic studies may be useful to
differentiate botulism from other acute disorders such as
polyradiculoneuritis. There may be a slight decrease in
motor nerve conduction velocity and decreased amplitude of the compound muscle action potential (CMAP).
Repetitive nerve stimulation may reveal a decremental
response at low (>5 Hz) rate or incremental response at
high (>50 Hz) rate. EMG may show some spontaneous
activity such as fibrillation potentials and positive sharp
waves but it is often normal.
Treatment of botulism consists of supportive care,
with mildly or moderately affected dogs recovering over
a period of several days. Intensive management may be
required for dogs needing ventilatory support or having
megaesophagus and dysphagia as they are at high risk for

807

VetBooks.ir

808

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

aspiration pneumonia. Recumbent nursing care, which
includes frequent turning, good padding to prevent
decubital ulcers and bladder care, is essential for a good
recovery and to avoid secondary complications. Oral
antibiotics are of no benefit, unless toxico‐infectious
botulism is suspected and in that case penicillins or
­metronidazole would be indicated. Administration of
C. botulinum antitoxin needs to be type specific and
would not be beneficial unless a specific type C‐antitoxin
were available. The antitoxin administration only helps
to inactivate circulating unbound toxin and not toxin
already fixed at the site of neuromuscular junction
damage so, depending on the timing of administration,
it could be too late in the course of the disease to use.
Complete recovery is possible with proper care and
should occur within 1–3 weeks. Dogs with aspiration
pneumonia and respiratory paralysis may have a more
guarded prognosis depending on severity and the ability
to obtain respiratory support.
Postsynaptic Disorders
Organophosphate and Carbamate Toxicity

Organophosphates (OP) and carbamates are commonly
used compounds found in many pesticides and insecticides. They are long‐acting anticholinesterases that
irreversibly bind acetylcholinesterase (AChE) in nervous
tissue and muscle, allowing accumulation of ACh to cause
continuous cholinergic stimulation. This occurs in central, muscarinic, and nicotinic cholinergic synapses,
resulting in clinical signs that include autonomic overstimulation (salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation)
and neuromuscular dysfunction. A delayed OP‐induced
polyneuropathy has also been described. Clinical toxicity
in veterinary medicine is usually associated with inappropriate or accidental dosing, with cats being more susceptible to these compounds than dogs. Historical information
is imperative to reaching the diagnosis.
Although serum cholinesterase concentrations can be
measured, the results are usually not available in a timely
fashion so a presumptive diagnosis based on history and
clinical signs is enough to begin treatment.
Clinical signs of OP intoxication are usually dominated
by the autonomic effects, but neuromuscular signs
include a stiff rigid gait, muscle tremors, and fasciculation (except for fenthion).
Treatment for these toxicities consists of reducing further exposure or absorption by bathing or gastric lavage
as appropriate. Atropine sulfate can be titrated to effect
to counteract the parasympathetic signs. Pralidoxime
chloride (2‐PAM or protopam chloride) and pralidoxime
mesylate (P2S) can be used in OP toxicity but not in
carbamate toxicity (except for aldicarb). These oxime
reactivators cause release the bound AChE from the
OP compound.

Drug‐Induced Neuromuscular Blockade
Certain drugs have been shown to induce NMJ blockade
in veterinary medicine although most reports are
experimental, with very few documented clinical cases.
The most commonly associated antibiotics are aminoglycosides, lincomycin, penicillamine, polymyxins, and
tetracyclines. The mechanism of action in aminoglycoside
NMJ blockage is presynaptic inhibition of ACh release as
a result of blocked calcium influx. There is also blockage
of calcium influx on the postsynaptic membrane. The
degree of transmission impairment with aminoglycosides depends on the specific drug and the balance
between the pre‐ and postsynaptic effects. The most
potent effects, in descending order, are from neomycin,
kanamycin, amikacin, gentamicin, and tobramycin.
Penicillamine has been documented to cause an immune‐
mediated MG in people. Polymyxins have their most
profound effect on the postsynaptic membrane by acting
as a noncompetitive nondepolarizing agent. Tetracyclines
have the proposed effect of chelating calcium ions and
thereby depressing the effect of ACh on the postsynaptic
muscle fiber.
It is important to remember that these drugs can
potentiate neuromuscular blocking agents used during
surgical procedures or may worsen or unmask preexisting disorders of neuromuscular transmission. The use of
these agents should be avoided in the treatment of other
neuromuscular disorders such as MG patients. Other
drugs that have a reported effect on neuromuscular
transmission are antiarrhythmic agents, phenothiazines,
methoxyflurane, magnesium, and the antiprotozoals
chloroquine and quinine. Methimazole has been documented to cause a reversible drug‐induced autoimmune
MG in hyperthyroid cats.
Black Widow Spider Envenomation
The black widow spider (Lactrodectus spp.) has a
worldwide distribution. The most potent component
of its venom is the purified fraction B known as alpha‐
latrotoxin. The toxin causes a massive release of neurotransmitter and loss of synaptic vesicles. The synaptic
vesicle loss is caused by increased fusion and docking of
the synaptic vesicles with the plasma membrane and
inhibition of new vesicle formation.
The cat appears to be more susceptible to envenomation and the clinical signs usually occur within the first
eight hours. There are fine muscle tremors, muscle
spasticity, abdominal rigidity, pain, and profound flaccid muscle weakness. Hypertension and electrolyte
abnormalities may also occur.
Treatment consists of administering the appropriate
antivenin and supportive care. A rapid response to the
antivenin is reported in people.

VetBooks.ir

74 Diseases of the Neuromuscular Junction

Snake Envenomation
There are four families of snakes that produce venom
which causes neuromuscular blockade: Atractaspididae
(African mole viper), Colubridae (bloomsang, twig
snake), Elapidae, and Viperidae. The Elapidae have three
major subfamilies: Elapidae (cobras, mambas, coral
snakes), Hydrophiinae (sea snakes), and Laticaudinae
(sea kraits). The Viperidae have two major subfamilies:
Crotalinae (pit vipers, copperheads, cotton mouths, and
rattle snakes) and Viperinae, the “Old World” vipers
(carpet vipers, adders, desert vipers).
The pit viper toxin that causes neuromuscular weakness is the Mojave toxin. It causes a presynaptic block
of ACh release which can then lead to complete neuro-

muscular blockade when there is a facilitatory release
of neurotransmitter leading to complete cessation of
neurotransmitter release. The Elapidae family, such as
the coral snake, produce at least three neurotoxins
(taipoxin, beta‐bungarotoxin, and notexin). These
­
toxins have phospholipase A2 activity and damage synaptic vesicles. There is also a change in the morphologic structure of the motor axon terminal, including a
decreased number of synaptic vesicles. The clinical
signs of snake envenomation are of a progressive neuromuscular weakness with cranial nerve involvement,
with death usually resulting from respiratory paralysis.
If the snake can be identified then the use of antivenin
has a positive effect on outcome, especially the coral
snake.

­Further Reading
Dewey C. A Practical Guide to Canine and Feline
Neurology, 2nd edn. Ames, IA: Iowa State University
Press, 2008.
Khorzad R, Whelan M, Sisson A, Shelton GD. Myasthenia
gravis in dogs with an emphasis on treatment and

critical care management. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2011;
21(3): 193–208.
Shelton GD. Myasthenia gravis and disorders of
neuromuscular transmission. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 2002; 32(1): 189–206, vii.

809

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

811

75
Myopathies
Marguerite F. Knipe, DVM, DACVIM (Neurology)
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology

­Signalment

Myocytes are specialized cells, with contractile elements
(actin and myosin) comprising the majority of the intracellular space, along with the other organelles (mitochondria, lysosomes, etc.) Disruption of myocytes
(myofibers) will result in decreased ability to contract the
muscle with appropriate strength. Myopathies occur
secondary to either intrinsic pathology within the
myofiber itself (noninflammatory myopathy) or infiltration and damage by inflammatory cells (myositis) from
infectious or immune‐mediated disease. Any disruption
of the muscle membrane or intracellular structures
results in myofiber dysfunction, whether through accumulation of storage products, through cellular infiltration, or dysfunction of the sarcolemma, other cytoskeletal
proteins, or membrane ion channels.

Inherited myopathic processes (Box 75.1) typically
exhibit clinical signs in young animals (<6 months old)
and may be static or progressive. Acquired myopathies
(Box 75.2) may develop at any age, and are often progressive unless the underlying cause is addressed.
Some myopathies have (to date) only been described in
certain breeds (Box 75.3), and presentation by one of
these breeds with appropriate clinical signs should raise
suspicion for one of these breed‐associated myopathies.

­Epidemiology
The wide range of etiologies for myopathies makes
delineating epidemiology difficult for each specific disease. About one‐third of canine generalized inflammatory myopathies (myositides) are associated with
infectious agents, although a causal relationship will be
difficult to determine unless histopathologically confirmed. There is also an association with canine polymyositis and skeletal muscle lymphoma, whether through
­malignant transformation of infiltrating lymphocytes, a
paraneoplastic syndrome, or as primary skeletal muscle
lymphoma.

­History and Clinical Signs
Functional manifestations of myopathies may include
gait abnormalities (lameness, stiff or stilted gait), exercise intolerance, focal or generalized weakness, dysphonia, dysphagia, regurgitation, possibly megaesophagus,
muscle tremors and/or fasciculations, and postural alterations (e.g., cervical ventroflexion, especially in cats).
The history and clinical signs of patients with myopathies are often the same as with other neuromuscular
diseases (neuropathies and junctionopathies), so noting
these signs in the patient’s history often just localizes a
problem to the neuromuscular system, and not necessarily specifically to a nerve, muscle, or junction problem.
Specific physical manifestations of myopathies may
include decreased muscle mass (atrophy or hypotrophy)
or even hypertrophied muscles in some diseases (myotonia congenita, some muscular dystrophies). Very young
patients with muscle diseases may have limb deformities

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

812

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

Box 75.1 Inherited myopathies (all non-inflammatory)
Muscular dystrophies
Myotonias and other channelopathies (myotonia
­congenita, hyperkalemic periodic paralysis)
Congenital myopathies (nemaline rod myopathy,
centronuclear myopathy, others)
Metabolic myopathies (glycogen or lipid storage
diseases)
Mitochondrial myopathies

Box 75.2 Acquired myopathies
Inflammatory myopathies
Infectious – bacterial, protozoal, etc.
Immune mediated
Masticatory muscle myositis (MMM)
Polymyositis
Dermatomyositis
Inclusion body myositis
Lymphoma‐associated polymyositis
Endocrine myopathies
Hypothyroidism
Hyperadrenocorticism
Electrolyte imbalance, especially potassium, calcium,
magnesium
Cachexia

Box 75.3 Breed‐associated myopathies
Familial polymyositis
Hungarian Vizsla dogs, Newfoundland, boxer
Dermatomyositis
Collie, Shetland sheepdog
X‐linked myotubular myopathy
Labrador retriever
Centronuclear myopathy
Labrador retriever, border collie
Muscular dystrophies
Golden retriever, Japanese spitz, Labrador retriever,
cats, German short‐haired pointer, Cavalier King Charles
spaniel, miniature schnauzer, among others
Inherited myopathy of Great Danes
Glycogen storage diseases
Curly‐coated retrievers (type IIIa)
Lapland dog (type II)
English springer spaniel (phosphofructokinase
­deficiency – type VII glycogen storage disease)

or orthopedic abnormalities secondary to the effects of
abnormal muscle forces on the bones.
Patients with myositis (inflammatory myopathies) may
exhibit apparent myalgia or pain on muscle palpation.
Dogs with masticatory muscle myositis often present
with apparent pain on opening the mouth or chewing.

­Diagnosis
History, physical, and neurologic examinations permit
the clinician to localize a problem to the neuromuscular
system. Further isolating the problem to a myopathic
process typically requires a combination of serologic,
functional, and histologic evaluation of the muscle.
Hematology/Serology
In certain myopathic diseases with prominent myonecrosis or rhabdomyolysis, serum creatine kinase (CK)
level may be elevated (normal 55–260 IU/L), and in some
myopathies (e.g., muscular dystrophy), serum CK can be
markedly elevated (>50 000 IU/L). CK is specifically
released secondary to damage to the myofiber sarcolemma. Not all myopathies have elevations in CK, so a
normal CK does not rule out a myopathic process; however, with appropriate clinical signs, elevated serum CK
will raise the suspicion of a myopathy.
Canine masticatory muscle myositis (MMM) is an
immune‐mediated disease against the 2M myofibers, exclusively located in the muscles of mastication (temporalis,
masseter, pterygoids, rostral digastricus). A s­ erologic assay
for 2M antibodies is available through the Comparative
Neuromuscular Laboratory (http://vetneuromuscular.ucsd.
edu/), and is highly sensitive and specific.
Functional
Electromyography (EMG) performed on the anesthetized patient assesses the stability of the muscle membrane. Normal muscle maintains electrical silence on
EMG, while myofibers with membrane instability will
depolarize spontaneously, resulting in abnormal spontaneous activity (fibrillation potentials, positive sharp
waves, complex repetitive discharges). One EMG abnormality specific for myotonia is the presence of myotonic
discharges which spontaneously wax and wane, but
more often than not, EMG alone is not sufficient to
diagnose a myopathy. Abnormal spontaneous activity
on EMG indicates either a myopathic process or denervation of that muscle, so motor nerve conduction velocities should be done to assess nerve function, as well as
muscle and nerve biopsies to assess muscle histology.

VetBooks.ir

75 Myopathies

Electromyography is useful to confirm that the motor
unit is affected and helps the clinician determine the
extent of the disease process (focal, generalized). EMG
may be especially helpful to screen for subclinical disease; a common recommendation for EMG examination
is to assess a minimum of two limbs, usually the thoracic
and pelvic limbs on one side of the patient. Often, only
one side is examined with EMG to maintain the opposite
limbs free of iatrogenic mechanical injury from the
exploring needle so biopsies can be obtained. Sometimes
an additional limb is examined (e.g., both pelvic limbs
and a thoracic limb), especially if the clinician wants to
assess the contralateral limb for comparison.
Histology
A definitive diagnosis of a myopathy is based on histologic abnormalities of the muscle. For the clinician,
biopsy selection, handling, and processing are extremely
important. Prior to biopsy, clinicians must decide
whether they will submit fresh muscle to a specialized
laboratory for processing, or will take samples to submit
in formalin for routine histopathologic evaluation. Fresh
muscle must be packed appropriately and shipped overnight to the lab, so the clinician must schedule sampling
and shipping so that the muscle arrives in good
condition.
For generalized disease processes, biopsies of the
triceps, biceps femoris/quadriceps, and cranial tibial
muscles permit evaluation of both proximal and distal
muscles, as well as the thoracic and pelvic limbs.
Temporalis muscle, if affected, is another muscle
­frequently sampled, particularly if there is a clinical
suspicion of MMM (although measuring serum 2M antibody titer is less invasive – see Hematology/Serology
earlier). If a different, specific muscle is the only one
affected, then the clinician should consider sampling
that as well. By sampling multiple muscles, the clinician
increases the likelihood of obtaining a biopsy with pathologic changes, since only a small portion (about 1 cm3)
of any muscle is taken, and focal or multifocal processes
may be missed. Two laboratories process international
veterinary fresh muscle samples, and information on
shipping is available on their websites (see Resources
below).
Muscle histopathology is broadly categorized into
inflammatory (true myositides) or noninflammatory
(dystrophic) myopathies (see Boxes 75.1 and 75.2).
Macrophages are present for myofiber phagocytosis
from any cause, but true myositis is characterized by
excessive cellular infiltration in the endo‐ and perimysium, with lymphocytes, neutrophils, and eosinophils, as
well as macrophages. If the myositis is secondary to an
infection, the causative agent may be apparent in the

biopsy, but again, the small sample makes it highly likely
that microorganisms may be missed.
Noninflammatory myopathies may have vacuoles,
abnormal accumulations within the myofibers, loss of
normal cytoskeletal architecture (cores), necrosis and
phagocytosis with macrophages only, may have nonspecific abnormalities, or may be completely normal on
histopathology.

­Therapy
For inflammatory myopathies, specific treatment for the
infectious process or immunosuppression is indicated, but
for most noninflammatory myopathies, unless an underlying or concurrent treatable disease is identified that could
cause the myopathy (e.g., electrolyte imbalance, endocrine
disease, etc.), there are no definitive treatments.
Nonspecific Therapy
Nutritional supplementation with L‐carnitine (50 mg/kg
PO q12h), co‐enzyme Q10 (100 mg PO q24h), and vitamin B complex for “muscle support” has been recommended for many noninflammatory myopathies, and
there are only anecdotal reports of clinical improvement
with these medications.
Inflammatory Myopathies
If an infectious etiology (parasitic, bacterial, protozoal,
etc.) is identified on biopsy or suspected clinically, appropriate antimicrobial therapy should be instituted. In
small animal medicine, immune‐mediated myositides
are likely more common than infectious, and immunosuppressive therapy is required. In some cases, immune‐
mediated myositis may be secondary to a chronic
infection. Clinicians may choose from several different
immunomodulatory drugs, including glucocorticoids,
azathioprine, and cyclosporine.

­Prognosis
Prognosis will depend on the specific underlying myopathy, and can range from grave to excellent. Some inherited myopathies may have tolerable clinical signs and
function throughout the life of the patient (e.g., some
myotonias), while others progress relentlessly to markedly impair quality of life (e.g., muscular dystrophies).
For most acquired myopathies, if the underlying cause
is identified and appropriately treated, patients may have
an excellent outcome.

813

VetBooks.ir

814

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

Resources
http://vetneuromuscular.ucsd.edu/ – 2M antibody titers;
accepts fresh muscle (and nerve) biopsies from canine
and feline patients.

https://neurology.vetmed.ucdavis.edu/ndl – accepts fresh
muscle (and nerve) biopsies from canine, feline, equine,
and food animal patients.

Further Reading
Eminaga S, Cherubini GB, Shelton GD. Centronuclear
myopathy in a Border collie dog. J Small Anim Pract
2012; 53(10): 608–12.
Evans J, Levesque D, Shelton GD. Canine inflammatory
myopathies: a clinicopathologic review of 200 cases.
J Vet Intern Med 2004; 18: 679–91.
Haley AC, Platt S, Kent M, et al. Breed‐specific polymyositis in
Hungarian Vizsla dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2011; 25: 393–7.

Shelton GD. What’s new in muscle and peripheral nerve
diseases? Vet Comp Ortho Traumatol 2007; 20:
249–55.
Sykes JE, Dubey A, Lindsay L, et al. Severe myositis
associated with Sarcocystis spp. infection in 2 dogs. J Vet
Intern Med 2011; 25: 1277–83.

VetBooks.ir

815

76
Myelopathy
Joan R. Coates, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Neurology)
Department of Veterinary Medicine and Surgery, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA

Myelopathy is a nonspecific term representing pathologies that result in signs of spinal cord dysfunction. It is
important for the clinician to recognize the neurologic
signs of myelopathy and to differentiate from or avoid
misdiagnosis of other mimicking orthopedic and neuromuscular (nerve, muscle, neuromuscular junction) disorders. Signalment, history, and physical and neurologic
examination findings will establish presence of a myelopathy, provide neuroanatomic localization and consideration of differentials. Ultimately, with neurodiagnostics
to narrow the differential diagnosis, appropriate therapies can be selected for treatment or management of
patients with spinal cord disease.

­History
An accurate clinical history is important in defining the
cause of the myelopathy. Time of onset (sudden or insidious), rate of progression (static, gradual or rapid), and
temporal relation (intermittent/episodic, stable or chronic)
can be established. Acute disorders such as fibrocartilaginous embolism (FCE), aortic thromboemboli, trauma,
discospondylitis, and Hansen type I intervertebral disc
herniation and meningomyelitis often present with sudden onset and can be rapidly progressive (Table 76.1).
Chronic disorders such as spinal canal/spinal cord
neoplasia, degenerative lumbosacral syndrome, cervical
spondylomyelopathy, degenerative myelopathy, and
Hansen type II intervertebral disc herniation cause
insidious signs of myelopathy (Table 76.2).

­Pathophysiology
The spinal cord serves as a conduit for the upper motor
neuronal fibers, sensory pathways and the origin of the

motor units of the cervical, thoracic, lumbar, sacral, and
caudal segments. The severity of motor and sensory
­deficits from spinal cord disease is dependent upon the
rapidity of disease onset, extent of lesion involvement,
and the area within the vertebral column.
Spinal cord injury occurs through primary mechanical
and secondary injury mechanisms. Primary injury results
from extrinsic or intrinsic injury processes causing laceration, compression, contusion, ischemia, and inflammation of the tissue. The acute stage consists of primary
tissue effects after injury such as central hemorrhage after
a severe compression/concussive injury. Typically, myelopathic changes initially involve the gray matter with centrifugal spread to the white matter. Sequential hemorrhage,
edema, and neuronal necrosis depend on severity and
type of injury. The primary injury initiates a cascade of
vascular, ionic, and biochemical events, associated with
ischemia that contributes to ­secondary spinal cord injury
processes and irreversible neuronal damage. Physical
attributes of the chronic stage subsequent to secondary
injury mechanisms include cavitation, presence of apoptosis, and Wallerian degeneration. Neurodegenerative
diseases related to underlying inherited, metabolic or
toxic causes result in intrinsic neuronal degeneration
involving the cell body, axon, and/or myelin.

­Clinical Signs
The primary objective of the neurologic examination in
spinal cord disease is to determine an accurate neuroanatomic localization (C1–5, C6–T2, T3–L3, L4–S3, and
caudal segments) (Table 76.3) and lesion distribution
(focal, multifocal, diffuse). Careful interpretation of the
neurologic examination is essential to avoid diagnostic
procedures that are inappropriate for lesion determination and potentially harmful to the patient.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

816

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

Table 76.1 Differential diagnosis for acute‐onset myelopathy
Differential category

Differentials

Comments

Degenerative

Hansen type I intervertebral disc herniation

Asymmetric or symmetric

Anomalous

Atlantoaxial instability

Usually symmetric

Neoplastic

Metastatic, vertebral body tumors, pathologic fracture,
histiocytosis, lymphoma, other hematopoietic neoplasia

Often asymmetric

Inflammatory
(infectious)

Bacterial, protozoal, and fungal meningomyelitis, canine
distemper virus, feline infectious peritonitis, discospondylitis,
spinal cord epidural empyema

Asymmetric or symmetric

Inflammatory
(noninfectious)

Steroid‐responsive meningitis‐arteritis, granulomatous
meningoencephalomyelitis

Usually symmetric

Trauma

Fracture/subluxation, acute noncompressive intervertebral
disc herniation

Asymmetric or symmetric;
nonprogressive

Vascular

Fibrocartilaginous embolism, aortic thromboembolism

Usually asymmetric;
nonprogressive

Italicized differentials indicate diseases associated with hyperesthesia on spinal palpation.

Table 76.2 Differential diagnosis for chronic myelopathy
Differential category

Differentials

Comments

Degenerative (spinal
cord)

Degenerative myelopathy, myelinopathy, neuronopathy, axonopathy,
subarachnoid diverticulum, storage disorders

Symmetric

Degenerative
(vertebral column)

Hansen type II intervertebral disc herniation, cervical spondylomyelopathy
(wobbler syndrome), degenerative lumbosacral syndrome, spinal synovial cyst,
diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis, spondylosis deformans,
mucopolysaccharidosis, osteochondromatosis

Symmetric or
asymmetric

Anomalous

Chiari‐like malformation (syringohydromyelia), atlantoaxial instability,
vertebral malformation, myelodysplasia, spinal stenosis, dermoid sinus

Usually symmetric

Neoplastic

Meningioma, primary spinal cord (oligodendroglioma, astrocytoma,
ependymoma), nephroblastoma

Often asymmetric

Inflammatory
(infectious)

Bacterial meningomyelitis, canine distemper virus, feline infectious
peritonitis, protozoal, fungal

Asymmetric or
symmetric

Italicized differentials indicate diseases associated with hyperesthesia on spinal palpation.

General Proprioceptive Ataxia

Paresis/Plegia

General proprioceptive (GP) ataxia reflects the lack of
information reaching the central nervous system
(CNS) responsible for the awareness of movement and
position of neck, trunk, and limbs in space. Due to
anatomic proximity within the spinal cord of the proprioceptive pathways and motor tracts, proprioceptive abnormalities often overlap with those caused by
upper motor neuron (UMN) weakness. A deficit of GP
appears as misplacement or knuckling of the foot,
which may not occur with every step, and poorly controlled swaying of the body. The feet may be crossed
or placed too far apart. Overall movement of the limbs
lacks coordination.

Paresis/plegia is a deficit/loss of ability to carry out voluntary motor function. The terms lower motor neuron
(LMN) and UMN are applied to differentiate two basic
types of neurologic weakness. Clinical signs of UMN
weakness are characterized by spasticity with normal to
increased spinal reflexes and muscular hypertonia. LMN
weakness manifests as flaccidity, hyporeflexia to areflexia and muscle atrophy that is severe and rapid in
onset. Neuroanatomic localization to a specific spinal
cord region is upon UMN or LMN signs (see Table 76.3).
In addition, the affected limbs have inadequate or absent
voluntary motion, which may be described as monoparesis/plegia (involvement of one limb), paraparesis/­

VetBooks.ir

76 Myelopathy

Table 76.3 Neurologic signs associated with spinal cord regions
Clinical signs
Evaluations

C1 to C5

C6 to T2

T3 to L3

L4 to S3 and caudal segments

Mental status

Normal

Normal

Normal

Normal

Posture

Normal; wide‐based
stance all limbs; +/‐
recumbency; horizontal
neck carriage

Normal; wide‐based
stance all limbs,
recumbent; +/−
horizontal neck carriage

Normal; falling;
acute – Schiff–
Sherrington posture,

Normal; falling; tail tone
decreased or flaccid

Gait

Normal, GP/UMN ataxia
(PL > TL), spasticity all
limbs, tetraparesis/
plegia, hemiparesis/
plegia

Normal, spastic PL, GP/
UMN ataxia (PL > TL),
shorten stride TL,
tetraparesis/plegia,
hemiparesis/ plegia

GP/UMN PL ataxia,
symmetric or
asymmetric spastic
paraparesis/plegia

GP PL ataxia, weakness may
vary; symmetric or
asymmetric (more often with
cauda equina) paraparesis/
plegia

Cranial nerves

Normal; bilateral or
ipsilateral Horner
syndrome

Normal; bilateral or
ipsilateral Horner
syndrome

Normal

Normal

Postural
reactions

Normal, mild‐severe
deficits (PL > TL); absent

Normal, mild‐severe
deficits (PL > TL); absent

Mild‐severe deficits;
absent

No deficits; mild‐severe
deficits; absent

Spinal reflexes

Normal, hyperreflexia all
limbs

Normal, hyporeflexia or
absent reflexes TL;
normal to hyperreflexia
PL

Normal to
hyperreflexia PL

Hypo‐ to areflexia;
pseudohyperreflexic patellar
reflex with sciatic nerve
dysfunction

Spinal
hyperesthesia

None; mild‐severe on
palpation; resists neck
movements

None; usually mild; may
resist neck movement

None; mild‐severe on
palpation

None; mild‐severe on
palpation; accentuate on tail
extension

Sensation
(nociception)

Usually normal; severe
lesions may show
mild‐severe sensory loss

Usually normal; severe
lesions may show
mild‐severe sensory loss

Mild‐severe sensory
loss; absent

None; mild‐severe (more
common with intumescence
lesion) sensory loss

Micturition

Usually intact; may have
detrusor areflexia;
sphincter hypertonia

Usually intact; may have
detrusor areflexia;
sphincter hypertonia

Usually affected with
loss of motor
function, detrusor
areflexia‐sphincter
hypertonia

None; mild‐severe detrusor
areflexia; sphincter
hypotonia

C, cervical; GP, general proprioceptive; L, lumbar; LMN, lower motor neuron; PL, pelvic limb; S, sacral; T, thoracic; TL, thoracic limb;
UMN, upper motor neuron.

plegia (involvement of pelvic limbs), tetraparesis
(involvement of all limbs) or hemiparesis (involvement
of the ipsilateral thoracic and pelvic limbs).
Gait is assessed with regard to coordination, voluntary
motor functions, and direction. The action of gait is
characterized by swing (flexion) and stance (extension)
phases. The voluntary motor system involves recruitment of the flexor muscles to initiate the swing phase
and the postural system recruits extensor muscles for the
stance and propulsive phases. Animals with UMN weakness will often have a gait of long stride length, whereas
with LMN weakness the stride length is shortened. The
gait in animals with spinal pain may have a shortened
stride length. Animals with joint, muscle, or meningeal
pain often appear to be “walking on eggshells.” Thoracic
or pelvic limb lameness may represent radicular pain
(nerve root signature).

Postural Abnormalities
Abnormal postures can be specific for vertebral column
abnormalities and spinal cord dysfunction. Ventroflexion
of the neck is a common phenomenon in animals with
disorders of neuromuscular weakness (especially cats) or
pain. Animals with spinal malformations can show
kyphosis (dorsal deviation), scoliosis (lateral deviation),
and lordosis (ventral deviation). A stiff neck or an arched
back is often reflective of cervical or generalized spinal
pain. Neck pain may manifest with horizontal neck carriage, increased muscle tone, and intermittent spasms/
jerks. The animal tends to move by turning the entire
body when changing directions. When the arched back
is centered to the thoracolumbar region, this may indicate pain localized to the caudal thoracic and lumbar
regions. Arching of the back with low head carriage also

817

VetBooks.ir

818

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

can be observed in animals with neck pain. An animal
with pain localized to the lumbosacral area will have its
pelvic limbs tucked under the caudal abdomen.
Postural Reaction Deficits

Various postural reactions (paw replacement, hopping,
hemiwalking, wheelbarrow, extensor postural thrust)
can further define the location and symmetry of the
weakness. Asymmetric weakness is common with vascular, inflammatory, and compressive myelopathies.
Spinal Reflex Abnormalities
Spinal, myotatic, and withdrawal reflexes can assist with
neuroanatomic localization to specific spinal regions
(see Table 76.1). Presence of hypo‐ to areflexia of limb
reflexes can localize the lesion to within an intumescence. The cutaneous trunci reflex can further assist
with localization of a thoracolumbar spinal cord lesion.
Hyperesthesia
Hyperesthesia denotes an unpleasant behavioral
response to a nonnoxious stimulus. As part of a routine
neurologic examination, spinal hyperesthesia is evaluated by deep palpation of the spinal epaxial musculature
and by detecting resistance with flexion‐extension and
lateral movements. Testing for spinal hyperesthesia
should be performed near the end of the neurologic
examination. Spinal palpation should begin distal to the
suspected lesion localization. Cervical spinal hyperesthesia can be elicited by deep palpation of the cervical
spinal musculature near the vertebral transverse processes. Clinical signs include caudal flinching of the ears,
twitching spinal musculature, and behavioral signs of
discomfort. The neck is manipulated by flexion, extension, and lateral movements. Normal animals have full
range of movement with no resistance. Resistance or
behavioral reluctance to move is evidence of spinal pain.
Meningeal pain often is diffuse but will commonly localize to the cervical spine. Joint and muscle pain are
assessed during palpation and evaluating range of motion
of the limbs.
Differentials associated with spinal hyperesthesia
include those associated with inflammation or compression (e.g., intervertebral disc herniation, neoplasia).
Anatomic structures with nociceptors include the meninges, nerve roots, outer one‐third of the disc, joints, periosteum, and muscle. Tissue damage or inflammation
produces pain through stimulation of nociceptors that are
sensitive to mechanical, thermal, and chemical stimuli.
Neuropathic pain occurs with injury to neural tissue and
represents abnormalities in transmission and somatosensory processing in the peripheral and central nervous

­systems. Some disease processes encompass both nociceptive/inflammatory and neuropathic pain mechanisms.
Loss of Nociception
Nociception (pain sensation) is considered the most
important prognostic indicator for functional recovery of
myelopathy. In dogs with thoracolumbar Hansen type I
intervertebral disc herniation, the majority of those with
intact nociception have an excellent prognosis. Dogs with
loss of nociception longer than 24–48 hours prior to surgery have a poorer prognosis for return of ambulatory
function. If surgery is performed within 12–36 hours, the
prognosis is better for more rapid and complete recovery.
In spinal fractures, however, animals with loss of nociception are assumed to have complete injury of neural tissues
and have a poor prognosis for recovery.

­Acute Spinal Cord Dysfunction
It is important to recognize specific physical and neurologic examination findings associated with acute spinal
cord injury. Neurogenic shock is a systemic complication
associated with severe cervical or cranial thoracic injury
to the spinal cord. This syndrome results from sympathetic loss (decreased blood pressure and heart rate resulting from unopposed vagal tone) and continual vagal tone.
This phenomenon results in loss of spinal cord blood flow
regulation and subsequent ischemia. Neurogenic shock
resolves with fluid therapy and pressor agents.
Spinal shock usually manifests as flaccidity of the limbs
distal to the lesion. The spinal reflexes are depressed to
absent. The bladder may be flaccid with urine retention
and the sphincter hypotonic. This phenomenon may
mislead a neuroanatomic localization if neurologic
examination is not reassessed. The duration of spinal
shock is proportional to the degree of species encephalization and thus may last only a few hours in quadrupeds.
Cause may be cessation of tonic input of spinal neurons
by excitatory impulses in descending pathways.
The Schiff–Sherrington posture is characterized by
increased extensor tone of the thoracic limbs and flaccid
paralysis of the pelvic limbs after acute T3–L3 spinal cord
lesions. “Border cells,” which exert inhibitory influences
on extensor motor neurons of the thoracic limbs via the
fasciculus proprius, are predominantly located in the L2–4
spinal cord segments. Damage to these cells or interruption of the fasciculus proprius as it ascends through the
thoracolumbar spinal cord causes release of thoracic limb
extensor motor neurons and hypertonia. Despite the
increase in extensor tone, the thoracic limbs are neurologically normal. Schiff–Sherrington posture does not
indicate that the spinal cord lesion is irreversible.

VetBooks.ir

76 Myelopathy

A traction injury of the spinal cord involving tethering
of nerves often is traumatic in origin. This injury commonly involves the nerves associated with the sacrococcygeal and cervicothoracic spinal cord segments.
Traction of nerves/nerve roots causes injury of associated spinal cord segments such as tail‐pull and brachial
plexus avulsion. For example, in cats with tail‐pull injury,
injury to the sacral segments affects the pelvic nerve and
its innervation of the bladder, resulting in loss of bladder
contraction.
Ascending and descending hemorrhagic myelomalacia
should be suspected in dogs with thoracolumbar
intervertebral disc disease (IVDD) that have an ascending loss of the cutaneous trunci reflex. Other neurologic
signs of myelomalacia include loss of nociception caudal
to the lesion, ascending and descending flaccidity, weakness and areflexia, which can lead to tetraplegia, hyperthermia, and respiratory distress. Death results from
asphyxia from intercostal and diaphragmatic muscle
paralysis. Clinical signs of ascending and descending
myelomalacia may manifest in hours to several days from
onset of paraplegia.

­Diagnostic Approach
Diagnostic evaluation of an animal with spinal cord disease begins with bloodwork (complete blood count,
serum biochemistry), urinalysis, and survey spinal radiographs. Thoracic radiography is recommended in
­animals older than 5 years or when neoplasia is considered a disease differential. If a diagnosis cannot be determined through these routine procedures, referral to a
specialty practice is recommended.
Conventional radiography of the vertebral column
can assist with recognition of obvious abnormalities
such as congenital malformation, discospondylitis,
fracture/luxation, and bone neoplasia. Meticulous
technique, collimation, and proper patient positioning,
usually under anesthesia or heavy sedation, are essential to detection of subtle changes that are often the key
to a diagnosis. Although many lesions are obvious with
cursory inspection, subtle changes may be difficult to
appreciate.
However, in the majority of instances, the diagnostic
capability of plain radiography of the vertebral column is
limited. The diagnostic capabilities are improved with
myelography, injection of iodinated contrast media into
the subarachnoid space. Myelography is accurate and sensitive for identifying compressive lesions. Dynamic studies (traction, extension, flexion) also can be performed.
Masses that occupy space in the vertebral canal (e.g.,
tumors, abscesses, disc herniations) cause alterations in
the myelographic contrast column. The extradural, intra-

dural/extramedullary, or intramedullary location can be
determined by the type of distortion occurring in the contrast column.
Cross‐sectional imaging includes computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and is
more likely to provide a definitive diagnosis. These imaging modalities are now available at many specialty
­practices. Lesion descriptions affecting the spinal cord
are similar to those described for myelography.
Administration of contrast media can improve visualization of pathology on MRI and CT. Intravenous administration of contrast media can increase the conspicuity of
a lesion due to breakdown in the blood–brain barrier and
better define its borders by creating greater contrast
between the lesions and surrounding tissue.
Computed tomography is a cross‐sectional imaging
modality in which images are constructed based on the
attenuation of X‐rays through tissue. The main benefit of
CT over conventional radiography is that with CT, there
is greater soft tissue differentiation and lack of superimposition of overlying structures which greatly improves
the evaluation of the vertebral column. CT also can assist
with determining lesion extent after myelography. CT
images should be evaluated for alterations in attenuation
of tissues. Dark or relatively black areas are hypodense or
hypoattenuating while light or relatively white areas are
hyperdense or hyperattenuating. CT may provide more
useful information than MRI in cases of vertebral fractures or subluxation where bony detail is important.
Taking advantage of the density of dystrophic mineralized intervertebral disc material, CT can be used in the
evaluation of chondrodystrophic dogs with suspected
IVDD. Due to the inferior soft tissue contrast, assessment of soft tissues within spinal cord tissue is limited.
Magnetic resonance imaging is the preferred imaging
modality for assessment of the spinal cord. The primary
reason for this is the superior soft tissue contrast that
MRI provides, allowing differentiation of anatomic
structures. No other imaging procedure provides conspicuity of soft tissue discrimination along with exceptional resolution. Imaging can be performed in different
planes (transverse, sagittal, dorsal) without loss of resolution, enabling examination of complex anatomic
regions. MRI is based on the magnetic properties of
hydrogen atoms, which are extremely abundant in tissues containing water, protein, and fat. Lesions are characterized based on number (single or multiple), intensity
(hypo‐, hyper‐, isointense in relationship to an adjacent
normal area), distribution of the intensity (homogeneous
or heterogeneous), lesion borders (well or poorly
defined), anatomic location of the lesion as well as lesion
location in reference to the spinal cord and meninges.
Similarly, lesions are characterized based on pattern of
contrast enhancement.

819

VetBooks.ir

820

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is contained within the subarachnoid space, which lies between the arachnoid and
pia mater. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis will assist with
determining the presence of inflammatory disease.
Abnormalities in CSF cytology and protein are sensitive
indicators of CNS disease but rarely specific for a disease
process. On occasion, infectious organisms or neoplastic
cells may be identified. The CSF profile, including ­protein
content, cell counts and cytology, will assist the clinician
to narrow the differential diagnosis.
Additional diagnostic procedures include electrodiagnostic evaluation (electromyography and nerve conduction studies), CSF protein electrophoresis, serology, and
exploratory surgery.

cord disorders by cross‐sectional imaging and CSF
­analysis combined with results for the SOD1 mutation
analysis. A dog with progressive T3–L3 myelopathy that
has normal neurodiagnostics and is homozygous for
the SOD1 mutation is likely to have degenerative
myelopathy.
Degenerative conditions of the vertebral column such
as intervertebral disc herniation, cervical spondylomyelopathy, and degenerative lumbosacral stenosis secondarily cause myelopathy by spinal cord compression.
Other less common degenerative conditions of the
­vertebral column include synovial cysts, canal stenosis,
and diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH).
Anomalies

­Differential Diagnosis
Myelopathies can be classified according to the DAMNIT
V scheme (degenerative, anomalous, metabolic, neoplastic, nutritional, inflammatory‐infectious/noninfectious,
traumatic, toxic, vascular) (see Tables 76.1 and 76.2).
Degenerative
Degenerative conditions of the spinal cord can occur in
both young and adult animals. Myelinopathies, axonopathies, and neuronopathies present initially with progressive signs of paraparesis and eventual tetraparesis. Many
of these conditions are breed specific and inherited.
Recent identification of gene mutations has enhanced
our understanding of the underlying pathogenesis for
many degenerative conditions associated with ion channel defects, abnormalities in protein aggregation, loss of
enzyme function (storage disease), and dysfunction in
protein metabolism and growth factors.
Canine degenerative myelopathy (DM) is an adult‐
onset neurodegenerative disease. Most dogs are at least 8
years old before onset of clinical signs. The initial signs
of degenerative myelopathy typically include asymmetric
GP ataxia and spastic paresis in the pelvic limbs. At this
stage, segmental spinal reflexes are indicative of UMN
loss. Dogs become nonambulatory paraparetic within
one year after onset. When euthanasia is delayed, weakness can ascend to the thoracic limbs with emergence of
LMN signs, dysphagia, and widespread muscle atrophy.
Recently, a missense mutation in the gene superoxide
dismutase 1 (SOD1) was established as a genetic “risk
factor” for dogs developing DM. Dogs that are homozygous (two copies of the mutant allele) for the SOD1
mutation are considered at risk for developing degenerative myelopathy. Because a variety of common acquired
compressive spinal cord diseases can mimic early DM, a
presumptive diagnosis is made by ruling out other spinal

Dogs and cats with congenital spinal malformations
often have abnormalities involving multiple segments of
the vertebral column and spinal cord. Malformations
associated with the spinal cord are often referred to as
spinal dysraphism that involve defects in closure of the
neural tube. Such defects may also involve the vertebral
column. Spinal dysraphism is a result of abnormal midline fusion and disrupts the normal pattern of spinal cord
circuits. Other defects include syringomyelia, dermoid
sinus, spina bifida, and caudal vertebral hypoplasia.
Genetic mutations and exposure to toxic and infectious
agents at certain stages of development can lead to these
malformations. Abnormal formation of vertebral bodies
by itself does not cause spinal cord dysfunction but some
conditions can cause myelopathy from spinal cord compression or spinal canal stenosis.
Congenital anomalies affecting the craniocervical
junction include atlantoaxial instability and atlantooccipital overlapping, which also can occur simultaneously.
The subsequent spinal cord compression results in signs
of C1–5 myelopathy or manifests as cervical spinal pain.
Metabolic
Endocrocrine‐related peripheral neuropathies such as
diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, and insulinoma paraneoplastic neuropathy reflect as sciatic nerve disease.
Clinical signs appear in the pelvic limbs first and may
mimic myelopathy.
Neoplastic
Tumors affecting the spinal cord are described as extradural, intradural‐extramedullary, and intramedullary
based on location with respect to the spinal cord.
Intramedullary tumors include gliomas (astrocytoma,
oligodendroglioma, and ependymoma) and neuronal‐
derived tumors. Common intradural‐extramedullary

VetBooks.ir

76 Myelopathy

tumors include meningiomas, neuroepitheliomas, and
nerve sheath tumors. Extradural tumors include primary
bone tumors, metastatic tumors, and hematopoietic
tumors (e.g., histiocytic disease, lymphoma, plasma cell
tumors). Tumors that involve the vertebral body cause
secondary spinal cord compression. Metastatic disease
of the spinal cord can occur from spread within the CNS
(drop metastasis) or from extraneural tissues via direct
extension or hematogenously. Hemangiosarcoma, melanomas, and carcinomas are the most common tumors to
metastasize to the spinal cord and vertebral column.
Inflammatory (Infectious, Noninfectious)
Meningitis (inflammation of the meninges) and meningomyelitis (inflammation of the meninges and spinal
cord) cause focal or diffuse signs of myelopathy and
severe spinal pain. Onset is acute, peracute or insidious.
Signs typically progress but can wax and wane.
Neurologic signs are variable and related to the area of
spinal cord affected. Common clinical signs include GP
ataxia, limb paresis, and paraspinal hyperesthesia. Lesion
distribution can be focal or multifocal, causing asymmetric neurologic deficits. Animals with meningomyelitis could also have signs of encephalitis. Spinal cord MRI
combined with CSF analysis is the most reliable diagnostic approach for identifying the presence and extent of
CNS inflammation. Some infectious agents affect other
organ systems in addition to the CNS. Serology and
molecular techniques screen for infectious etiologies.
Disease confirmation often requires biopsy or necropsy
examination.
Common infectious diseases causing myelopathy
include viral (e.g., feline coronavirus, feline infectious
peritonitis, canine distemper virus, feline immunodeficiency virus, feline leukemia virus), protozoal, rickettsial,
algal, and fungal diseases. In the dog, canine distemper
virus and protozoa are the most frequently identified
agents. Infectious meningomyelitis seems to be the most
common cause underlying myelopathy in the cat.
Granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis (GME) and
steroid‐responsive meningitis‐arteritis are noninfectious
inflammatory diseases that predominate in the dog.
Inflammation/infections of the vertebral column can
involve the vertebra (osteomyelitis, physitis) or intervertebral disc space (discospondylitis). Spinal cord epidural
empyema is defined as an extensive accumulation of
purulent material in the epidural space of the vertebral
column related to direct extension of osteomyelitis or
discospondylitis. Discospondylitis is associated with
bacterial or fungal infection of the intervertebral disc
and contiguous vertebrae. Hyperesthesia of the vertebral
column is the primary clinical sign. Radiographic features of discospondylitis include lysis and sclerosis of the

vertebral endplates. Pathologic changes and lesion extent
can be more conspicuous with CT and MRI. Due to its
zoonotic potential, Brucella canis screening is indicated.
Antimicrobial selection should be based on susceptibility testing of bacteria isolated from urine or blood or
from infected tissue.
Trauma
Animals with spinal fractures and luxations are assessed
with minimal manipulation to prevent further injury and
displacement of the spine. Nociception is assessed in plegic animals to assist with determining prognosis. Spinal
fracture/luxation in dogs and cats is most commonly associated with severe external trauma and results in ­spinal
cord dysfunction. Diagnosis is based on radiography or
cross‐sectional imaging of the entire spine. Nonsurgical or
surgical management depends upon presence of instability. The prognosis for recovery from a spinal fracture/­
luxation with loss of nociception is considered poor.
Vascular Occlusive Disorders
Fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopathy is the most common cause of vascular occlusion of the spinal cord in dogs
and infrequently can occur in cats. FCE most commonly
affects the younger, larger dog breeds but also occurs in
small dog breeds, with the miniature schnauzer overrepresented. Onset of signs is often peracute or acute with
little progression. Key neurologic signs include asymmetric paresis with lack of paraspinal hyperesthesia.
Localization frequently reflects the segments of the cervicothoracic and lumbosacral intumescences; however, segments within L4–S3 and T3–L3 are most commonly
reported. The pathogenesis still remains enigmatic. Spinal
cord arteries become occluded with fibrocartilage that
originates from the nucleus pulposus of the intervertebral
disc. The clinical presentation is sometimes difficult to
distinguish from the concussive, noncompressive extrusions of the intervertebral disc. Prognosis is dependent on
the severity of neurologic deficits, lesion location and
extent, and owner’s commitment to nursing care. The
prognosis is favorable in patients that show improvement
within two weeks of onset.
In cats with acute onset of asymmetric paresis/
paralysis, aortic thrombosis is a primary differential.
The pelvic limbs are commonly affected, with signs of
loss of femoral pulse, pain and firmness in the muscles, and loss of nociception distally. Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy is the most frequent underlying disease. Diagnosis is suspected based upon clinical signs,
elevated creatine kinase concentration, and evidence
of cardiac disease. Initial therapy involves management of the cardiac disease, preventing further clot

821

VetBooks.ir

822

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

formation and supportive care. Long‐term prognosis
is guarded during the early recovery phase.

­Treatment
Treatment of myelopathy is determined based on the
underlying disease diagnosis. Specific treatment

approaches focus on surgical decompression of compressive lesions, excision/debulking of compressive
masses (neoplasia, cyst), stabilization procedures and
appropriate therapy of infectious and inflammatory diseases. Principles of appropriate supportive care and
physical rehabilitation assist with expediting recovery
and prevention of secondary complications of a recumbent patient.

­Further Reading
Da Costa RC, Samii VF. Advanced imaging of the spine in
small animals. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2010; 40: 765–90.
De Risio L, Adams V, Dennis R, McConnell FJ, Platt SR.
Association of clinical and magnetic resonance imaging
findings with out‐come in dogs suspected to have
ischemic myelopathy: 50 cases (2000–2006). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2008; 233: 129–35.
Granger N, Smith PM, Jeffery ND. Clinical findings and
treatment of non‐infectious meningoencephalomyelitis
in dogs: a systematic review of 457 published cases from
1962 to 2008. Vet J 2010; 184: 290–7.
Griffin JF, Levine JM, Levine GJ, Fosgate GT.
Meningomyelitis in dogs: a retrospective review of

28 cases (1999 to 2007). J Small Anim Pract 2008; 49:
509–17.
Marioni‐Henry K. Feline spinal cord diseases. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2010; 40: 1011–28.
Pancotto TE, Rossmeisl JH, Zimmerman K, Robertson JL,
Were SR. Intramedullary spinal cord neoplasia in 53
dogs (1990–2010): distribution, clinicopathologic
characteristics, and clinical behavior. J Vet Intern Med
2013; 27: 1500–8.
Tipold A, Stein VM. Inflammatory diseases of the spine in
small animals. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2010; 40: 871–9.

VetBooks.ir

823

77
Neuroophthalmology
Bradford J. Holmberg, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVO
Animal Eye Center, Little Falls, NJ, USA

Neuroophthalmology is a complex discipline involving
the intricate relationship between the eye and the central
nervous system (CNS). A thorough understanding of
afferent and efferent pathways is crucial in the loca­
lization and diagnosis of neuroophthalmic disorders.
A review of normal anatomy and physiology is beyond
the scope of this chapter and can be found elsewhere.
Abnormalities in the afferent or efferent arm may pre­
sent as changes in vision, eye position, tear production,
eyelid carriage, function, sensation, and pupil shape, size
or response. This chapter will focus on common neu­
roophthalmic diseases.

­Amaurosis
Amaurosis is defined as partial or complete vision loss
without observable ophthalmic pathology. Clinical signs
of vision loss include a reduced or absent menace
response, inability to track a cotton ball, failure to navi­
gate around stationary objects, and possibly an absent
dazzle reflex or pupillary light reflex (PLR). Amaurosis
may be caused by primary retinal disease, such as sudden
acquired retinal degeneration syndrome (SARDS), ret­
robulbar optic nerve disease, or any lesion along the
optic chiasm, optic tract, lateral geniculate nucleus,
optic radiation, or visual cortex. Electroretinography
(ERG) is essential in differentiating retinal disease from
CNS disease as ERG will identify a retina that appears
normal on examination but fails to function properly.
Frequently, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and cer­
ebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis are instrumental in diag­
nosing a primary CNS cause of vision loss. Neoplasia is
the most common CNS cause of vision loss in dogs and
cats. Prognosis for return of vision is grave with SARDS
and poor with CNS disease, depending on the underlying
etiology.

­Optic Neuritis
Inflammation of the optic nerve is usually bilateral and
results in complete vision loss with the absence of pupil­
lary light reflexes. On ophthalmic exam, the optic disc is
enlarged and hyperemic with focal hemorrhages and
peripapillary retinal detachment (Figure 77.1). If only the
retrobulbar optic nerve is affected, the ophthalmic exam
will be normal and diagnosis is confirmed through a
normal ERG and abnormal MRI. T2‐weighted MRI may
reveal an enlarged, moderately hyperintense optic nerve.
CSF analysis in dogs with optic neuritis is variable and
may reveal a marginal to marked increase in protein or
cellularity.
Optic neuritis can be secondary to infectious, inflam­
matory, and neoplastic disease. In dogs, infectious causes
include viral (distemper and tick‐borne encephalitis
virus), fungal (cryptococcosis, blastomycosis, histoplas­
mosis), protozoal (toxoplasmosis), and bacterial (ehrli­
chiosis). Granulomatous meningoencephalitis is the
most common inflammatory disorder, although idio­
pathic and necrotizing meningoencephalitides have also
been reported. Primary optic nerve tumors and space‐
occupying retrobulbar masses may trigger secondary
nerve inflammation. In cats, optic neuritis is often sec­
ondary to feline infectious peritonitis, but may be due to
other infectious diseases, including cryptococcosis and
toxoplasmosis. Most cases of optic neuritis are consid­
ered idiopathic due to lack of an apparent cause even
with a thorough systemic medical work‐up.
Treatment of optic neuritis is directed at the underlying
cause when feasible. If no underlying cause is identified,
immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids are used to
reduce inflammation. Even with appropriate therapy,
prognosis for return of vision is poor and optic nerve
atrophy is an unfortunate common end‐result.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume I, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

positive with C‐type virus particles present within the
ciliary nerves or ganglia.
Unilateral miosis in dogs and cats can be secondary to
anterior uveitis, Horner’s syndrome (discussed later), or
pharmacologic agents such as pilocarpine or topical
prostaglandin analogs. Anterior uveitis is differentiated
from Horner’s syndrome based on concurrent ophthal­
mic clinical signs including conjunctival hyperemia,
episcleral congestion, corneal edema, blepharospasm,
aqueous flare, keratic precipitates, and ocular hypotony.

VetBooks.ir

824

­Internal and External
Ophthalmoplegia

Figure 77.1 Idiopathic optic neuritis in a dog. Note the optic disc
is edematous and hyperemic with peripapillary retinal
detachment.

­Anisocoria
Pupil diameter is regulated by autonomic control of the
iris sphincter and iris dilator muscles. Anisocoria is
defined as unequal pupils. Physiologic anisocoria may
occur with heterochromia iridis or age‐related iris
atrophy with the affected pupil dilated. When not physi­
ologic, determination of which pupil is abnormal can
be challenging. Examination of the patient in bright,
ambient, and dim light conditions facilitates diagnosis.
An abnormal mydriatic pupil will not constrict com­
pletely in bright light compared to the normal pupil.
In contrast, an abnormal miotic pupil will not dilate
completely in dim light compared to the normal pupil.
Unilateral mydriasis in dogs and cats can have primary
ocular or neurogenic causes. Ocular causes include iris
atrophy, glaucoma, end‐stage retinal degeneration, optic
nerve atrophy, and pharmacologic dilation with agents
such as tropicamide or atropine. Neurogenic causes
include a lesion in the parasympathetic nerve, oculomo­
tor nerve, or brainstem. Due to the unique innervation of
the cat sphincter muscle by two short ciliary nerves con­
trolling either side of the iris, parasympathetic denerva­
tion may result in hemiplegia and a “D” shaped or reverse
“D” shaped pupil. Iris sphincter hemiplegia has been
associated with trauma and iris stromal infiltration by
lymphoma. Mydriasis alternating between eyes is second­
ary to feline spastic pupil syndrome. Cats affected with
feline spastic pupil syndrome tend to be feline leukemia

Unilateral mydriasis may be secondary to an afferent or
efferent defect. Afferent defects involve the retina, optic
nerve, or optic tract. Efferent defects involve the oculo­
motor nucleus, oculomotor nerve, or iris sphincter mus­
cle. Vision and PLR testing are vital in distinguishing
afferent from efferent defects. Animals with afferent
lesions are nonvisual, have an absent direct PLR, and an
absent consensual (affected to nonaffected eye) PLR.
Animals with efferent lesions are visual, have an absent
direct PLR, and a normal consensual (affected to nonaf­
fected eye) PLR. The presence of a normal consensual
PLR from the nonaffected eye to the affected eye rules
out an efferent arm lesion.
Efferent lesions may involve the oculomotor nucleus,
oculomotor nerve, or iris sphincter muscle. Peripheral
parasympathetic fibers along the medial aspect of the
oculomotor nerve are responsible for pupillary constric­
tion. The oculomotor nerve also innervates extraocular
muscles (superior, medial, and inferior rectus, inferior
oblique) and the levator palpebrae superioris muscle.
Lesions affecting just the peripheral aspect of the nerve
will result in mydriasis only, termed internal ophthalmoplegia (Figure 77.2). Lesions affecting the entire nerve
will result in lateral strabismus and ptosis, adding the
diagnosis of external ophthalmoplegia. External ophthal­
moplegia is defined as paralysis of one or more of the
extraocular muscles and may only involve the oculomo­
tor nerve or may also involve the trochlear and abducens
nerves.
When evaluating mydriasis, it is important to distin­
guish ophthalmoplegia from a pupillomotor defect.
Pupillomotor defects are usually secondary to iris atro­
phy or previous topical anticholinergic medication
administration. Animals with iris atrophy may have a
slight direct PLR or may have a characteristic scalloped
appearance to the pupillary margin. When these signs
are absent, pharmacologic testing is useful in differenti­
ating a pupillomotor defect from ophthalmoplegia.

77 Neuroophthalmology

VetBooks.ir

Other CNS signs may be evident depending on the spe­
cific localization of the lesion.
The presence of concurrent internal and external
ophthalmoplegia should prompt the clinician to evaluate
for intracranial disease to explain involvement of multiple
cranial nerves. Imaging (MRI) is the diagnostic tool of
choice. Treatment is limited unless the underlying cause
is found. Prognosis is poor as most cases progress to
involve adjacent CNS sites.

­Trigeminal Nerve Deficit

Figure 77.2 Internal ophthalmoplegia in a dog. The right pupil is
normal. The left pupil is mydriatic with an absent direct and
consensual (right to left) PLR. Topical application of 2%
pilocarpine resulted in pupil constriction within five minutes,
confirming an efferent pathway deficit.

Pharmacologic testing has classically involved the use
of both indirect‐ and direct‐acting parasympathomimetics.
Indirect acting agents, such as topical 0.5% physostig­
mine, will cause rapid pupillary constriction in cases of
a preganglionic (proximal to the cilary ganglion) lesion
due to release of acetylcholine stores at the postgangli­
onic axon terminals. Direct‐acting agents, specifically
1% to 2% pilocarpine, are more commonly used. One
drop of pilocarpine acts directly on the iris sphincter
muscle by binding to and activating acetylcholine
receptors, inducing pupil constriction within 30 min­
utes. Use of a direct‐acting agent will allow pupil con­
striction with both pre‐ and postganglionic lesions and
therefore is useful in differentiating ophthalmoplegia from
a pupillomotor defect but does not differentiate a pregan­
glionic from a postganglionic site. Lack of pupillary con­
striction following administration of a topical
parasympathomimetic confirms a pupillomotor defect.
In a young dog or one without clinical evidence of iris
atrophy, pharmacologic mydriasis is commonly the
cause. A thorough history will aid in diagnosis.
Internal and external ophthalmoplegia occur as a result
of oculomotor nerve, ganglion, or nucleus compression.
They are a result of neoplasia, trauma, or inflammation
at the level of the midbrain, brainstem, or cavernous sinus.

Two of the three branches of the trigeminal nerve pro­
vide sensory innervation to the eye, adnexa, and perioc­
ular skin. Lateral sensation is primarily via the maxillary
branch and medial sensation via the ophthalmic branch.
Corneal sensation is derived through afferent fibers
within the long ciliary nerves that originate in the
ophthalmic branch. Decreased or absent function is
diagnosed through an absent palpebral reflex (i.e.,
blink response) and an absent corneal reflex. Lack of
sensation must be distinguished from lack of motor
function (facial nerve deficit) where the patient is unable
to blink. Differentiation is accomplished by attempting
to elicit a menace response or dazzle reflex while avoid­
ing contact with the skin. A patient with trigeminal nerve
dysfunction will blink in response whereas animals with
a facial nerve defect will not have a palpebral reflex or
normal menace response.
The long ciliary nerves derive from the nasociliary
nerve, a branch of the ophthalmic branch of the trigemi­
nal nerve. Inadequate function of the long ciliary nerves
results in corneal anesthesia or hypoesthesia. With loss
of these neurons, there is a loss of normal regulatory
neuromediators such as acetylcholine, substance P,
calcitonin gene‐related peptide, and neuropeptide Y
­
which are instrumental in maintaining normal corneal
integrity. Neurotrophic keratitis describes pathology
resulting from a trigeminal nerve defect. The decrease in
corneal sensation leads to reduced corneal epithelial cell
proliferation and delayed healing with corneal ulcera­
tion. Neurotrophic keratitis is likely secondary to trigem­
inal nerve trauma, but as in humans, diabetes mellitus
and herpes virus may be predisposing factors.
The mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve has
both motor and sensory components. It is responsible
for motor innervation to the masticatory muscles and
sensation to the mouth, lower face, and ear. Bilateral dis­
ruption of the mandibular branch results in the inability
to close the mouth. Ninety percent of cases are idiopathic
and clinical signs typically resolve over three weeks.
Prolonged cases may develop atrophy of the muscles of
mastication. When the pterygoid muscles are affected,

825

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

VetBooks.ir

826

Figure 77.3 Neurotrophic and neuroparalytic keratitis in a dog.
Note the left eye is enophthalmic, the third eyelid is elevated, the
ocular surface is dry, and a deep, infected stromal corneal ulcer is
present. Also note the severe masseter and temporalis muscle
atrophy. Neuroophthalmic localization of the lesion is at the
petrosal temporal bone.

secondary enophthalmos and passive third eyelid eleva­
tion may occur (Figure 77.3).
Treatment for trigeminal nerve defects is supportive.
Topical lubricating agents are recommended to support
surface ocular health and symptomatic treatment for
secondary corneal ulceration is indicated when necessary.
As most cases are secondary to trauma or are idiopathic,
prognosis for return of function is fair. Other reported
causes of trigeminal dysfunction include neoplasia and
polyneuritis of unknown origin.

­Facial Nerve Paralysis
The efferent arm of the palpebral, menace, corneal, and
dazzle reflex are all mediated by the facial nerve. The
facial nerve arises at the facial nucleus in the brainstem
and courses with the vestibulocochlear nerve through
the petrosal bone before branching. Ultimately, the
zygomatic branch innervates the orbicularis oculi and
retractor anguli oculi muscles and controls the blink­
ing response. Clinical signs associated with facial nerve
paralysis may be restricted to the eye or may also involve
other structures, depending on the site affected.
Nonocular clinical signs associated with facial nerve
paralysis may include deviation of the nasal septum
toward the unaffected side, drooping of the ipsilateral lip
or pinna, and lack of sensation to the inner pinna. Ocular
signs of facial nerve paralysis include an absent palpebral
reflex, neuroparalytic keratitis, and, potentially, neuro­
genic dry eye.
Differentiation of facial nerve paralysis from trigeminal
nerve dysfunction can be difficult. Animals with facial

nerve paralysis still have normal sensation and may
retract their eye and elevate the third eyelid in response
to a menacing gesture or painful stimulus applied to the
adnexa. Animals with a trigeminal nerve defect have a
normal menace response.
Without the ability to close the eyelids completely,
neuroparalytic keratitis may arise due to chronic cor­
neal exposure and tear film evaporation. With progres­
sion, corneal vascularization, scarring, and ulceration
ensue (see Figure 77.3). Corneal protection is the treat­
ment of choice and involves the use of topical lubri­
cants, topical antibiotics, and possibly placement of a
temporary ­tarsorrhaphy. If the parasympathetic fibers
that run with the facial nerve to the lacrimal gland are
affected, neurogenic dry eye will occur. Approximately
20% of dogs with facial nerve paralysis develop neuro­
genic dry eye that can be diagnosed by a routine
Schirmer tear test. Concurrent neurogenic dry eye
hastens corneal deterioration. Treatment with oral or
topical parasympathomimetics will aid in return of
tear production due to denervation hypersensitivity
and upregulation of acetylcholine receptors at the lac­
rimal gland.
Facial nerve paralysis is reported to be idiopathic in
75% of dogs and 25% of cats. Other causes include
­surgery, trauma, neoplasia, hypothyroidism, and otitis
media. Total ear canal ablation and bulla osteotomy
surgery results in facial nerve paralysis or paresis in
49% of dogs and cats. Median time to restoration of
function is 2–4 weeks. Neoplasia is an uncommon
cause in dogs, but the most common in cats. Inflam­
mation of the middle or inner ear is often present with
facial nerve paralysis. With primary or secondary pet­
rosal bone inflammation, other neuropathies may
become apparent. The trigeminal, vestibulocochlear,
glossopharyngeal, and oculosympathetic and parasym­
pathetic nerves course through the petrosal bone.
Therefore, additional clinical signs may include ocular
and facial anesthesia or hypoesthesia, neurotrophic
keratitis, masticatory muscle atrophy, vestibular dis­
ease, loss of taste sensation, and Horner’s syndrome.
Fifty to sixty percent of dogs and cats with facial nerve
paralysis will have additional signs, with vestibular dis­
ease most common in cats and hypothyroidism or ves­
tibular disease most common in dogs.
Treatment of facial nerve paralysis involves addressing
the underlying cause when present. All patients with
facial nerve paralysis should have a thorough otic exam
and a thyroid level completed. If an underlying cause is
not found, and true idiopathic facial nerve paralysis
exists, supportive care to involve ocular lubrication and
protection is indicated. Prognosis for return to function
is guarded, with some cases improving in several weeks
and others never.

VetBooks.ir

77 Neuroophthalmology

­Horner’s Syndrome
Sympathetic fibers to the eye originate in the paraven­
tricular nucleus of the hypothalamus, course within the
spinal cord and exit between T1 and T3 into the thoracic
cavity, forming the sympathetic trunk. These fibers travel
through the mediastinum and join the vagosympathetic
trunk in the neck before synapsing at the cranial cervical
ganglion located adjacent to the tympanic bulla. All fib­
ers prior to this synapse are considered preganglionic
and those that course from the cranial cervical ganglion
to the eye are considered postganglionic. Any disruption
of nerve conduction along this circuitous route will lead
to the classic clinical signs of Horner’s syndrome.
Clinical signs include ptosis secondary to loss of tone
in Müller’s muscle of the upper and lower eyelid, miosis
due to loss of sympathetic tone in the iris dilator muscle,
and enophthalmos with secondary third eyelid elevation
due to loss of smooth muscle tone of the periorbita
(Figure 77.4). These four clinical signs are diagnostic for
Horner’s syndrome. Depending on where nerve conduc­
tion is disrupted, these may be the only clinical signs, or
additional clinical signs may be present, including altered
behavior/mentation, altered gait or paresis, spinal or
neck pain, dysphagia, coughing, regurgitation, otitis
media, vestibular disease, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, or
facial nerve paralysis. Localization of the lesion is impor­
tant for both prognosis and potential treatment.
Pharmacologic testing along with identifying clinical
signs are useful in differentiating preganglionic from post­
ganglionic Horner’s syndrome. Topical application
of indirect‐acting sympathomimetic drugs such as
1% hydroxyamphetamine will induce norepinephrine
release from postganglionic neurons, allowing immediate
pupil dilation. This positive test confirms preganglionic
Horner’s syndrome. There is no effect of an indirect‐acting

Figure 77.4 Horner’s syndrome in a cat, demonstrating ptosis of
the left upper eyelid, enophthalmos, third eyelid elevation, and
miosis.

sympathomimetic with cases of postganglionic Horner’s
syndrome. With the difficulty in obtaining these agents
and abuse potential, this testing is rarely completed.
Direct‐acting sympathomimetic agents such as 0.001%
epinephrine or dilute (1%) phenylephrine can be used to
confirm a postganglionic lesion due to denervation hyper­
sensitivity of smooth muscle. With a postganglionic defect,
application of these agents will allow improvement of the
clinical signs within 5–20 minutes. Lack of a response is
suggestive, but not diagnostic, of a preganglionic lesion.
Preganglionic lesions carry a worse prognosis than
postganglionic. The majority of preganglionic cases are
secondary to neoplasia, vascular events, or significant
head, neck, brachial plexus, or chest trauma. A diagnosis
of preganglionic Horner’s requires further diagnostics to
localize the lesion and should include a complete blood
count, serum biochemistry, thyroid level, thoracic radi­
ography, MRI of brain and spinal cord, and CSF analysis.
Treatment is directed toward the underlying cause.
Prognosis for return of function is guarded.
Postganglionic lesions tend to be idiopathic or second­
ary to otitis media, but can be secondary to retrobulbar
disease or trauma. If there is no evidence of ear disease,
an idiopathic cause is assumed. Golden retrievers and
Labrador retrievers between the ages of 10 and 12 years
are overrepresented. Most cases of idiopathic, postgan­
glionic Horner’s syndrome resolve without treatment
within two months.

­Cavernous Sinus Syndrome
The cavernous sinus incorporates two venous sinuses
located at the base of the cranial vault extending from
the orbital fissure to the petrooccipital canal. The sinuses
are joined by several anastomoses across the midline.
Structures of clinical significance that pass through or
are in close proximity to the cavernous sinus include the
oculomotor nerve, trochlear nerve, ophthalmic and
maxillary branches of the trigeminal nerve, abducens
nerve, and postganglionic sympathetic axons.
Dogs and cats with cavernous sinus syndrome present
with a multitude of clinical signs related to the affected
cranial nerves, including internal and external ophthal­
moplegia (mydriasis, ptosis, lateral or ventrolateral
strabismus), corneal anesthesia, periorbital and facial
anesthesia, and enophthalmos. Most cases are unilateral,
with rare bilateral cases reported. Mean age of affected
dogs and cats is 9 and 10 years of age, respectively.
Diagnosis is obtained through observation of the
clinical signs. Advanced imaging, preferably MRI, is nec­
essary to confirm the diagnosis. Most reported cases in
dogs occur secondary to primary or metastatic neopla­
sia. In cats, intracranial neoplasia and infectious disease

827

VetBooks.ir

828

Section 8 Neurologic Disease

have been reported. Long‐term prognosis is poor even
with treatment aimed at the underlying cause.

­Dysautonomia (Key–Gaskell
or Dilated Pupil Syndrome)
Dysautonomia is a rare, idiopathic condition in which
there is generalized loss of autonomic nervous system
function secondary to degeneration of parasympathetic
and sympathetic neuronal ganglia. Ophthalmic clinical
signs may be the first observed and include bilateral
mydriasis with absent PLR, elevated third eyelids, ptosis,
and decreased tear production. Dysautonomia can be
readily differentiated from Horner’s syndrome by the
presence of mydriasis rather than miosis. Nonocular
clinical signs may include xeromycteria, xerostomia, dys­
phagia, vomiting, regurgitation, gastric distension, ano­
rexia, diarrhea, bradycardia, constipation, and urinary
bladder distension.

Both cats and dogs can be affected, although the disease
is much more prevalent in cats. A geographic distribu­
tion has been suggested, with most affected cats living in
the United Kingdom and most affected dogs living in
the American Midwest. Animals tend to be young and
have a rapid onset (two days to two weeks). Although
there is no known cause, 50% of cats in one study did test
positive for Clostridium botulinum type C.
Diagnosis of dysautonomia is generally accomplished
through the overt clinical signs. Pharmacologic testing as
described previously for internal ophthalmoplegia and
Horner’s syndrome can be completed. In cases of dysau­
tonomia, application of dilute pilocarpine will induce
pupillary constriction and application of dilute epineph­
rine or phenylephrine will allow third eyelid retraction.
Treatment for dysautonomia is supportive. Prognosis for
survival is poor, with 75–85% of animals succumbing to the
disease or being euthanized due to the difficulty in mainte­
nance of supportive care. Some cats have spontaneously
recovered, although this is rare and should not be expected.

­Further Reading
Harkin KR, Andrews GA, Nietfeld JC. Dysautonomia in
dogs: 65 cases (1993–2000). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002;
220(5): 633–9.
Mayhew PD, Bush WW, Glass EN. Trigeminal neuropathy
in dogs: a retrospective study of 29 cases (1991–2000).
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2002; 38(3): 262–70.
Nell B. Optic neuritis in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2008; 38(2): 403–12.

Theisen SK, Podell M, Schneider T, Wilkie DA, Fenner
WR. A retrospective study of cavernous sinus syndrome
in 4 dogs and 8 cats. J Vet Intern Med 1996; 10(2):
65–71.
Webb A, Cullen C. Neuro‐ophthalmology. In: Veterinary
Ophthalmology. Ames, IA: John Wiley & Sons, 2012,
pp. 1821–68.

VetBooks.ir

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine
Volume 2
Edited by
David S. Bruyette, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)
Chief Medical Officer, Anivive Lifesciences, Long Beach, CA, USA

SECTION EDITORS
Nick Bexfield, BVetMed, PhD, DSAM, DipECVIM‐CA, PGDipMEdSci, PGCHE, FHEA, MRCVS
University of Cambridge

Johnny D. Chretin, DVM, DACVIM (O)
TrueCare for Pets

Linda Kidd, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM)
Western University of Health Sciences

Stephanie Kube, DVM, DACVIM (N)

Veterinary Neurology and Pain Management

Catherine Langston, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)
Ohio State University

Tina Jo Owen, DVM, DACVS
Washington State University

Mark A. Oyama, DVM, MSCE, DACVIM‐Cardiology
University of Pennsylvania

Nathan Peterson, DVM, DACVECC
VCA West Los Angeles Animal Hospital

Lisa V. Reiter, DVM, DACVD
McKeever Dermatology Clinics

Elizabeth A. Rozanski, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), DACVECC
Tufts University

Craig Ruaux, BVSc (Hons), PhD, MACVSc, DACVIM (SAIM)
Massey University

Sheila M.F. Torres, DVM, MS, PhD
University of Minnesota

VetBooks.ir

This edition first published 2020
© 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by law. Advice on how to obtain permission to reuse material
from this title is available at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
The right of David S. Bruyette to be identified as the author of the editorial material in this work has been asserted in accordance with law.
Registered Office
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
Editorial Office
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
For details of our global editorial offices, customer services, and more information about Wiley products visit us at www.wiley.com.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats and by print‐on‐demand. Some content that appears in standard print versions of
this book may not be available in other formats.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientific research, understanding, and discussion only and are not intended and should
not be relied upon as recommending or promoting scientific method, diagnosis, or treatment by physicians for any particular patient. In view
of ongoing research, equipment modifications, changes in governmental regulations, and the constant flow of information relating to the use of
medicines, equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to review and evaluate the information provided in the package insert or instructions for
each medicine, equipment, or device for, among other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and
precautions. While the publisher and authors have used their best efforts in preparing this work, they make no representations or warranties with
respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any
implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives, written
sales materials or promotional statements for this work. The fact that an organization, website, or product is referred to in this work as a citation
and/or potential source of further information does not mean that the publisher and authors endorse the information or services the organization,
website, or product may provide or recommendations it may make. This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged
in rendering professional services. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a
specialist where appropriate. Further, readers should be aware that websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when
this work was written and when it is read. Neither the publisher nor authors shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages,
including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
Library of Congress Cataloging‐in‐Publication data applied for
ISBN 9781118497067
Cover image: Cell images (left, middle) © Kateryna Kon/Shutterstock, Cell image (right) © David Bruyett, Dog and Cat image © David Bruyette
Cover design by Wiley
Set in 10/12pt Warnock by SPi Global, Pondicherry, India
10 9

8

7

6

5

4

3 2

1

VetBooks.ir

­Dedication
To CB Chastain, Dick Nelson and Ed Feldman for trying their best to make me a better clinician. For someone interested in internal medicine and endocrinology I could not have had better mentors.
To all of my former students, interns and residents, thanks so much for always keeping me honest and forcing me to
try to stay ahead of those I was supposed to be teaching.
To all the wonderful folks at Wiley (Erica Judisch, Gillian Whitley, Purvi Patel, Holly Regan-Jones, and Katrina Maceda)
that made this book possible and tried their best to keep me on track. You turned the idea into reality and improved
the book at every step in the process.
To my amazing children McKenna, Taylor, Ivy and Cole, thanks for letting me be a part of your lives. Being your Dad
is the best job in the world.
To my amazing wife and best friend Maya. You make my life complete and I look forward to sharing every day with
you.

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

vii

Contents
Preface xix
List of Contributors xxi
About the Companion Website xxix
VOLUME I
Section 1

Evaluation and Management of the Patient 1

1

The Concept of One Medicine 3
Lonnie J. King

2

Statistical Interpretation for Practitioners 7
Philip H. Kass

3

Using Data for Clinical Decision Making 17
Philip H. Kass

Section 2

Endocrine Disease 27

4

Principles of Endocrinology 29
Robert Kemppainen

5

Neuroendocrinology 35
Maya Lottati

6

Feline Acromegaly 43
David S. Bruyette

7

Pituitary‐Dependent Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs and Cats 49
David S. Bruyette

8

Polyuria and Polydipsia 65
Jennifer L. Garcia

9

Canine Hypothyroidism 71
David S. Bruyette

10

Feline Hyperthyroidism 75
David S. Bruyette

VetBooks.ir

viii

Contents

11

Hypoadrenocorticism in Dogs and Cats 81
Patty Lathan

12

Diabetes Mellitus in Dogs and Cats 93
Jacquie S. Rand

13

Hypoglycemia in Patients without Diabetes Mellitus: Evaluation and Management 103
Rhett Nichols

14

Canine Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndromes
Deborah Greco

Section 3

113

Cardiovascular Disease 117

15

Approach to the Patient with Suspected Cardiovascular Disease 119
Ingrid Ljungvall and Jens Häggström

16

Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease 127
Valérie Chetboul

17

Electrocardiography 165
Anna R.M. Gelzer and Marc S. Kraus

18

Pathophysiology of Heart Failure 175
Barret J. Bulmer

19

Management of Heart Failure 185
Steven Rosenthal and Mark A. Oyama

20

Ventricular Arrhythmias 199
Amara H. Estrada and Romain Pariaut

21

Supraventricular Arrhythmias 205
Romain Pariaut and Amara H. Estrada

22

Systemic Hypertension 219
Rebecca L. Stepien

23

Pulmonary Hypertension 225
Heidi B. Kellihan

24

Congenital Heart Disease 231
Brian A. Scansen

25

Valvular Heart Disease 245
Michele Borgarelli

26

Canine Myocardial Disease 253
M. Lynne O’Sullivan

27

Feline Myocardial Disease 267
Virginia Luis Fuentes

VetBooks.ir

Contents

28

Pericardial Disease 275
Ashley B. Saunders and Sonya G. Gordon

Section 4

Respiratory Disease 287

29

A Respiratory Pattern‐Based Approach to Dyspnea 289
Christopher G. Byers

30

Feline Bronchial Asthma 297
Christine M. Serafin

31

Canine Chronic Bronchitis 305
Kevin Kumrow

32

Pulmonary Thromboembolism 313
Robert Goggs

33

Surgical Approaches to Thoracic Disease 325
Raegan Wells

34

Pleural Effusion 333
Ashley Allen and Gareth Buckley

Section 5

Critical Care Medicine 345

35

Approach to the Patient in the Critical Care Setting 347
Sarah Allen

36

Fluid Therapy 355
Teresa Rieser

37

Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation 365
Nathan Peterson

38

Respiratory Monitoring in Critical Care 373
Mathew Mellema

39

Acute Respiratory Failure 381
Matthew Mellema

40

Mechanical Ventilation 393
Kate Hopper and Mathew Mellema

41

Approach to the Patient with Shock 403
James W. Barr

42

Cardiogenic Shock 413
Nathan Peterson and James W. Barr

43

Septic Shock 421
James W. Barr

ix

VetBooks.ir

x

Contents

44

Disorders of Heat and Cold 431
Sarah Allen

45

Acute Poisoning 437
Ben O’Kelley

46

Medical Management of Trauma and Burns 445
Nathan Peterson

47

Venomous Snake Bites 459
Nathan Peterson

Section 6

Gastrointestinal Disease 467

48

Gastrointestinal Imaging 469
Susanne M. Stieger‐Vanegas

49

Gastrointestinal Endoscopy 507
Craig Ruaux

50

Diseases of the Oral Cavity and Salivary Glands 533
Maria M. Soltero‐Rivera and Alexander M. Reiter

51

Gastritis and Gastric Ulceration in Dogs and Cats 547
Katie Tolbert and Emily Gould

52

Disorders of the Esophagus 557
Silvia Funes and Craig Ruaux

53

Motility Disorders of the Alimentary Tract 563
Reto Neiger and Silke Salavati

54

Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency in Dogs and Cats 583
Panagiotis G. Xenoulis

55

Pancreatitis in the Dog 591
Caroline Mansfield

56

Pancreatitis in the Cat 601
Craig Ruaux

57

Rectoanal Diseases – Medical and Surgical Management 609
Craig Ruaux and Milan Milovancev

58

Dysbiosis and the Use of Pre‐, Pro‐ and Synbiotics 621
Jan S. Suchodolski

59

Diagnosis and Management of Chronic Enteropathies 627
Karin Allenspach

Section 7
60

Diseases of the Liver, Gallbladder, and Bile Ducts 639

Approach to the Patient with Liver Disease 641
Emma O’Neill

VetBooks.ir

Contents

61

Imaging in Hepatobiliary Disease 659
Esther Barrett

62

Metabolic, Toxic, and Neoplastic Diseases of the Liver 677
Jan Rothuizen

63

Feline Inflammatory Liver Disease 687
Nicki Reed

64

Canine Inflammatory Liver Disease 695
Nick Bexfield

65

Cirrhosis and its Consequences 705
Katherine Scott

66

Portosystemic Shunts and Microvascular Dysplasia 713
Geraldine Hunt

67

Diseases of the Gallbladder and Extrahepatic Biliary Ducts 721
Ben Harris

Section 8

Neurologic Disease 727

68

The Neurologic Examination 729
Alexander de Lahunta

69

Central Nervous System Trauma 741
Simon R. Platt

70

Seizures and Movement Disorders 759
Michael Podell

71

Disorders of the Forebrain 773
Sam N. Long

72

Vestibular Disease 789
Tammy Stevenson

73

Meningoencephalitis and Meningomyelitis 795
Christopher L. Mariani

74

Diseases of the Neuromuscular Junction 803
David Lipsitz

75

Myopathies 811
Marguerite F. Knipe

76

Myelopathy 815
Joan R. Coates

77

Neuroophthalmology 823
Bradford J. Holmberg

xi

Contents

VOLUME II

VetBooks.ir

xii

Section 9
Part 1

Infectious Disease 829

Diagnostic Considerations 831

78

Epidemiology of Infectious Disease 833
Peggy L. Schmidt and Helen T. Engelke

79

Laboratory Diagnosis of Infectious Diseases 839
Laia Solano‐Gallego and Gad Baneth

Part 2

Select Infectious Diseases and Disease Agents 849

80

Canine Distemper 851
David S. Bruyette

81

Canine Herpesvirus 855
Yvonne Drechsler

82

Canine Viral Enteritis 857
Margaret C. Barr

83

Viral Papillomatosis 861
Margaret C. Barr

84

Canine Influenza Virus
Ellen Collisson

85

Feline Parvovirus 869
Margaret C. Barr

86

Feline Coronavirus 873
Yvonne Drechsler

87

Feline Leukemia Virus 877
David S. Bruyette

88

Feline Immunodeficiency Virus 883
Tom Phillips

89

Feline Viral Upper Respiratory Tract Disease 887
Yvonne Drechsler

90

Rabies in Dogs and Cats 891
Emily Beeler and Karen Ehnert

91

West Nile Virus 899
Tracey McNamara

92

Ebola Virus 901
Linda Kidd

865

VetBooks.ir

Contents

93

Ehrlichiosis and Anaplasmosis 903
Pedro P. Vissotto de Paiva Diniz

94

Salmon Poisoning Disease 913
Pedro P. Vissotto de Paiva Diniz

95

Wolbachia pipientis Infection 917
Pedro P. Vissotto de Paiva Diniz

96

Bartonellosis 919
Pedro P. Vissotto de Paiva Diniz

97

Hemotropic Mycoplasma 927
Séverine Tasker

98

Nonhemotropic Mycoplasma, Ureaplasma, and L‐Form Bacteria 931
Joachim Spergser

99

Spotted Fever and Typhus Group Rickettsia 937
Linda Kidd

100

Lyme Borreliosis 941
Meryl P. Littman

101

Leptospirosis 945
Katharine F. Lunn

102

Yersiniosis 951
Maria Grazia Pennisi

103

Tularemia 955
Linda Kidd

104

Q Fever 959
Linda Kidd

105

Brucellosis 963
Erin E. Runcan and Marco A. Coutinho da Silva

106

Tetanus and Botulism 967
Andrea Fischer

107

Anthrax 971
Wayne E. Wingfield and Jerry J. Upp

108

Actinomycosis, Nocardiosis, and Mycobacterial Infections 977
Joanna Whitney and Vanessa R. Barrs

109

Fungal Infections 985
Jane E. Sykes

110

Protozoal and Protozoa‐Like Infections 1003
Gad Baneth and Laia Solano‐Gallego

xiii

VetBooks.ir

xiv

Contents

111

Coccidia 1023
Chris Adolph

112

Surgical, Traumatic, and Bite Wound Infections 1029
Laura L. Nelson

113

Canine Infectious Respiratory Disease Complex 1035
Jonathan Dear
Part 3

Therapeutic Considerations 1039

114

Antimicrobial Therapy in Dogs and Cats 1041
Katrina R. Viviano

115

Antifungal Therapy 1049
Daniel S. Foy
Part 4

Special Topics 1055

116

Nosocomial and Multidrug‐Resistant Infections 1057
Jason W. Stull and J. Scott Weese

117

Management of Infectious Disease in Kennels and Multicat Environments: Creating a Culture of
Compliance 1063
Frank Bossong
Section 10

Renal and Genitourinary Disease 1067

118

Disorders of Sodium and Water Homeostasis 1069
Julien Guillaumin and Stephen DiBartola

119

Disorders of Phosphorus and Magnesium 1079
Rosanne Jepson

120

Acute Kidney Injury 1089
Adam E. Eatroff

121

Glomerular Disease 1101
Shelly L. Vaden

122

Obstructive Uropathy 1109
Edward Cooper and Brian A. Scansen

123

Urolithiasis in Small Animals 1123
Alice Defarges, Michelle Evason, Marilyn Dunn, and Allyson Berent

124

Prostatic Diseases 1157
Serge Chalhoub

125

Management of Chronic Kidney Disease 1165
Jessica Quimby

VetBooks.ir

Contents

126

The Role of Dialysis 1175
Adam E. Eatroff

127

Micturition and Associated Disorders 1181
Julie K. Byron

128

Urinary Tract Infections
Nicole Smee

Section 11

1189

Oncologic Disease 1197

129

Approach to the Cancer Patient 1199
Lisa DiBernardi

130

Biology of Cancer and Cancer Genetics 1205
Mary‐Keara Boss

131

Endocrine Manifestations of Cancer: Ectopic Hormone Production 1213
Cory Brown

132

Paraneoplastic Syndromes 1217
Cory Brown

133

Lymphoid Leukemias, Myeloid Neoplasia, and Myelodysplastic Syndrome 1223
Angela R. Kozicki

134

Lymphomas 1231
Kristine Elaine Burgess

135

Plasma Cell Disorders 1241
Orna Kristal

136

Central Nervous System Tumors in Dogs and Cats 1247
David Ruslander

137

Cancer of the Nose and Mouth 1253
Lauren Askin Quarterman

138

Tumors of the Eye and Ocular Adnexa 1261
Erin M. Scott and Paul E. Miller

139

Cancer of the Heart 1271
Nick A. Schroeder and Lisa DiBernardi

140

Cancer of the Airway and Lung 1277
Joanne L. Intile

141

Cancer of the Esophagus and Stomach 1283
Avenelle I. Turner

142

Cancer of the Small and Large Intestine 1287
Edwin Brodsky

xv

VetBooks.ir

xvi

Contents

143

Exocrine Pancreatic Cancer 1293
Avenelle I. Turner

144

Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors 1297
Karen Eiler

145

Liver and Biliary Tract Tumors 1303
Amanda K. Elpiner

146

Tumors of the Urinary Tract 1307
Pedro A. Boria

147

Tumors of the Male Reproductive System 1311
Trina Hazzah

148

Gynecologic Cancers 1317
Trina Hazzah

149

Mammary Cancer 1321
Julie Bulman‐Fleming

150

Tumors of Bone and Joint 1327
Stephanie L. Shaver, William T.N. Culp, and Robert B. Rebhun

151

Soft Tissue Sarcomas 1333
Lauren Askin Quarterman

152

Hemangiosarcoma 1339
Christine B. Oakley and John D. Chretin

153

Melanoma 1347
Philip J. Bergman

154

Nonmelanoma Skin Cancers 1353
Barbara E. Kitchell

155

Mast Cell Neoplasia 1359
Zachary M. Wright

156

Apheresis in Companion Animals 1369
Steven Suter

Section 12

Skin and Ear Diseases 1373

157

Approach to the Patient with Dermatologic Disease 1375
Lisa V. Reiter

158

Principles of Therapy of Dermatologic Diseases 1397
Sandra N. Koch

159

Atopic Dermatitis 1403
Alison Diesel

VetBooks.ir

Contents

160

Allergic Skin Diseases 1413
Patrick Hensel

161

Cutaneous Adverse Food Reactions 1419
Ralf S. Mueller

162

Autoimmune and Immune‐Mediated Skin Diseases 1423
Nicole A. Heinrich

163

Approach to Alopecia 1433
Linda A. Frank

164

Canine Sterile Papular and Nodular Skin Diseases 1441
Sandra Diaz

165

Parasitic Skin Diseases 1449
Elizabeth E. Toops

166

Bacterial Pyodermas 1461
Jennifer R. Schissler

167

Otitis 1471
Sue Paterson

168

Cutaneous Manifestations of Systemic Disease 1481
Kinga Gortel

169

Superficial Necrolytic Dermatitis 1491
Mitchell D. Song

170

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases 1495
Lisa V. Reiter and Sheila M.F. Torres

Section 13

Diseases of Bone and Joint 1507

171

Skeletal Development and Homeostasis 1509
Matthew J. Allen and Gert J. Breur

172

Metabolic Bone Diseases 1521
Keren E. Dittmer

173

Osteoarthritis in Small Animals 1529
Steven A. Martinez

174

Developmental Orthopedic Diseases 1537
Gert J. Breur, Nicolaas E. Lambrechts, and Heather A. Towle Millard

Section 14
175

Social and Ethical Issues in Veterinary Medicine 1553

Canine and Feline End of Life Care 1555
Robin Downing

xvii

VetBooks.ir

xviii

Contents

Section 15

Preventive Care 1565

176

Role of Immunization 1567
Melissa Kennedy

177

Behavior Triage for Internists and the General Practitioner 1571
Karen Lynn C. Sueda

Section 16
Index 1583

Laboratory Support 1581

VetBooks.ir

xix

Preface
Internal medicine is hard. Progress in science and technology makes it almost impossible to keep abreast of
recent advances and on top of that, all of us want to balance our life both at work and home. Is there enough
time in the day for everything?
There are a variety of ways in which we learn and the
path is not the same for everyone. For those of us with an
interest in internal medicine, and I’m assuming that
includes the reader of this book, we rely on a number of
resources. Our colleagues, continuing education seminars, the literature, professional educational networks,
and reference textbooks. A concern of mine over the past
few years has been the increasing reliance on technology
to arrive at a clinical diagnosis rather than emphasizing
the need to understand physiology and the value of a
complete history and a thorough physical examination.
We feel increasing pressure to arrive at a specific and
definitive diagnosis and, more importantly, to arrive at
that diagnosis almost immediately.
Your goal in internal medicine is not to arrive at a diagnosis. I would much prefer to see a pet respond to my
treatment and recover without a definitive diagnosis
than to arrive at a definitive diagnosis at necropsy. If you
are successful in achieving a diagnosis, that can be very
rewarding. However, your goal should be to accurately
identify problems and address those problems in a logical, timely, and cost‐effective manner, always weighing
the risk/benefit of running myriad diagnostics versus
improving the quality of life of your patient and the pet
owner. While not every pet owner will be able to afford
or desire to follow each and every one of our recommendations, it is our job to make sure that whatever decision
the owner makes is based on being fully informed.
Illness is really physiology gone awry. If you have an
understanding of what is normal, it makes your job of
identifying the abnormal much easier. The body has a
limited repertoire of responses to an insult so often many
diseases will have very similar clinical presentations.

While we all like to make lists of the 20 differential diagnoses for a given patient’s abnormalities, it’s important to
recognize that in clinical practice, common things occur
commonly and those differentials should be at the top of
your rule‐out list.
There are numerous excellent textbooks on the market
and I use many of them on a daily/weekly basis. Some
serve as definitive reference works for the topic under discussion. Some are brief, bullet point, clinically oriented
texts that one can use to find something quickly. What I
thought was currently lacking was a text that would be
continually updated, provide enough background physiology to help the reader understand normal versus abnormal, and provide useful and, more importantly, clinically
relevant material to help you with your patients.
The goal of this text was to first identify section editors
who were recognized experts in their field both academically and clinically. The section editors then identified
topics they felt were of greatest clinical importance and
selected authors who could translate this information
into a text that would be used every day. I hope we have
achieved that goal. We will be updating the text online
with new information and updated references on a quarterly basis, adding additional sections and chapters with
future editions, and uploading podcasts consisting of
interviews with the authors to highlight and emphasize
the material in the text and any recent advances in the
field.
We hope that you will find the text helpful and all
credit for that success goes to the authors. Any omissions
or errors lie with me so please let me know both the good
and the bad so we can improve things going forward.
As my favorite philosopher once said “It’s a magical
world, Hobbes, ol’ buddy, let’s go exploring.”
All the best and enjoy exploring the mysteries of
medicine.
Dave

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

xxi

List of Contributors
Chris Adolph, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVM (Parasitology)

Zoetis Inc.
Tulsa, OK, USA
Ashley Allen, DVM, DACVECC

College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL, USA
Matthew J. Allen, VetMB, PhD

Department of Veterinary Medicine
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
Sarah Allen, DVM, DACVECC

Massachusetts Veterinary Referral Hospital
Woburn, MA, USA
Karin Allenspach, Dr.Med.Vet., PhD, DECVIM‐CA

College of Veterinary Medicine
Iowa State University
Ames, IA, USA
Gad Baneth, DVM, PhD, DECVCP

School of Veterinary Medicine
Hebrew University
Rehovot, Israel
James W. Barr, DVM, DACVECC

BluePearl Veterinary Partners
Tampa, FL, USA
Margaret C. Barr, DVM, PhD

College of Veterinary Medicine
Western University of Health Sciences
Pomona, CA, USA

Vanessa R. Barrs, BVSc (Hons), MVetClinStud, MACVSc
(Small Animal), FACVSc (Feline), GradCertEd (Higher Ed)

University of Sydney
Sydney, Australia
Emily Beeler, DVM, MPH

Veterinary Public Health Program
Los Angeles County Department of Public Health
Los Angeles, CA, USA
Allyson Berent, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

The Animal Medical Center
New York, USA
Philip J. Bergman, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Oncology)

Katonah‐Bedford Veterinary Center
Clinical Studies, VCA Antech
Bedford Hills, NY, USA
Nick Bexfield, BVetMed, PhD, DSAM, DECVIM‐CA,
PGDipMEdSci, FHEA, MRCVS

The Queen’s Veterinary School Hospital
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
Michele Borgarelli, DVM, PhD, DECVIM (Cardiology)

Virginia‐Maryland Regional College of
Veterinary Medicine
Blacksburg, VA, USA
Pedro A. Boria, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Oncology)

Blue Pearl Veterinary Partners
Northfield, IL, USA
Mary‐Keara Boss, DVM, PhD, DACVR (Radiation Oncology)

Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO, USA
Frank Bossong, DVM

Esther Barrett, MA, VetMB, DVDI, DECVDI, MRCVSt

Wales and West Imaging
Chepstow, UK

College of Veterinary Medicine
Western University of Health Sciences
Pomona, CA, USA

VetBooks.ir

xxii

­List of Contributors

Gert J. Breur, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVS

Johnny D. Chretin, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)

College of Veterinary Medicine
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA

TrueCare for Pets
Studio City, CA, USA

Edwin Brodsky, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)

College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Missouri
Columbia, MO, USA

Veterinary Medical Center of Long Island
West Islip, NY, USA
Cory Brown, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Joan R. Coates, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Neurology)

Ellen Collisson, MS, PhD

VetScan Mobile Diagnostics
Powell, OH, USA

College of Veterinary Medicine
Western University of Health Sciences
Pomona, CA, USA

David S. Bruyette, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Edward Cooper, VMD, MS, DACVECC

Anivive Lifesciences
Long Beach, CA, USA
Gareth Buckley, MA, VetMB, MRCVS, DACVECC

College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL, USA
Julie Bulman‐Fleming, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)

Veterinary Cancer Group
Tustin, CA, USA
Barret J. Bulmer, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Cardiology)

Tufts Veterinary Emergency Treatment & Specialties
Walpole, MA, USA
Kristine Elaine Burgess, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)

Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine
Tufts University
North Grafton, MA, USA
Christopher G. Byers, DVM, DACVECC, DACVIM (SAIM), CVJ

CriticalCareDVM.com
Omaha, NE, USA
Julie K. Byron, DVM, MS, DACVIM (SAIM)

College of Veterinary Medicine
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA

College of Veterinary Medicine
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA
William T.N. Culp, VMD, DACVS, ACVS Founding
Fellow of Surgical Oncology

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA, USA
Jonathan Dear, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA, USA
Alice Defarges, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Ontario Veterinary College
University of Guelph
Guelph, ON, Canada
Alexander de Lahunta, DVM, PhD,
DACVIM (Neurology), DACVP

College of Veterinary Medicine
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
Sandra Diaz, DVM, MS, DACVD
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences

Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA

Serge Chalhoub, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Stephen DiBartola, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
University of Calgary
Calgary, AB, Canada

Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA

Valérie Chetboul, DVM, PhD, DECVIM‐CA (Cardiology)

Lisa DiBernardi, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology), DACVR
(Radiation Oncology)

National Veterinary School at Alfort
Maisons‐Alfort, France

Gulf Coast Veterinary Specialists
Houston, TX, USA

VetBooks.ir

­List of Contributors

Alison Diesel, DVM, DACVD

Michelle Evason, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA

Atlantic Veterinary College
University of Prince Edward Island
Charlottetown, PE, Canada

Pedro P. Vissotto de Paiva Diniz, DVM, PhD

Andrea Fischer, DVM, DECVN, DACVIM (Neurology)

College of Veterinary Medicine
Western University of Health Sciences
Pomona, CA, USA
Keren E. Dittmer, PhD, BVSc, DACVP

School of Veterinary Science
Massey University
Palmerston North, New Zealand
Robin Downing, DVM, MS, DAAPM, DACVSMR

The Downing Center for Animal Pain Management, LLC
Windsor, CO, USA
Yvonne Drechsler, PhD

College of Veterinary Medicine
Western University of Health Sciences
Pomona, CA, USA
Marilyn Dunn, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vétérinaire
University of Montreal
Saint‐Hyacinthe, QC, Canada
Adam E. Eatroff, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

ACCESS Specialty Animal Hospitals
Culver City, CA, USA
Karen Ehnert, DVM, MPVM, DACVPM

Veterinary Public Health Program
Los Angeles County Department of
Public Health
Los Angeles, CA, USA
Karen Eiler, DVM, MS, DACVIM (SAIM)

VCA West Los Angeles Animal Hospital
Los Angeles, CA, USA
Helen T. Engelke, BVSc, MPVM, DACVPM, MRCVS

College of Veterinary Medicine
Western University of Health Sciences
Pomona, CA, USA

Ludwig‐Maximilians University
Munich, Germany
Daniel S. Foy, MS, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), DACVECC

College of Veterinary Medicine
Midwestern University
Glendale, AZ, USA
Linda A. Frank, DVM, MS, DACVD

College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Tennessee Institute of Agriculture
Knoxville, TN, USA
Virginia Luis Fuentes, MA, VetMB, PhD, CertVR, DVC,
MRCVS, DACVIM (Cardiology), DECVIM (Cardiology)

Royal Veterinary College
University of London
Hatfield, Herts, UK
Silvia Funes, DVM, MS, DACVIM (SAIM)

VCA Bay Area Veterinary Specialists and
Emergency Hospital
San Leandro, CA, USA
Jennifer L. Garcia, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Sugar Land Veterinary Specialists and VetCompanion
Houston, TX, USA
Anna R. M. Gelzer, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Cardiology),
DECVIM‐CA (Cardiology)

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA
Robert Goggs, BVSc, PhD, DACVECC, DECVECC

Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine
Companion Animal Hospital
Ithaca, NY, USA
Sonya G. Gordon, DVM, DVSc, DACVIM (Cardiology)

VCA Great Lakes Veterinary Specialists
Cleveland, OH, USA

College of Veterinary Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA

Amara H. Estrada, DVM, DACVIM (Cardiology)

Kinga Gortel, DVM, MS, DACVD

University of Florida
Gainesville, FL, USA

Tri Lake Animal Hospital and Referral Centre
Lake Country, BC, Canada

Amanda K. Elpiner, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)

xxiii

VetBooks.ir

xxiv

­List of Contributors

Emily Gould, DVM, MS

College of Veterinary Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
Deborah Greco, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM)

Desert Veterinary Specialists
Palm Desert, CA, USA
Julien Guillaumin, DVM, DACVECC

Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO, USA
Jens Häggström, DVM, PhD, DECVIM‐CA (Cardiology)

Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences
Uppsala, Sweden
Ben Harris, MA, VetMB, CertSAM, MRCVS

Northwest Veterinary Specialists
Sutton Weaver, Cheshire, UK

Rosanne Jepson, BVSc, MVetMed, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM),
DECVIM-CA, PGCertVetEd, FHEA, MRCVS

Royal Veterinary College
University of London
London, UK
Philip H. Kass, BS, DVM, MPVM, MS, PhD

Population Health and Reproduction
Davis, CA, USA
Heidi B. Kellihan, DVM, DACVIM (Cardiology)

University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI, USA
Robert Kemppainen, DVM, PhD

Auburn University
Auburn, AL, USA
Melissa Kennedy, DVM, PhD, DACVM

College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Tennessee
Knoxville, TN, USA
Linda Kidd, DVM, PhD, DACVIM

Trina Hazzah, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)

VCA West Los Angeles Animal Hospital
Los Angeles, CA, USA
Nicole A. Heinrich, DVM, DACVD

McKeever Dermatology Clinics
Eden Prairie, MN, USA
Patrick Hensel, Dr. Med.Vet., DACVD, DECVD

Tierdermatologie
Basel, Switzerland
Bradford J. Holmberg, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVO

Animal Eye Center
Little Falls, NJ, USA
Kate Hopper, BVSc, DACVECC, PhD

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA, USA
Geraldine Hunt, BVSc, MVetClinStud, PhD, FACVSc

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA, USA
Joanne L. Intile, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)
College of Veterinary Medicine

North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC, USA

College of Veterinary Medicine
Western University of Health Sciences
Pomona, CA, USA
Lonnie J. King, DVM, MS, MPA, DACVPM

The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA
Barbara E. Kitchell, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
(Internal Medicine, Oncology)

VCA Veterinary Care Animal Hospital and
Referral Center
Albuquerque, NM, USA
Marguerite F. Knipe, DVM, DACVIM (Neurology)

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA, USA
Sandra N. Koch, DVM, MS, DACVD

College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Minnesota
St Paul, MN, USA
Angela R. Kozicki, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)

Bluepearl Veterinary Partners
Southfield, MI, USA
Marc S. Kraus, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM, Cardiology),
DECVIM‐CA (Cardiology)

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA

VetBooks.ir

­List of Contributors

Orna Kristal, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)

Veterinary Specialty and Emergency Hospital
Wan Chai, Hong Kong
Stephanie Kube, DVM, DACVIM (Neurology)

Veterinary Neurology and Pain Management
Center of New England
Walpole, MA, USA
Kevin Kumrow, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Orchard Park Veterinary Medical Center
Orchard Park, NY, USA
Nicolaas E. Lambrechts, DVM, DECVS, DACVSMR

College of Veterinary Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO, USA
Catherine Langston, VM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA
Patty Lathan, VMD, DACVIM (SAIM)

College of Veterinary Medicine
Mississippi State University
Mississippi State, MS, USA
David Lipsitz, DVM, DACVIM (Neurology)

Veterinary Specialty Hospital
San Diego, CA, USA
Meryl P. Littman, VMD, DACVIM (SAIM)

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA
Ingrid Ljungvall, DVM, PhD, DECVIM‐CA (Cardiology)

Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences
Uppsala, Sweden
Sam N. Long, BVSc, PhD, DipECVN

Centre for Animal Referral and Emergency
Melbourne, Australia
Maya Lottati, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM)

Caroline Mansfield, BSc, BVMS, MVM, PhD,
MANZCVS, DECVIM-CA

Melbourne Veterinary School
University of Melbourne
Melbourne, Australia
Christopher L. Mariani, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Neurology)

College of Veterinary Medicine
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC, USA
Steven A. Martinez, DVM, MS, DACVS, DACVSMR

College of Veterinary Medicine
Washington State University
Pullman, WA, USA
Tracey McNamara, DVM, DACVP

College of Veterinary Medicine
Western University of Health Sciences
Pomona, CA, USA
Mathew Mellema, DVM, PhD, DACVECC

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA, USA
Heather A. Towle Millard, DVM, MS, DACVS‐SA

Blue Pearl Pet Hospital
Overland Park, KS, USA
Paul E. Miller, DVM, DACVO

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Wisconsin‐Madison
Madison, WI, USA
Milan Milovancev, DVM, DACVS‐SA

School of Veterinary Medicine
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR, USA
Ralf S. Mueller, Dr. Med.Vet., DACVD, FANZCVSc

Centre for Clinical Veterinary Medicine
Ludwig‐Maximilians‐University of Munich
Munich, Germany
Reto Neiger, Dr.Med.Vet., PhD, DACVIM (SAIM),
DECVIM-CA

TrueCare for Pets
Studio City, CA, USA

Small Animal Clinic Hofheim
Hofheim, Germany

Katharine F. Lunn, BVMS, MS, PhD, MRCVS, DACVIM (SAIM)

Laura L. Nelson, DVM, MS, DACVS

College of Veterinary Medicine
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC, USA

College of Veterinary Medicine
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC, USA

xxv

VetBooks.ir

xxvi

­List of Contributors

Rhett Nichols, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Antech Diagnostics
Farmingdale, NY, USA
Christine B. Oakley, DVM

VCA Veterinary Specialists of the Valley
Woodland Hills, CA, USA
Ben O’Kelley, DVM, DACVECC

BluePearl Veterinary Partners
Tampa, FL, USA
Emma O’Neill, BSc, BVSc, PhD, DSAM, DECVIM‐CA, MRCVS

School of Veterinary Medicine
University College Dublin
Dublin, Eire
M. Lynne O’Sullivan, DVM, DVSc, DACVIM (Cardiology)

Atlantic Veterinary College
University of Prince Edward Island
Charlottetown, PEI, Canada
Tina Jo Owen, DVM, DACVS

Washington State University
Pullman, WA, USA
Mark A. Oyama, DVM, MSCE, DACVIM (Cardiology)
Department of Clinical Sciences and Advanced Medicine

University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA

Romain Pariaut, DVM, DACVIM (Cardiology),
DECVIM-CA (Cardiology)

College of Veterinary Medicine
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
Sue Paterson, MA, VetMB, DVD, DECVD, FRCVS

Veterinary Dermatologicals
Altrincham, Cheshire, UK
Maria Grazia Pennisi, DVM, PhD

Specialist Applied Microbiology
University of Messina
Messina, Italy
Nathan Peterson, DVM, DACVECC

VCA West Los Angeles Animal Hospital
Los Angeles, CA, USA
Tom Phillips, DVM, MS, PhD

Deceased
Formerly College of Veterinary Medicine
Western University of Health Sciences
Pomona, CA, USA

Simon R. Platt, BVM&S, FRCVS, DACVIM
(Neurology), DECVN

College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Georgia
Athens, GA, USA
Michael Podell, MSc, DVM, DACVIM (Neurology)

Chicago Veterinary Emergency and Specialty Center
Chicago, IL, USA
Lauren Askin Quarterman, DVM, DACVR
(Radiation Oncology)

PetCure Oncology
San Jose, CA, USA
Jessica Quimby, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM)

Ohio State University Veterinary Medical Center
Columbus, OH, USA
Jacquie S. Rand, BVSc, DVSc, MANZVS, DACVIM (SAIM)

School of Veterinary Science
University of Queensland
Gatton, Queensland, Australia
and
Australian Pet Welfare Foundation
Kenmore, Queensland, Australia
Robert B. Rebhun, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Oncology)

Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA, USA
Nicki Reed, BVM&S, CertVR, DSAM (Feline), DECVIM‐CA,
MRCVS

Veterinary Specialists
West Lothian, Scotland, UK
Alexander M. Reiter, Dipl.Tzt., Dr.Med.Vet.,
DAVDC, DEVDC

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA
Lisa V. Reiter, DVM, DACVD

McKeever Dermatology Clinics
Eden Prairie and Inver Grove Heights, MN, USA
Teresa Rieser, DVM, DACVECC

Veterinary Specialty Care
Mt. Pleasant, SC, USA
Steven Rosenthal, DVM, DACVIM (Cardiology)

CVCA Cardiac Care for Pets
Towson, MD, USA

VetBooks.ir

­List of Contributors

Jan Rothuizen, DVM, PhD, DECVIM‐CA

Erin M. Scott, DVM, DACVO

Department of Clinical Science of
Companion Animals
Utrecht University
Utrecht, The Netherlands

College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA

Elizabeth A. Rozanski, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), DACVECC

VCA Alameda East Veterinary Hospital
Denver, CO, USA

Tufts University
Medford, MA, USA
Craig Ruaux, BVSc (Hons), PhD, MACVSc, DACVIM (SAIM)

School of Veterinary Science
Massey University
Palmerston North, New Zealand
Erin E. Runcan, DVM, DACVT

Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA
David Ruslander, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology), DACVR
(Radiation Oncology)

Veterinary Specialty Hospital of the Carolinas
Cary, NC, USA
Silke Salavati, Dr.Med.Vet., PhD, DipECVIM‐CA, MRCVS

Royal School of Veterinary Studies
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, Scotland
Ashley B. Saunders, DVM, DACVIM (Cardiology)

College of Veterinary Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
Brian A. Scansen, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Cardiology)

Katherine Scott, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

Christine M. Serafin, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)

The Animal Surgical Center of Michigan
Flint, MI, USA
Stephanie L. Shaver, DVM, DACVS

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA, USA
Marco A. Coutinho da Silva, DVM, MS, PhD, DACT

Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA
Nicole Smee, DVM, MS, DACVIM

Las Vegas Veterinary Specialty Center
Las Vegas, NV, USA
Laia Solano‐Gallego, DVM, PhD, DECVCP

Facultat de Veterinária
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain
Maria M. Soltero‐Rivera, DVM, DAVDC

VCA San Francisco Veterinary Specialists
San Francisco, CA, USA
Mitchell D. Song, DVM, DACVD

Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO, USA

VETMED Specialty Referral and 24‐Hour Emergency
Care Veterinary Hospital
Phoenix, AZ, USA

Jennifer R. Schissler, DVM, MS, DACVD

Joachim Spergser, Dipl.Tzt., Dr. Med.Vet., DECVM

College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO, USA
Peggy L. Schmidt, DVM, MS, DACVPM

College of Veterinary Medicine
Kansas State University
Manhattan, KS, USA

Institute of Microbiology
University of Veterinary Medicine
Vienna, Austria
Rebecca L. Stepien, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Cardiology)

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Wisconsin‐Madison
Madison, WI, USA

Nick A. Schroeder, DVM, DACVIM (Cardiology)

Tammy Stevenson, DVM, DACVIM

LeadER Animal Specialty Hospital
Cooper City, FL, USA

Veterinary Specialty Hospital
San Diego, CA, USA

xxvii

VetBooks.ir

xxviii

­List of Contributors

Susanne M. Stieger‐Vanegas, DVM, PhD, DECVDI

Avenelle I. Turner, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)

Carlson College of Veterinary Medicine
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR, USA

Veterinary Cancer Group
Culver City, CA, USA

Jason W. Stull, VMD, MPVM, PhD, DACVPM

Midtown Animal Hospital
Gering, NE, USA

Department of Veterinary Preventive Medicine
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA
Jan S. Suchodolski, MedVet, Dr. Med.Vet., PhD, AGAF,
DACVM

College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
Karen Lynn C. Sueda, DVM, DACVB

VCA West Los Angeles Animal Hospital
Los Angeles, CA, USA
Steven Suter, VMD, MS, PhD, DACVIM

Canine Bone Marrow Transplant Unit
North Carolina State University College of
Veterinary Medicine
Raleigh, NC, USA
Jane E. Sykes, BVSc, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM)

Jerry J. Upp, DVM

Shelly L. Vaden, DMV, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM)

College of Veterinary Medicine
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC, USA
Katrina R. Viviano, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM), DACVCP

School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Wisconsin‐Madison
Madison, WI, USA
J. Scott Weese, DVM, DVSc, DACVIM (SAIM)

Ontario Veterinary College
University of Guelph
Guelph, ON, Canada
Raegan Wells, DVM, DACVECC

Phoenix Veterinary Referral and Emergency Center
Phoenix, AZ, USA
Joanna Whitney, BSc, BVSc, PhD, MVetStud, MACVS
(SMAnimMed, ECC)

University of California, Davis
Davis, CA, USA

Small Animal Specialist Hospital
North Ryde, NSW, Australia

Séverine Tasker, BSc, BVSc (Hons), PhD, DSAM, DACVIM‐CA,
PGCertHE, MRCVS

Wayne E. Wingfield, MS, DVM, DACVS, DACVECC

Bristol Veterinary School
University of Bristol
Bristol, UK
Katie Tolbert, DVM, PhD, ADCVIM (SAIM)

College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
Elizabeth E. Toops, DVM, MS, DACVD (Dermatology)

Virginia Veterinary Specialists
Charlottesville, VA, USA
Sheila M.F. Torres, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVD

College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Minnesota
St Paul, MN, USA

Department of Clinical Sciences
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO, USA
Zachary M. Wright, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)

VCA Animal Diagnostic Clinic
Dallas, TX, USA
Panagiotis G. Xenoulis, DVM, Dr. Med.Vet., PhD

College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX

VetBooks.ir

xxix

About the Companion Website
This book is accompanied by a companion website:
www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical
The website includes:
Podcasts

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

829

Section 9
Infectious Disease

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

831

Part 1
Diagnostic Considerations

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

833

78
Epidemiology of Infectious Disease
Peggy L. Schmidt, DVM, MS, DACVPM1 and Helen T. Engelke, BVSc, MPVM, DACVPM, MRCVS2
1
2

College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USA
College of Veterinary Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA

Infectious diseases pose many challenges for veterinarians.
How was my patient exposed to the pathogen? When did
exposure occur? Where did the disease ­originate? Are
there others infected? Does my patient pose a risk to other
pets or people? How can I determine if things are getting
better or getting worse? Understanding the epidemiology
of infectious disease can help veterinarians answer these
and other questions which can lead to better informed decisions which then improve patient outcomes and mitigate
further spread of disease. Two essential areas of infectious
disease epidemiology for the practicing veterinarian
to understand are performing disease monitoring and
surveillance activities and outbreak investigations.

­Disease Monitoring and Surveillance
Disease monitoring and surveillance are important
activities designed to assess the health and disease status
of a population of animals. Monitoring and surveillance,
while sounding similar to the lay person, are considered
epidemiologically distinct terms. Specific diseases,
described syndromes, or general health status are monitored by veterinarians through the systematic collection
and recording of data. Disease monitoring activities
­provide information which can inform treatment and
prognosis of affected animals, but does not typically
elicit an intervention at the population level.
Disease surveillance activities may include collection
of the same data used for disease monitoring, but activities are more intensive and purposeful. Surveillance is an
ongoing, somewhat cyclic event which to be effective
occurs over a considerable period of time. Surveillance
methods can include testing programs for new additions
to populations, such as FeLV testing of new cats entering
an animal shelter or cattery, or annual testing for

­infectious disease, such as annual heartworm testing for
dogs. In surveillance, when a specified threshold disease
level is reached, prevention, control, or eradication measures are triggered and applied at the population level.
Although most small animal clinical practices deal
with individual animals rather than owned populations,
disease monitoring and surveillance activities are no less
important to the clinic population. For example, veterinarians may erroneously assume low disease prevalence
in their area because of historic patterns of disease,
thereby preventing early detection of disease in that area.
As people, animals, and vectors move more freely and
establish new areas of residence, previously rare diseases
may incrementally increase in incidence.
Small animal veterinarians also have a responsibility to
participate in population surveillance programs established
for public health. Public health agencies at both the state
and federal level maintain a list of reportable diseases which
include zoonotic diseases that affect companion animals.
While maintaining a focus on human cases of disease, an
increasing number of agencies now include reporting of
zoonotic disease cases in companion animals. For example,
the California Code of Regulations requires veterinarians
to report cases of ­category A bioterrorism agents, such as
anthrax, plague, and tularemia, as well as zoonotic diseases
such as brucellosis (other than B. canis) and rabies to local
health officials. Veterinarians should check routinely with
their state veterinarian and local health departments to
keep current on reporting regulations related to zoonotic
disease and potential bioterrorism agents.
Small animal veterinarians may serve on the front line
for preventing incursions of foreign animal diseases. In
2007, an astute small animal veterinarian in Mississippi
found fly larvae on a 16‐year‐old dog imported from
Trinidad and reported the findings to the Mississippi
state veterinarian. Further diagnostics identified the fly

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

834

Section 9 Infectious Disease

larva as Cochliomyia hominivorax, the New World
screwworm, which had been successfully eradicated
from the US in the 1960s.
Disease monitoring and surveillance activities can be
formal or informal and help to identify increases in incidence of specific diseases or disease syndromes. Taking
the time to formalize a hunch, collect and analyze data,
and report findings to veterinary or public health
­officials may be the key to early identification of disease
outbreaks within a practice population.

­Outbreak Investigations
Outbreak investigations are parallel to a diagnostic work‐
up of an individual patient. A series of steps, performed in
a specific order, provide information which helps describe
and diagnose the problem at hand, plus allows insight
into measures to mitigate disease and prevent future
spread. Sources will vary slightly on the number of steps
involved in an outbreak investigation but this chapter will
focus on a six‐step process for outbreak investigation.
The outbreak investigation process mimics the clinical
investigation process for individual animals with disease:
recognize there is a problem, define the problem, gather
subjective and objective information to better describe
the problem, formulate a list of likely differentials, perform diagnostics to rule in or rule out differentials,
design a treatment plan, and communicate findings with
the client. Goals of an outbreak investigation are to verify
the pathogen responsible for the disease, identify the
source of disease in the population, determine methods
of transmission, and define means to prevent further
spread and future occurrences.
Pre‐step (or Step Zero): Establish
an Investigation Team
With outbreaks of food‐borne or infectious disease
affecting people, a team of physicians and epidemiologists is established prior to beginning an investigation. In
small animal medicine, resources to assist in an investigation may be available through local departments of
public health, especially if the outbreak has zoonotic
potential or may significantly impact the mental well‐
being of owners or the community. Assistance may also
be available from county or state veterinarians or local
colleges of veterinary medicine.
Step 1: Confirm Presence of Disease Outbreak
Before moving forward with an investigation, confirmation of the presence of disease above normal levels
must occur. Ideally, this would involve comparing ­current
disease levels with historic endemic levels of disease in

the area. Published prevalence studies from the literature
may provide insight into endemic disease levels in specific geographic areas or populations. If endemic disease
levels are unavailable, levels could be estimated by
extracting diagnosis information from electronic medical records in previous years.
Step 2: Establish a Case Definition
Commonly seen diseases with available accurate diagnostic tests allow for easy establishment of a working
case definition. For example, outbreaks of canine parvovirus are not uncommon and are reliably diagnosed by a
combination of clinical signs and diagnostic test results.
The disease under investigation may only present as a
collection of clinical signs rather than through isolation
and identification of a specific pathogen. In this situation,
the case definition would include significant or unique
clinical signs, signalment information, animal location
(area of residence), and time of onset of disease.
Additional data from animals who meet the case
definition should be collected to further inform the
­
investigation. Data should include pertinent information
from the patient history, physical exam, and diagnostic
procedures. Patient outcomes or response to treatments
should also be collected and recorded. As the investigation moves forward, the case definition will be continually refined in response to new information.
Step 3: Descriptive Epidemiology
Once the working case definition has been established,
investigators should review available historical medical
records to identify previous animals meeting the case
definition. This allows for identification of the time point
for the start of the outbreak. Data from previous cases,
including species, breed, age, and sex, should be used to
calculate prevalence of disease in various populations
and further describe the disease epidemiology.
Generating hypotheses for risk factors for disease will
depend on this information.
Key descriptors for the outbreak investigation include
temporal and geographic spread of disease. One of the
easiest ways to describe these data is through epidemic
curves (Figure 78.1). Epidemic curves inform hypotheses
for disease introduction and transmission, estimate
incubation periods, recognize possible pathogens, and
identify possible interventions.
Point source epidemic curves are indicative of a common pathogen exposure in a group of animals in a single
or relatively brief time point. They are characterized by a
sharp slope at the beginning of the outbreak and a more
gradual slope at the end. For infectious diseases, spread
of the disease is limited to a single incubation period and
further spread into naive populations does not occur.

15
10
5
0
1

3

5

7

9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31

3

5

7

10
8
6
4
2
0
1

3

5

7

9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31

Date of onset

Date of onset

Intermittent common source
epidemic curve

Propagating epidemic curve

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1

Number of animals (cases)

20

Continuous common source
epidemic curve

9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31
Date of onset

Number of animals (cases)

Number of animals (cases)

Point source epidemic curve

Number of animals (cases)

VetBooks.ir

78 Epidemiology of Infectious Disease

20

Hypothesized
incubation period

15
10
5
0
1

3

5

7

9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31
Date of onset

Figure 78.1 Epidemic curves.

Continuous common source epidemic curves also
indicate a common pathogen exposure in a group of animals. Sharp onset and more gradual ending to the outbreak are similar to point source epidemics with the
overall duration of the outbreak extending across a
longer period of time which overlaps into multiple incubation periods.
Intermittent common source epidemic curves look
like a series of point source epidemics across the measured time period. These epidemics may be misclassified
as point source in nature when the studied time period is
too brief to detect the sequential pathogen exposures.
Periods between onset of case clusters can be used to
estimate the incubation period of a suspected infectious
pathogen.
Propagating epidemic curves resemble intermittent
common source epidemics, but subsequent waves of
infection peak at progressively higher levels of infection.
These waves of infection represent secondary and tertiary cases of disease as a result of animal‐to‐animal
spread of the pathogen. As with intermittent common
source epidemic curves, periods of time between the
onset of waves of infection can be used to estimate incubation period of a suspected infectious pathogen. If the
pathogen responsible for the outbreak is yet undetermined, incubation period information can be used to
narrow the list of potential pathogens.

Separate epidemic curves can be created for subpopulations of animals based on breed, age, or sex. Differences
in the shapes of the curves may indicate potential risk
factors for disease, helping to identify potential pathogens or intervention measures with a greater likelihood
of success. Combining the temporal spread of a disease
with the geographic spread can also provide further
insight into potential pathogens and mechanisms for
spread of disease between susceptible populations.
For example, the CDC has published annual maps of the
incidence of West Nile virus in people and animals from
2003 to 2019. These maps provide a visual reference for
the spread of the disease from New York to California
(wwwn.cdc.gov/arbonet/maps/ADB_Diseases_Map/
index.html). Patterns of spread mapped against topographic information may support theories of vector‐
borne or water‐borne disease and again may help with
designing successful intervention strategies.
Step 4: Formulate and Test Hypotheses
Hypotheses related to disease introduction, spread,
cause, and intervention will be formulated based on data
gathered from animals meeting the case definition.
If considered in isolation, the data can be informative
but potentially deceptive. Without a nonaffected comparison population, false assumptions about prevalence

835

VetBooks.ir

836

Section 9 Infectious Disease

and risk factors can prevent implementation of successful interventions. This may lead to treatment failure and
continued spread of the disease.
Observational studies facilitate comparisons between
affected and nonaffected populations (cases and controls) with measures of association. Retrospective case–
control studies are relatively quick and easy to perform,
but may be hampered by incomplete or imperfect
data collection or availability in medical records. Odds
ratios can be calculated to identify risk factors for
­disease and support hypothesized control or prevention
interventions.
Prospective cohort studies are more expensive and
time consuming compared to case–control studies, but
provide incidence data which lead to more accurate
­estimates of risk through relative risk calculations. Their
prospective nature provides an opportunity for more
complete data collection in both affected and nonaffected populations which would not be available in
­historical medical records. As with case–control studies,
cohort studies also identify potential risk factors for
­disease and support interventions to reduce or prevent
further disease spread.
Step 5: Implement Control and Prevention
Measures
Descriptive epidemiologic data from epidemic curves
and risk factors determined from observational studies
must be carefully analyzed to determine what interventions will provide the greatest benefit and likelihood of
success. Measures must be directed at controlling the
current outbreak through treatment, if possible, and
­preventing continued spread of the disease into naive
animals in the population.
In small animal clinical practice, these actions can
­provide significant challenges not encountered in populations under ownership or control of relatively few
parties. When a population of animals has a single
owner, the potential loss of a few animals is mitigated
by the benefits of disease prevention in the larger
population. Sacrificing a few animals for diagnostic
­
procedures or to prevent further disease spread often
makes economic sense. With companion animals, the
value of individual animals does not lie just in dollars
and cents, but also in an unquantifiable emotional value
as a member of the family. The good of the population
does not necessarily override the value of the individual, creating difficult choices for mitigating disease at a
population level.
Recommendations for treating individual animals
are likely to be accepted and, depending on the cause

of the outbreak, individuals may have a good chance to
recover from infection. Treatment options may be cost‐
prohibitive for some owners or treatment may be refused
for various reasons. This may have little effect on spread
of disease if owners follow strict isolation and quarantine
protocols. Unfortunately, some owners may refuse
­quarantine and isolation procedures designed to stop
the spread to naive animals and veterinarians have
few options to mandate such procedures without a risk
to public health or safety. In these situations, effective
and compassionate communication of risk may help
increase compliance and mitigate risk of further spread
of disease.
­Step 6: Communicate Findings
For public health outbreak investigations, communication of findings includes informing the healthcare community of the “who, what, where, when, why, and how”
of the outbreak. This can increase awareness of the
potential for continued spread of the disease and
allow implementation of preventive measures and early
detection of the disease in new populations.
If the disease outbreak under investigation has a public
health implication, and local public health officials were
not part of the investigation process, it is important to
communicate relevant findings to the local public health
department. Findings should include date of onset and
conclusion (if outbreak has ended), case definition/­
diagnosis, populations affected, epidemic curves, and
outcomes of control and prevention measures. This
information should also be shared with other veterinarians in the practice area so results of the investigation can
be used to control and prevent disease in the larger
­population of animals in the community.
Findings from new or novel disease outbreaks should
also be communicated to the larger veterinary audience through publication in journals or presentations
at ­continuing education functions. Increased awareness may prevent further outbreaks or mitigate the
effects of outbreaks if they spread to new companion
animal populations.

­Conclusion
Epidemiology is an integral part of the daily practice of
veterinary medicine whether veterinarians realize it or
not. Tools and techniques for disease monitoring and
surveillance and outbreak investigations are readily
available and can add to a veterinarian’s epidemiology

VetBooks.ir

78 Epidemiology of Infectious Disease

toolbox. Just as epidemiology is a science focused on
populations, veterinarians should not work in isolation
when investigating the incidence of disease in their
­practice populations. Local, regional, state, and federal

veterinarians and health professionals should be part of
the companion animal healthcare team responsible for
rapid identification and resolution of diseases in the
clinic and community populations.

­Further Reading
California Department of Public Health. 2011. Title 17,
California Code of Regulations (CCR) §2500,
§2593, §2641.5‐2643.20, and §2800‐2812
Reportable Diseases and Conditions. www.cdph.ca.gov/
Programs/CID/DCDC/CDPH%20Document%20
Library/ReportableDiseases.pdf (accessed
June 24, 2019).

California Department of Food and Agriculture. List of
Reportable Conditions for Animals and Animal
Products. www.cdfa.ca.gov/ahfss/animal_health/pdfs/
CA_reportable_disease_list_poster.pdf (accessed
June 12, 2019).
JAVMA News. Dog with screwworms brought to
Mississippi. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007; 231(9): 1320–33.

837

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

839

79
Laboratory Diagnosis of Infectious Diseases
Laia Solano‐Gallego, DVM, PhD, DACVP1 and Gad Baneth, DVM, PhD, DACVP2
1
2

Dep. Medicina i Cirurgia Animals, Facultat de Veterinària, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
School of Veterinary Medicine, Hebrew University, Rehovot, Israel

Veterinarians use diagnostic testing for infectious
­diseases for two main reasons:
to confirm acute or chronic infection in a dog or cat
with clinical signs or clinicopathologic abnormalities
compatible with infectious diseases
●● to detect subclinical infection or certify that animals
are free of infection.
●●

Detection of infection may be pursued to screen ­clinically
healthy animals living in endemic regions, to prevent
transmission by blood transfusion, to avoid importation of
infected dogs and cats to nonendemic countries, to avoid
transmission of disease to people in contact with the animal,
including immune‐suppressed owners, to monitor response
to treatment, and for research. Different diagnostic procedures can be used depending on the purpose of the diagnostic investigation and the pathogen most likely affecting
the dog or cat based on the differential diagnosis list. Test
results might also be interpreted according to the aim of the
diagnosis, type of pathogen, and clinical status of animals.
Accurate diagnosis of infectious diseases requires an
integrated routine approach consisting of thorough
­clinical history, physical examination, pertinent routine
laboratory tests such as complete blood count (CBC),
complete biochemical profile and urinalysis, diagnostic
imaging and additional diagnostic testing, depending on
the differential diagnoses list for each individual patient.
In addition, specific pathogen diagnostic assays should
be carried out when infectious diseases are at the top of
the differential diagnoses list.
This chapter describes general concepts of diagnosis of
viral, bacterial, protozoal, and fungal infectious diseases
with an overview of the most common diagnostic methods employed for these infections. Specific diagnostic
features of common infectious diseases in dogs and cats,
geographic distribution, main transmission modes, chief

clinical signs, clinicopathologic abnormalities, treatment, prognosis, and prevention will be described in
detail in other chapters in this section.
The most commonly employed techniques for the
diagnosis of infectious diseases in small animals include
microscopic examination of microorganisms in cytologic preparations or histopathologic specimens, serology, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and culture of the
organism in appropriate medium, as described in the following subsections of this chapter. The advantages and
disadvantages of these diagnostic techniques are listed in
Table 79.1. Sample collection, transport, and preservation of specimens for the different diagnostic tests and
pathogens are described in Table 79.2.

­Protozoal and Arthropod‐Borne Infections
Microscopic Examination
Diagnosis can be based on cytologic or histologic detection of pathogens, either contained inside cells or free in
routinely stained smears. Detection by light microscopy
of pathogens in cytologic preparations or histopathologic specimens might be difficult, depending on the
type of microorganisms causing infection. However,
cytology is a more rapid and simple technique for the
detection of some microorganisms compared with histopathology. Histopathology commonly requires special
staining to detect bacterial, mycobacterial, fungal or protozoal infections. Standard Romanowsky stains such as
Giemsa are used for cytologic detection of the majority
of organisms (Figure 79.1). Special stains can also be
used in cytology for enhancing the visualization of
microorganisms but are less frequently needed.
Although the specificity of these methods is high, it is
important to highlight that identification of species

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

840

Section 9 Infectious Disease

Table 79.1 Advantages and disadvantages of common diagnostic methods for the detection of infectious diseases in dogs and cats
Diagnostic techniques

Microscopic
examination (cytology
/histopathology)

Serologic testing
(antibody detection)

– Qualitative

Advantages

Disadvantages

Permits direct detection of the pathogen and nature
of the host response.
●● Findings could be suspicious of infection or allow
exclusion of other differential diagnoses
●● Cytology is rapid and less invasive than obtaining
tissues for histopathology by biopsy
●● Cytology usually permits easier visualization of
pathogens when compared with histopathology
●●

Detection of specific antibodies against the
pathogen causing infection
●● Permits evaluation of seroconversion to confirm
recent infection
●●

●●

Rapid in‐clinic test

Relatively low sensitivity for the detection of
pathogens in tissues or body fluids
●● Requires the performance of other diagnostic
tests such as immunohistochemistry and/or
PCR when pathogens are not visualized
●● Does not distinguish between
morphologically similar organisms
●● Requires expertise
●●

Does not detect the pathogen itself
Typically does not discriminate between
vaccinated and naturally infected dogs or cats
●● Serologic cross‐reactivity between related
organisms is possible
●●
●●

Provides only positive or negative results
Variable sensitivities and performance with
risk of false‐negative results due to
conservative cut‐off level and use of
recombinant proteins
●● A positive result will benefit from additional
validation by quantitative serology
●●
●●

– Quantitative
(IFA, ELISA)

Serologic testing
(antigen detection)
Molecular testing

●●

●●

Determines the antibody level which is of major
importance in some diseases such as leishmaniasis
where high antibody levels in the presence of
compatible clinical signs and/or clinicopathologic
abnormalities are conclusive of clinical leishmaniasis
Allows the detection of pathogen

●●

Allows the detection of pathogen DNA and RNA
High sensitivity and specificity for target loci
●● Allows determination of pathogen load (by real‐time
PCR)
●●
●●

Culture

Permits the isolation of pathogens and their
maintenance for further comparisons and analysis
●● Facilitates in‐depth identification of pathogens
●●

Performance and accuracy of cut‐off vary
between laboratories
●● Frequent lack of sufficient standardization of
techniques between laboratories
●● Low antibody levels frequently require further
testing
●●

May not be sensitive when low numbers of
pathogens are present

False‐positive results possible due to DNA
contamination or to amplification of
erroneous targets including host DNA
●● Different techniques used by diagnostic
laboratories and lack of standardization
●●

Time‐consuming and laborious
Requires special equipment and biohazard
conditions and therefore restricted to
specialized laboratories
●● May require up to one month to provide a
result
●●
●●

Source: Modified from Solano‐Gallego and Baneth (2016). Reproduced with permission of John Wiley & Sons.
ELISA, enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay; IFA, immunofluorescence assay; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.

based solely on morphology is often not possible and
molecular analysis is required for speciation. Sensitivity
will depend on the time spent searching for microorganisms, type of pathogen, tissue sampled, amount of organism in the tissue (parasite load), and clinical status of the
patient. Generally speaking, higher diagnostic sensitivity
is found in sick animals compared with subclinically
infected dogs or cats. The diagnosis of chronically
infected and carrier animals remains a diagnostic
­challenge due to low and often intermittent parasitemia,

or low tissue pathogen load, which frequently make
pathogen observation by microscopic evaluation difficult. Therefore, the use of molecular diagnostic assays is
strongly recommended in those cases. In addition,
identification of protozoa in formalin‐fixed, paraffin‐
­
embedded sections of different tissues may be facilitated
by immunohistochemical methods such as immunoperoxidase staining or in situ hybridization techniques.
The optimal tissue or body fluid for sampling will
depend on types of pathogen involved and lesions found

VetBooks.ir

79 Laboratory Diagnosis of Infectious Diseases

Table 79.2 Collection, processing, and transport recommendations for different diagnostic tests in small animal infectious diseases.
Follow all governmental guidelines relevant to a given infectious disease agent and clinical specimen
Diagnostic test

Specimen type

Collection and processing

Shipment

Histology

Any tissue
specimen

Samples collected for histology should never
be >1 cm thick (preferably 5–7 mm thick).
Fix in 10% buffered formalin (10× volume)

Double bag and leak‐proof container with
adequate fixative

Cytology

Any tissue
specimen or
fluid analysis

Blood or cytologic smears should never be
Air‐dried smear should be prepared
immediately after the sample has been collected mailed to the laboratory in the same package
to minimize cell deterioration. Alcohol fixation with formalin‐fixed tissues because formalin
is not needed. Analysis of various effusions and vapors will produce artifacts in the specimen.
fluids usually includes determination of protein Cytologic preparation should be transported at
content, total cell concentration, and cytologic room temperature in a plastic container. Fluid
examination. A sample of effusion/fluid should samples should be shipped chilled but not
frozen
be collected into an EDTA tube for routine
analysis. A second sample should be collected
into a serum tube if any biochemical analyses
are to be performed or if a bacterial culture is
desired

Antibody or
antigen testing

Blood, plasma,
serum,
cerebrospinal
fluid, urine
samples or
feces

Serology generally requires serum, but
plasma is often satisfactory. For serum
samples, the blood should be drawn into a
plain tube or a separator tube. The sample
should be held at room temperature for
20–30 min to allow complete clot formation
and retraction. The sample should then be
centrifuged at high speed (~1000 g) for 10
min. In some instances, paired samples may
be required for an adequate diagnosis

Specimens can be refrigerated for up to a week
prior to shipment to the laboratory. Specimens
should be frozen at −20 °C or −80 °C if stored
for a longer period. Specimens can be stored
frozen for years without loss of antibody levels.
For specimens collected for assays for antigen
detection, results may be more susceptible to
variation with long specimen storage. The
laboratory should be contacted in order to
determine specimen storage and handling
requirements

Molecular
testing

Any specimen

Collect aseptically to prevent contamination.
For blood or bone marrow and DNA
analysis, use preferably EDTA or acid citrate
dextrose (ACD) anticoagulant

For DNA analysis: submit specimens held at
room temperature within 24 h of collection.
Specimens can be stored at 2–8 °C for 72 h, or
at −20 °C or ≤−70 °C for prolonged storage.
For RNA analysis: use stabilization solution or
send immediately to the laboratory on wet ice.
For storage, freeze specimens at or below −70 °C

Isolation‐
culture

Any specimen

Collect aseptically to prevent contamination.
Some agents might have special
requirements such as anaerobic culture or
special media. Culture from blood should be
collected in special media bottles designed
to prevent coagulation and neutralize
antibiotic residues if animal was treated

Normally, specimens should be refrigerated and
not frozen and delivered directly to the
laboratory within 24 h

on physical examination. Blood‐borne organisms such
as Babesia (Figure 79.2) can be found in blood smears,
concentrated and stained buffy coat or splenic ­specimens.
Other important tissue samples used for the detection of
these pathogens are lymph node aspirates, skin touch
impressions, bone marrow, joint fluid, cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) or other body fluids and tissues.
Serologic Testing (Antibody and Antigen
Detection)
Antibody Detection

Several serologic methods can be used to detect specific
serum antibodies directed against protozoal and arthro-

pod‐borne pathogens. Methods include the ­indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA) test, the enzyme‐linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), immunochromato­
graphic rapid in‐house devices, direct agglutination
assays, and western blotting. The most common serologic
tests employed in clinical practice are quantitative assays
(IFA and ELISA) and qualitative tests (rapid in‐house
devices). In general, most of these methods have good
sensitivities and specificities but sensitivity and specificity
greatly depend on the antigens employed. Whole‐parasite extracts are sensitive for the detection of subclinical
or clinical canine and feline infections but provide lower
specificity. On the other hand, assays that employ recombinant protein antigens are very specific but may lack

841

Section 9 Infectious Disease

VetBooks.ir

842

Figure 79.1 Lymph node aspirate from a dog. Note the increased
numbers of plasma cells and macrophages with abundant
intracellular Leishmania amastigotes (modified Wright stain,
original magnification ×400).

­sensitivity for the detection of infection, depending on
the antigen employed and the level of serum antibodies.
Serologic cross‐reactivity is common between pathogens of the same genus or otherwise closely related
organisms. Therefore, cross‐reactivity between antibodies directed at different pathogens is possible with some
serologic tests, especially those based on whole‐parasite
antigen, and is less likely to occur when using recombinant protein antigens. It is important to note that the use
of antigens of similar species will frequently result in
cross‐reaction at a high level. For example, antibodies
against Babesia canis will cross‐react with Babesia vogeli
antigen. Pathogens of closely related different genera are
more likely to cross‐react at low levels, such as the cross‐
reactivity between antibodies to Trypanosoma cruzi and
Leishmania infantum.
Antibody detection can indicate past exposure or
present acute or persistent infection. Acute diseases
­
may be difficult to diagnose due to the lack of detectable
antibody production and low pathogen load in blood or
other tissues. Therefore, false‐negative results are possible

in peracute or acute diseases. Evidence of seroconversion
is fundamental in the diagnosis of some acute diseases. In
these cases, the measurement of acute and convalescent
antibody levels (paired samples) is c­ onfirmatory for acute
infection. Antibody level determination may vary between
different laboratories, and therefore, it is recommended to
use the same laboratory and assay for comparison of antibody levels. Furthermore, variations are also likely
between assays carried out on different days. Therefore,
ideally, paired samples should be tested at the same time.
Seroconversion is considered when a fourfold or
greater increase in antibody level is demonstrated in
paired samples over a 2–4‐week period, and in some
­particular infections longer than that, for instance in
L. infantum infection where a serologic response ­develops
months after initial infection. In addition, a­ntibodies
induced by vaccination may be detected by serologic
assays, making it impossible to discriminate between vaccinated and naturally infected animals. Examples of this
include vaccination against B. canis and L. infantum.
High antibody levels are associated with high tissue
parasite loads and disease in some protozoal and arthropod‐borne chronic diseases. In contrast, cases of animals
with suspected clinical signs and compatible clinicopathologic abnormalities and low antibody levels require
the use of additional detection methods to exclude or
confirm the disease, because low antibody levels may
also be detected in subclinical carriers suffering from a
different clinical disease. Canine leishmaniasis is a good
example of a disease in which moderate to severe clinical
disease is usually manifested by medium to high antibody levels, whereas subclinical infection is more often
associated with lower antibody levels or seronegativity.
Antigen Detection

The detection of circulating plasma or blood antigen
specific for a pathogen is an additional and usually very
specific serologic technique. This type of assay detects
the presence of a circulating plasma or blood antigen.
For example, the most common detection technique
of canine heartworm infection caused by Dirofilaria
Figure 79.2 Blood smears from two
different dogs. (Right) A large form of
Babesia. (Left) Small forms of Babesia
(modified Wright stain, original
magnification ×1000).

VetBooks.ir

79 Laboratory Diagnosis of Infectious Diseases

immitis is based on detection of a circulating secretory
antigen of the adult female worm.
Molecular Diagnostics
Polymerase chain reaction is a sensitive and specific
diagnostic technique frequently employed for the diagnosis of protozoal and arthropod‐borne diseases. It is
used for diagnostic purposes, monitoring during and
after treatment, research studies, and for screening of
blood donors. Moreover, it is particularly useful for
detection of infection in animals with low parasitemia
levels and for speciation of pathogens. PCR can be
­carried out on DNA extracted from tissues, blood, body
fluids, conjunctival and oral swabs, or even cytologic
preparations or histopathologic specimens.
A large number of PCR assays and protocols using a
variety of gene targets have been described for the detection of protozoal and arthropod‐borne infections of dogs
and cats. It is important to highlight that for diagnostic
purposes, the best DNA target will often be the locus or
gene with the largest number of copies per organism. For
instance, the kinetoplast DNA (kDNA) of L. infantum is
an excellent target as it has about 10 000 copies in each
Leishmania amastigote. Other targets are more useful
for distinguishing between species such as the leishmanial ribosomal internal transcribed spacer 1 (ITS1). Due
to the fact that in some endemic areas, more than one
species co‐exist and infect animals, molecular techniques have been developed to discriminate DNA from
different species of the same genus or related genera.
These techniques include semi‐nested PCR, reverse line
blotting, PCR restriction fragment length polymorphism
(RFLP), and high‐resolution melting curve quantitative
fluorescence resonance energy transfer PCR. Sequencing
may also reveal infections with novel organisms that
have not been described before.
It is important to highlight that negative results by
molecular techniques only indicate that specific DNA
was not detected under the assay conditions and should
not be interpreted as absolute evidence for the absence
of infection. In addition, false‐positive results are possible due to DNA contamination or the amplification of
DNA from other sources which may not be noticed if
sequencing is not performed. Controls should be
included in each step of the assay to ensure that DNA
contamination has not occurred.
Isolation
Diagnosis may also be established by culture of the infectious agent. However, this technique is usually tedious
and time‐consuming. It sometimes requires special
­conditions and a long duration for obtaining results and

therefore is less commonly used in clinical practice for
parasites and arthropod‐borne pathogens. This technique is employed in research studies because it permits
the identification and maintenance of pathogens. It is
important to highlight that some organisms, such as
Babesia species, are difficult to culture. The culture
method is pathogen specific and usually requires special
media and temperature conditions. Special culture
medium is used for the isolation of some protozoal
­pathogens, such as L. infantum.

­Viral Infections
Microscopic Examination
Most viral infections are not diagnosed by microscopy.
Viruses are too small to be detectable by light microscopy, but typical cytoplasmatic or intranuclear inclusion
bodies caused by viruses may be detected in blood or
­tissue cells. Electron microscopy may be used for the
detection of certain viruses such as canine parvovirus in
feces of dogs shedding the virus, although this is a
­cumbersome, time‐consuming technique which is often
unable to specify the exact species involved in infection,
as it relies on morphology.
Serologic Testing (Antibody and Antigen Detection)
Serologic tests are frequently used for the detection of
viral infections in cats and dogs. There are a number of
basic serologic techniques such as ELISA, IFAT, virus
neutralization, complement fixation, agglutination, agar
gel immunodiffusion, and western blotting. Serology can
be aimed at detecting specific antibodies produced
against a certain virus in the infected animal, as in the
most common tests for feline immunodeficiency virus
(FIV) which detect antibodies to the p24 core protein.
It can also be aimed at the actual detection of a certain
viral antigen in a body fluid such as the blood, as in the
common feline leukemia virus (FeLV) antigen test based
on the detection of the viral p27 capsid protein.
Rapid commercial tests are available for many of the
common viral infections, and they are also frequently
based on the detection of either antibodies against the
virus or virus antigen. Rapid commercial tests are often
based on immunochromatographic devices which produce a color response when antibodies against a virus are
detected, or when the actual viral antigens are detected,
if the assay is geared to the detection of antigen. These
types of assays are often used for in‐house rapid diagnosis in veterinary clinics and hospitals. Several manufacturers have produced such rapid assays for the detection
of antibodies against FIV, antigenemia with FeLV, or the

843

VetBooks.ir

844

Section 9 Infectious Disease

presence of parvoviral antigen in the feces of dogs shedding this virus. The rapid assays that detect antibodies
against a virus are often not quantitative and only produce a positive or negative result, in contrast to tests
done in a specialized laboratory which frequently
­provide an antibody titer or quantitative measure related
to the level of antibodies, such as the optical density in
the ELISA.
Molecular Diagnostics
Molecular diagnosis of viruses includes the detection of
specific nucleic acid sequences present in the targeted
virus. Viruses may contain DNA or RNA, depending on
the viral family to which they belong. PCR assays are
commonly associated with the amplification of the
nucleic acid sequence selected as the target for the assay
and visualization of the product on a gel in conventional
PCR, or its amplification and release of measurable fluorescence by real‐time PCR which can also be quantitative. Amplification of nucleic acids from RNA viruses
may require an additional reverse transcription step in
which RNA is translated into cDNA and then amplified.
RNA is less stable than DNA and is susceptible to rapid
degradation unless stored in an RNA stabilization solution and frozen at –70 °C or below. A multiplex reverse
transcription‐nested PCR assay has been developed to
differentiate between wild‐type and vaccine strains of
canine distemper virus.
An additional molecular diagnostic technique is the
use of nucleic acid probes which attach specially to
nucleic acid sequences in viruses and do not involve
amplification of the virus’s DNA or RNA.
Isolation
Isolation of virus from blood, secretions, or organ tissues
is a common method of diagnosis for viral infections of
dogs and cats. Isolation requires the use of appropriate
media to transport the tested sample, a specialized laboratory, and rapid transportation to the laboratory in
refrigeration. Viruses are usually taken from the transport media or the original fluid in which they were submitted (e.g., blood or CSF) and grown in various cell
culture lines. Often virus isolation is attempted in multiple cell lines simultaneously as the host cell preference of
the particular virus strain is unknown. Virus isolation
from animals is usually performed with the addition of
antibiotics and antifungal drugs to cell lines to prevent
contamination with bacteria and fungi. While feline retroviruses such as FIV and FeLV are usually isolated from
blood, isolation of canine distemper virus is usually
attempted from the CSF, bronchoalvelor lavage, and
transtracheal lavage specimens.

­Bacterial Infections
Microscopic Examination
Most bacteria are detectable by high‐power light microscopy of cytology specimens (Figure 79.3) but this is usually not sufficient for species identification and may
serve as a relatively insensitive measure for the presence
of bacteria in the sample. Furthermore, some anatomic
sites such as the skin, oral cavity, gastrointestinal tract,
and upper airway normally contain bacteria and it is usually difficult to distinguish between the normal flora and
infection with pathogenic bacteria just by microscopic
examination of the organisms. Gram stain, acid‐fast
staining, and other staining methods are ancillary
­techniques that can assist in the initial assessment of
bacterial infection. Dark‐field microscopy is helpful in
the detection of spirochetes such as leptospires in urine
samples.
Serologic Testing
Serology can be useful in the detection of some bacterial
infections of dogs and cats. Detection of specific antibodies is helpful in the diagnosis of leptospirosis and a
battery of serogroup antigens is used to find which serovar demonstrates the highest antibody titer and is either
responsible for infection or closest to the Leptospira
serovar present in the animal. Serology is also useful for
the detection of exposure to intracellular bacteria such as
Ehrlichia canis or Anaplasma phagocytophilum.
Isolation and Identification (Including
Molecular Testing)
Culture has been the major technique for detection and
characterization of bacterial pathogens for the past century. There are a number of different media for growth of
bacteria from various groups with specific metabolic
requirements. Often, one type of medium is used for the
transport or initial growth of bacteria and other media
are subsequently used for subculture with enrichment
and selection of the bacteria suspected as cause of infection. The MacConkey agar medium selects for gram‐
negative bacteria. Cultures from an infection site are
often placed initially into more than one medium when a
broad spectrum of infective agents is suspected, for
instance in aerobic and anaerobic specific media which
also require specific growth conditions such as an
­anaerobic environment enriched with carbon dioxide for
anaerobes.
Identification and characterization of isolated bacteria
are usually done based on biochemical qualities and tests
such as the catalase test and coagulase production.

VetBooks.ir

79 Laboratory Diagnosis of Infectious Diseases

Commercial biochemistry test strips enable the identification of cultured bacteria and automated commercial
identification systems are often used in large bacteriology laboratories for rapid bacteria identification.
Some bacteria such as Anaplasma platys and hemotrophic mycoplasms (e.g., Mycoplasma hemofelis,
Candidatus Mycoplasma hemominutum) are unculturable. The detection of these bacteria relies mainly on
molecular biology techniques such as PCR amplifying
DNA sequences which are specific for the suspected
bacteria. Other bacteria such as Rickettsia spp., E. canis,
and A. phagocytophilum are strictly intracellular and can
only be grown in appropriate cell culture lines, restricting their isolation to research laboratories with expertise. Molecular techniques can also be useful for the
identification of bacteria that have been propagated in
culture and require classification to the species and
strain levels. These can be sometimes be achieved by
multigenic sequencing and characterization, with phylogenetic analysis.
Providing the bacteriology laboratory with a good clinical history, physical examination and initial blood test
work‐up and cytology findings can be very helpful in the
selection of different isolation techniques. Sampling the
correct organ sites is imperative and should be based on
clinical judgment. Common body fluids and anatomic
sites sampled for bacteriology from dogs and cats include
urine, blood, feces, bronchoalveolar lavage, skin and ear,
abdominal and pleural fluids, CSF, and cornea.
Interpretation of Culture Results

The results of culture should be interpreted cautiously,
considering that the bacterium isolated, when culture is
successful, may not actually be the cause of infection, or
that in some other cases, culture is negative despite bacterial infection. This can be due to several reasons
including technical difficulties in transporting the culture with infectious agent, use of incorrect isolation
technique or culture site, intermittent shedding of
­bacteria to the blood or other body fluid, and previous
antibiotic treatments.
Antimicrobial Susceptibility Tests

Determination of minimum inhibitory concentrations
(MIC) for isolated bacteria can be helpful in deciding
which antibiotic should be used for treatment of susceptible infections. This is also important in the detection of
antimicrobial resistance, if present. The standard techniques for antibiotic susceptibility testing involve either
gel diffusion or dilution methods. Although they can
provide an idea of the antibiotics to which the isolated
bacteria is susceptible in vitro, this does not always conform with the actual susceptibility due to in vivo factors
such as accessibility to the infected tissue (e.g., decreased

accessibility to abscesses), concentration of antibiotic in
the affected tissue, and inhibition of antibiotics by
body proteins.

­Fungal Infections
Fungal agents have a remarkably varied spectrum of clinical picture: primary skin disease, single to multiple subcutaneous masses, mass lesions within body cavities,
disseminated disease with multiple organ dysfunction,
and disseminated disease that presents as single‐organ
dysfunction or as a cause of sudden death.
Clinicopathologic findings are not specific but mild anemia of chronic disease, leukocytosis, hypergammaglobulinemia, hypoalbuminemia, and hypercalcemia can be
present in some of these diseases. Primary (i.e.,
Blastomyces, Coccidioides, Cryptococcus, Histoplasma)
and opportunistic pathogens, mainly saprophytic soil
fungi (i.e., Aspergillus, Basidiobolus, Cladosporium,
Conidiobolus), can be responsible for these diseases.
Opportunistic fungi can cause disease by trauma and
often present as a single subcutaneous mass. When
dissemination occurs, it is often associated with
­
decreased immunocompetence.
Microscopic Examination
Suspicion of fungal diseases should be made when macrophagic or macrophagic‐neutrophilic inflammation is
noted in any tissue by cytologic or histopathologic
­specimens. Bacterial inflammatory lesions (Figure 79.3)
that are unresponsive to appropriate medical therapy
should be investigated further to rule out underlying
mycotic disease due to the fact that bacterial and fungal
co‐infections do occur.
Cytological evaluation of any tissue or body cavity
fluid specimen is very useful for identification of fungal disease in dogs and cats. Cytology is a more rapid
and simple technique for the detection of some fungal
microorganisms than histopathology. Histopathology
commonly requires special staining such as periodic
acid–Shiff (PAS) or Gomori methenamine silver
(GMS) to detect fungal infections. In addition, some
laboratories offer immunohistochemistry for fungal
organisms within tissues submitted for routine histopathology. Yeasts, different types of spores, and
hyphae can be observed in cytologic specimens
(Figure 79.4).
Cytologic features of most fungal pathogens are
described elsewhere. Routine Romanowsky staining adequately stains most fungal organisms within cytologic
preparations. Organisms that do not stain well appear as
negatively stained elements (Figure 79.5).

845

Section 9 Infectious Disease

VetBooks.ir

846

Figure 79.3 Kidney aspirate from a cat. Note neutrophilic‐
macrophagic inflammation with infection of rod‐shaped bacteria
(modified Wright stain, original magnification ×1000).

Figure 79.5 Inguinal subcutaneous mass in a dog. Note the
marked neutrophilic inflammation and the evidence of unstained
and partially pale basophilic hyphae (modified Wright stain,
original magnification ×400).

Serologic Testing (Antibody and Antigen
Detection)

Figure 79.4 Thoracic mass from a German Shepherd dog. Note
the necrotic background, increased numbers of neutrophils and
Aspergillus terreus hyphae (modified Wright stain, original
magnification ×1000).

India ink staining is commonly used for the identification of Cryptococcus species. The expertise of the individual evaluating the slide is the main variable in using
cytology in the clinical setting. The sensitivity of cytologic and histologic evaluation varies considerably
although specificity is high. Cytologic and histopathologic features cannot definitively identify the species and
therefore culture and biochemical characterization or
molecular analysis are mandatory for identification. It is
important to highlight that morphologic features of
fungi in tissue differ when grown on fungal media.

Serology is used in the clinical setting to diagnose fungal
disease in dogs and cats. However, interpretation of
serologic results in some fungal diseases might be difficult and will benefit from additional cytologic or molecular evidence or culture. Limited studies are available
regarding sensitivity and specificity of serologic testing
of some fungal diseases. The majority of fungal serologic
tests currently in use in veterinary medicine detect the
antibody response to infection. A few tests detect fungal
antigens, providing a definitive diagnosis if the antigen is
sufficiently specific (such as the antigen‐based latex
agglutination test available for Cryptococcus neoformans). As with any serological test, cross‐reactivity can
exist between fungal agents. Positive serology provides
evidence of exposure and supports the clinical findings.
Paired serum samples (2–4 weeks apart) should be run at
the same time. A fourfold increase or decrease in the
antibody level is strong evidence of active disease. More
details on current serologic tests available for fungal disease are described elsewhere in this section and in the
literature.
Isolation and Identification (Including
Molecular Testing)
Culture

The specific identification of fungal organism is based on
culture of fluids or tissue. However, successful culture of
fungal agents depends on several variables, including the

VetBooks.ir

79 Laboratory Diagnosis of Infectious Diseases

fungal organism itself, concentration of fungal elements
in the sample, sample integrity, culture requirements
of the fungal agent, and expertise of the laboratory
­performing the culture.
Obtaining and submitting the appropriate sample
for culture and providing the laboratory with detailed
history and clinical diagnosis are essential for a successful culture. Samples of urine, exudates, and body cavity
fluids can be submitted in sterile serum collection tubes.
Up to 10 mL of fluid is recommended. Samples of fresh
tissue from a lesion can be submitted in a sterile container for culture.
Identification of fungal agents in cultures is time‐
consuming. The culture has to grow and form characteristic fruiting bodies, conidia, or arthrospores to
allow morphologic identification of the fungus.
Microscopic morphology of fungal reproductive structures is the most useful criterion for identification. It is
strongly advised that fungal culture (other than for dermatophytosis) is performed in a reference diagnostic
laboratory.

Molecular Testing

Molecular testing is less commonly employed for the
diagnosis of fungal diseases in tissues or body fluids in
veterinary medicine as it is for bacterial, viral, and protozoal diseases. Molecular techniques are the same as
reported for other infectious diseases and include conventional, nested, and real‐time PCR and sequencing.
Common target genes are the 18S or 5.8S ribosomal gene
or internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions of ribosomal
DNA. Fungal identification based on DNA sequencing is
not always definitive because results depend on whether
or not the DNA of the fungus in question has been previously sequenced and submitted to the genomic databases. Therefore, fungal identification based on DNA
sequencing should include at least two DNA regions for
comparison.
In contrast, PCR‐based methods are commonly used
to confirm identification of fungi culture in diagnostic
laboratories. Commercial chemiluminescent‐labeled
DNA probes are available for some fungal agents such as
Blastomyces, Coccidioides, and Histoplasma.

­Further Reading
Goldstein RE. Canine leptospirosis. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2010; 40: 1091–101.
Schulz BS, Strauch C, Mueller RS, Eichhorn W, Hartmann
K. Comparison of the prevalence of enteric viruses in
healthy dogs and those with acute haemorrhagic
diarrhoea by electron microscopy. J Small Anim Pract
2008; 49: 84–8.
Si W, Zhou S, Wang Z, Cui SJ. A multiplex reverse
transcription‐nested polymerase chain reaction for

detection and differentiation of wild‐type and vaccine
strains of canine distemper virus. Virol J 2010; 7: 86.
Solano‐Gallego L, Baneth G. Diagnosis of protozoal and
arthropod‐borne diseases. In: Villiers E, Ristic J,
Blackwood L, eds. BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline
Clinical Pathology. Gloucester, UK: BSAVA, 2016.
Solano‐Gallego L, Koutinas A, Miro G, et al. Directions for
the diagnosis, clinical staging, treatment and prevention
of canine leishmaniosis. Vet Parasitol 2009; 165: 1–18.

847

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

849

Part 2
Select Infectious Diseases and Disease Agents

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

851

80
Canine Distemper
David S. Bruyette, DVM, DACVIM
Anivive Lifesciences, Long Beach, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Canine distemper virus (CDV) is a large (100–250 nm)
ssRNA virus belonging to the genus Morbillivirus of the
family Paramyxoviridae. Mutations affecting the CDV H
protein required for virus attachment to host cell receptors are associated with virulence and disease emergence
in novel host species. CDV has a lipoprotein envelope
and a nonsegmented negative‐stranded RNA genome
consisting of six genes that code for a single envelope‐
associated protein (matrix [M]), two glycoproteins
(hemagglutinin [H] and fusion [F] proteins), two transcriptase‐associated proteins (phosphoprotein [P] and
large protein [L]) and the nucleocapsid (N) protein,
which encapsulates the viral RNA. Only one serotype of
CDV is recognized with several co‐circulating genotypes
based on variation in the H protein.
Canine distemper has affected dogs worldwide for
centuries, with descriptions of disease outbreaks in the
European literature dating back to the 17th century. It
was first formally described in dogs in 1905. Despite the
introduction of modified live vaccines in the 1950s and
their extensive uptake, the disease remains prevalent.
Systemic CDV infection, resembling distemper in
domestic dogs, can also be found in wild canids (e.g.,
wolves, foxes), procyonids (e.g., raccoons, kinkajous),
ailurids (e.g., red pandas), ursids (e.g., black bears, giant
pandas), mustelids (e.g., ferrets, minks), viverrids (e.g.,
civets, genets), hyaenids (e.g., spotted hyenas), and large
felids (e.g., lions, tigers). In addition, besides infection
with the closely related phocine distemper virus, seals
can become infected by CDV. In some CDV outbreaks,
including the mass mortalities among Baikal and Caspian
seals and large felids in the Serengeti Park, terrestrial
carnivores including dogs and wolves have been suspected
as vectors for the infectious agent. Lethal infections have
been described in noncarnivore species such as peccaries

and nonhuman primates demonstrating the remarkable
ability of the pathogen to cross species barriers.
Canine distemper virus infection of dogs is characterized by a systemic and/or nervous clinical course and viral
persistence in selected organs, including the central nervous system and lymphoid tissue. Main manifestations
include respiratory and gastrointestinal signs, immunosuppression and demyelinating leukoencephalomyelitis
(DL). The primary mode of infection is via inhalation.
After initial exposure, dogs may mount a robust immune
response and recover. It is estimated that as many as 75%
of infections may actually be subclinical. Initially, CDV
replicates in lymphoid tissue of the upper respiratory tract.
Monocytes and macrophages are the first target cells
which propagate the virus. Impaired immune function,
associated with depletion of lymphoid organs, consists of
a viremia‐associated loss of lymphocytes, especially of
CD4+ T cells, due to lymphoid cell apoptosis in the early
phase. After clearance of the virus from the peripheral
blood, an assumed diminished antigen presentation and
altered lymphocyte maturation cause an ongoing immunosuppression despite repopulation of lymphoid organs.
Following a variable incubation period (1–4 weeks), animals develop a characteristic biphasic fever. During the first
viremic phase, generalized infection of lymphoid tissues
with lymphoid depletion, lymphopenia, and transient fever
are observed. Profound immunosuppression is a consequence of leukocyte necrosis, apoptosis, and dysfunction.
The second viremia is associated with high fever and
infection of parenchymal tissues such as the respiratory
tract, digestive tract, skin, and CNS. The early phase of
DL is the result of direct virus‐mediated damage and
infiltrating CD8+ cytotoxic T cells associated with an
upregulation of proinflammatory cytokines such as
interleukin (IL)‐6, IL‐8, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)‐
alpha, and IL‐12 and a lack of response of immunomodulatory cytokines such as IL‐10 and transforming growth

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

852

Section 9 Infectious Disease

factor (TGF)‐beta. A CD4+‐mediated delayed‐type
hypersensitivity and cytotoxic CD8+ T cells contribute
to myelin loss in the chronic phase. Additionally, upregulation of interferon‐gamma and IL‐1 may occur in
advanced lesions. Moreover, an altered balance between
matrix metalloproteinases and their inhibitors seems to
play a pivotal role for the pathogenesis of DL.
Histologic manifestations include polioencephalitis
and DL. The observations of p75NTR‐expressing bipolar
Schwann cell‐like glia in CDV‐DL highlight the potential
of Schwann cell‐mediated remyelination and raise the
hope for a beneficial regenerative process in CDV‐DL.
Though the central role of axonal damage as a triggering
event is established in CDV‐DL, the role of macrophage
polarization in CDV‐DL is currently unknown. In light
of the fact that distinct macrophage responses have been
linked to axonal regeneration, degeneration, demyelination, and remyelination, the elucidation of a potential
macrophage polarization during CDV‐DL appears to
represent a promising field for future investigations and
the development of new treatment strategies.
Recovery from CDV depends on the host immune
response. A strong and effective cellular immune
response can eliminate the virus prior to infection of
parenchymal tissues, while weak and delayed cellular
and humoral immune responses lead to virus spread and
persistence, respectively.

­Epidemiology
Canine distemper is a fatal disease of dogs with a worldwide distribution. With a mortality rate of around 50%, it
is second only to rabies when it comes to virus‐induced
fatality in dogs.

­Signalment
There is no breed or sex predilection. Animals <6 months
are particularly vulnerable.

­Clinical Signs
Signs most often involve the respiratory tract.
Gastrointestinal (GI) signs may also occur. Affected dogs
are listless and have a decreased appetite. In milder cases,
signs may be similar to other agents of canine infectious
respiratory disease complex. Subclinical infection with
shedding may also occur, depending on the level of host
immunity. Systemic signs are most common in unvaccinated dogs (e.g., puppies) as maternal immunity wanes.

Conjunctivitis, nasal discharge, cough, and fever are classic
signs. Respiratory infection may involve the lower respiratory tract with possible primary viral pneumonia.
Secondary bacterial infection may occur. Vomiting and
diarrhea may be present. Neurologic signs may be concurrent with epithelial signs (i.e., respiratory disease, conjunctivitis, vomiting, diarrhea) with encephalitis caused by
direct viral replication. Alternately, neurologic disease may
occur several weeks after resolution of epithelial invasion.
A significant amount of pathology results from the
host’s immune response to the virus, as well as the virus
itself. Seizures and myoclonus are two of the more common signs. The latter may affect limbs or manifest as
chewing motion of the jaw. Ocular disease may also
occur. Lesions include anterior uveitis, optic neuritis,
and retinal detachment. Infection during pregnancy may
lead to abortion or stillbirth. Puppies infected before
permanent dentition may have enamel hypoplasia.
Digital hyperkeratosis (“hard pad disease”) may be noted.

­Diagnosis
Diagnosis is established via virus identification in a clinical sample through use of reverse‐transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of whole blood, a swab of
conjunctiva or tissue, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), or urine.
When obtaining conjunctival scrapings, remove mucus
and tears and using a sterilized, blunt metal spatula or
dulled scalpel blade, repeatedly scrape the conjunctiva
until a small amount of tissue can be lifted. Apply the tissue to a slide and submit the slide to an outside lab for
immunofluorescence assay (IFA) testing. Urine is a good
source for PCR testing in patients with CDV encephalitis
after resolution of epithelial signs. CDV may be detected
in urine for a longer period than other sample types.
CDV detection in urine and CSF was equivalent in one
study of neurologic cases. Postmortem evaluation and
microscopic findings confirm infection. The specific
lesion of CDV is eosinophilic intranuclear/intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies in glial cells, neurons, epithelial respiratory cells, and cells of the GI and urogenital tracts.
Virus isolation is the gold standard for diagnosis and is
useful in low levels of viral infection through observation
of typical syncytial cell formation. Immunocytology can
be used to enhance the visibility of inclusion bodies by
fluorescein‐conjugated CDV antibodies.

­Treatment
Treatment is supportive only (see Chapter 82). Antiviral
medications are not routinely used or recommended. No
single treatment is specific or uniformly successful.

VetBooks.ir

80 Canine Distemper

Secondary bacterial infection frequently results in bronchopneumonia, which requires broad‐spectrum antibiotic
therapy +/‒ expectorants or nebulization. Parenteral therapy is required when GI signs or dehydration are present.
Water, food, and oral drugs should be discontinued if vomiting and diarrhea are present, Parenteral antiemetics may
be required. In dogs with status epilepticus, diazepam
should be administered intravenously or per rectum, followed by phenobarbital for maintenance prevention.

­protective immunity. Information on antibody testing
can be found at www.aaha.org/CanineVaccineTiters. No
vaccine is 100% effective, but regular vaccination can
help protect animals. CDV is susceptible to ultraviolet
light, heat, drying, and all routinely used disinfectants.
Client education about purchasing puppies from
crowded pet markets is important.

­Prevention

Prognosis is guarded, especially with CNS involvement.

Control is accomplished through vaccination. Current
vaccines include strains of the American lineage
(Onderstepoort or Lederle strains). After recovery from
natural infection or following booster vaccination,
immunity can persist for years. Vaccination for CDV can
begin as early as 6–8 weeks of age, with boosters every
2–4 weeks until at least 16 weeks of age. For naive puppies or adults vaccinated after maternal immunity has
waned (approximately 16 weeks of age), a single attenuated live or recombinant vaccine may be sufficient to
induce protection. In older vaccinated dogs, an annual or
triennial distemper booster is recommended, depending
on the risk for infection. Current AAHA guidelines
should be consulted for specific vaccination recommendations in standard and high‐risk situations. The AAHA
2017 canine vaccination guidelines state that measuring
antibody levels provides a reasonable assessment of

­Prognosis

­Public Health Implications
Currently, CDV is not considered to be a public health
concern. However, following the outbreaks of CDV
infections in animal facilities in China, a CDV outbreak
occurred in cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca fascicularis)
in Japan in 2008. A corresponding CDV strain was isolated (CYN07‐dV) and characterized, which efficiently
utilized macaca CD150 as an entry receptor. Despite the
similarity of the amino acid sequence of Macaca mulatta
CD150 to the human sequence, the isolated virus did not
efficiently infect human Vero‐hSLAM cells. As long as a
high percentage of the human population is immune to
measles via vaccination, there is likely little concern for
CDV making the transition to humans. However, that
may change if measles should happen to be eradicated.

­Further Reading
Anis E, Newell TK, Dyer N, Wilkes RP. Phylogenetic
analysis of the wild‐type strains of canine distemper
virus circulating in the United States. Virol J 2018; 5: 118.
Beinke A, Baumgartner W, Wohlsein P. Cross‐species
transmission of canine distemper virus – an update. One
Health 2015; December 1: 49–59.
Cosby S, Weir L. Measles vaccination: threat from related
veterinary viruses and need for continued vaccination

post measles eradication. Hum Vaccin Immunother
2018; 14(1): 229–33.
Ford RB, Larson LJ, McClure KD, Schultz RD, Welborn LV.
2017 AAHA Canine Vaccination Guidelines. J AAHA
2017; 53: 5.
Yuan C, Liu W, Wang Y, Hou J, Zhang L, Wang G.
Homologous recombination is a force in the evolution of
canine distemper virus. PLoS One 2017; 12(4): e0175416.

853

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

855

81
Canine Herpesvirus
Yvonne Drechsler, PhD
College of Veterinary Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology

­Signalment

Canine herpesvirus (CHV), a member of the Herpesviridae
family, is a DNA virus that infects and replicates in
mucosal epithelial cells and lymphoid tissue. Clinical signs
vary depending on the age and immune status at time of
infection. The virus replicates most efficiently at temperatures lower than 98.6 °F. Therefore, the ability to mount a
febrile response aids in fighting infection. In addition, replication is favored in cooler body locations such as mucous
membranes. As is common for herpesviruses, CHV will
exist as a latent form in ganglia or lymphoid tissue after
initial infection. The virus can be reactivated by stressors
at any time, leading to shedding and transmission.
In naive pregnant females, infection will lead to systemic viremia, resulting in fetal death, abortion, and
mummification. Puppies typically acquire the infection
in utero, during passage through the birth canal, via contact with oronasal secretions of the dam, or from contact
with other infected dogs shedding the virus. Acute neonatal viremia is associated with very high mortality in
puppies younger than 3 weeks. Pregnant females, previously exposed to the virus, will confer passive immunity
through nursing, while remaining asymptomatic. Older,
naive puppies and adult dogs will usually show disease of
the genitals, respiratory tract or eyes.

Neonatal puppies up to 3 weeks are at greatest risk for
severe disease and death. Male and female dogs older
than 3 weeks generally develop mild clinical signs and
recurring infections.

­Epidemiology
Canine herpesvirus is common in several canine species,
including dogs, coyotes, and wolves, and has a worldwide distribution. Studies in Europe have shown a seroprevalence of 39–88% in dogs. Infection is more common
in multidog environments, such as shelters and kennels.
Studies in shelter dogs have also shown that CHV may be
implicated as an etiologic agent in canine infectious respiratory disease complex.

­History and Clinical Signs
Infection and associated clinical signs occur by exposure
to other dogs, and may be particularly common in kennels and other multidog environments. Clinical signs
may also occur due to reactivation of previous infection
provoked by various stressors. Immunocompromised
animals are at higher risk of reoccurring infections, particularly dogs with diabetes mellitus, immune‐mediated
diseases, and lymphoma.
In young puppies 1–3 weeks of age, signs include depression, respiratory signs, anorexia, soft yellow or green stools
and diarrhea, persistent crying, abdominal pain, petechial
hemorrhages on mucous membranes and occasional presence of vesicles on genitals. Death usually occurs within
24–48 hours of showing clinical signs. Surviving puppies
will most likely develop neurologic signs.
Older puppies and adults may present with upper respiratory signs, but in rare cases, more severe lower respiratory disease can occur. Signs of primary genital
infection are characterized by vesicular lesions on the
genital mucosa. Ocular signs may include conjunctivitis,
corneal ulceration or keratitis, blepharospasm, photophobia, and ocular discharge.

­Diagnosis
History, clinical signs, physical examination, a history
of stress or evidence of immunosuppression should

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

856

Section 9 Infectious Disease

increase the index of suspicion for infection. Sepsis is the
primary differential for neonates. CHV can be isolated
and grown from various tissues including liver, spleen,
kidneys, and lymph nodes taken from puppies that died
of systemic infection. Older animals showing signs of
reproductive, respiratory or ocular disease will typically
shed the virus in oral or genital mucosa, which can be
sampled. In cases of active viremia, whole blood in EDTA
can be used for virus isolation. Virus can also be detected
using polymerase chain reaction (PCR), immunofluorescence assays, or electron microscopy. Serology will confirm presence of CHV antibodies, which indicates
exposure but not necessarily active infection.

­Therapy
Treatment options for young puppies with signs of systemic infection are limited. The progression of the disease is rapid and usually fatal. Supportive care is
important. Intraperitoneal injection of 1–2 mL of pooled
immune sera from female dogs that have given birth to
CHV‐infected litters has been suggested as a treatment
for neonatal puppies. External warming may restrict
viral growth, and it has been suggested that it may help
prevent clinical signs in unaffected puppies. However,

it is not effective in puppies that already show signs of
infection. The efficacy and safety of antiviral drugs
requires further research. Currently, there are no
licensed medications for treatment of CHV in dogs.
The antiviral drugs vidarabine and acyclovir have been
described for treatment of neonatal puppies with CHV
infection, but whether they are safe or effective has not
been well studied, toxicity is a significant concern.
There is no vaccination for CHV in the United States,
but a vaccine is available in Europe.

­Prognosis
The disease is usually fatal in neonates whereas milder or
subclinical disease occurs in older animals with a competent immune system and the ability to thermoregulate.
Immunosuppression may cause recrudescence of latent
infection.

­Public Health Implications
Like other herpesviruses, CHV is highly species specific
and does not infect humans.

­Further Reading
Erles K, Dubovi EJ, Brooks HW, Brownlie J. Longitudinal
study of viruses associated with canine infectious
respiratory disease. J Clin Microbiol 2004; 42: 4524–9.
Evermann JF, Ledbetter EC, Maes RK. Canine
reproductive, respiratory and ocular diseases due to
canine herpesvirus. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2011; 41(6): 1097–120.

Greene CE, Carmichael LE. Canine herpesvirus infection.
In: Greene CE, ed. Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat,
4th edn. St Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2012. 48–54.
Ledbetter EC, Kim SG Dubovi EJ. Outbreak of ocular
disease associated with naturally acquired canine
herpesvirus‐1 infection in a closed domestic dog colony.
Vet Ophthalmol 2009; 12: 242–7.

VetBooks.ir

857

82
Canine Viral Enteritis
Margaret C. Barr, DVM, PhD
College of Veterinary Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA, USA

Dogs are susceptible to several viral diseases that present
with gastrointestinal signs either as the primary complaint or as a component of multisystemic disease.
Canine parvovirus type 2 (CPV‐2) is the most common
cause of viral enteritis in dogs, but enteric canine coronavirus (CCoV) and canine distemper virus must also be
considered as possible viral etiologies. Canine rotavirus
causes diarrhea in neonatal puppies, similar to type A
rotaviruses in other animal species. A multitude of other
viruses, including two newly discovered viruses of dogs,
canine kobuvirus and dog circovirus, have been identified in some cases of canine enteritis.
Because CPV‐2 is the most clinically relevant of the
canine enteric viruses, this section will focus on its characteristics, pathogenesis, and management. Table 82.1
provides a comparison of CPV‐2 with some of the other
canine enteric viruses.

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Canine parvovirus is a small single‐stranded, nonenveloped DNA virus that infects and replicates in a variety of
rapidly dividing cells. Entry into the host cells depends on
interaction between the major capsid protein of the virus,
VP2, and the transferrin receptor on the cell surface. Initial
replication usually occurs in the oropharyngeal lymphoid
tissues, followed by viremia and systemic replication in
other lymphoid tissues, leukocyte precursors in the bone
marrow, and intestinal crypt epithelial cells. Clinical signs
may appear as early as four days after exposure but more
typically occur about a week after infection.
Pathologic findings include gastrointestinal inflammation and hemorrhage predominantly in the small intestine,
with characteristic crypt cell destruction and severe villous
atrophy. The virus also causes lymphoid depletion, thymic
lymphocytolysis, and mitotic arrest of bone marrow

hematopoietic cells. Perinatal infection with CPV‐2 can
result in cardiac myofiber lysis and multifocal necrosis.

­Epidemiology
Canine parvovirus is closely related to feline parvovirus
and similar viruses of wild carnivores, such as mink
enteritis virus and raccoon parvovirus. Since its emergence and worldwide spread in domestic and wild canids
in the mid‐late 1970s, CPV‐2 has mutated to form antigenic variants CPV‐2a, CPV‐2b, and CPV‐2c, which are
all defined by amino acid changes in the major capsid
protein, VP2. Although CPV‐2 is unable to infect cats,
subsequent variants have expanded host ranges and can
replicate in feline cells.
The main route of infection for CPV‐2 (as with most
other enteric viruses) is through oral or nasal contact with
feces or feces‐contaminated material. In utero transmission of CPV‐2 can also occur. The small compact size and
nonenveloped structure of the virus make it highly resistant to inactivation by environmental conditions and easily
transmitted on fomites. Infected animals shed the virus in
high concentrations beginning around day 4 of infection
and can continue to shed for several days after the resolution of clinical signs. Parvovirus is rarely detected in the
feces of healthy dogs with no history of enteritis.
At least in some regions, there is a distinct seasonality
to the occurrence of parvovirus enteritis, usually peaking
in late summer to early fall.

­Signalment
While male and female dogs of all ages are susceptible
to infection, CPV‐2 is most significant as a cause of
­gastroenteritis in puppies 6 weeks to 6 months of age.
Puppies become susceptible to infection as maternally

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

Table 82.1 Comparison of CPV‐2 and other canine enteric viruses
Age most
affected

Primary target cells and typical
pathobiology

Domestic and wild
Canine parvovirus 2 ssDNA, nonenveloped,
canids; CPV‐2a, 2b,
icosohedral capsid;
(Parvovirus,
variants CPV‐2, 2a, 2b, 2c 2c – can also infect
Parvoviridae)
cats

6 weeks–6
months

>4 months

Virus

Molecular
characteristics

Host specificity

Clinical presentation

Additional information

Lymphoid cells, intestinal crypt
epithelial cells, hematopoietic
cells
Intestinal crypt destruction/
severe villous atrophy;
lymphoid, bone marrow and
thymic depletion

Fever, depression, inappetence,
vomiting, diarrhea (scant
mucoid to profuse
hemorrhagic); dehydration,
electrolyte disturbances;
endotoxemia

High level of genetic variation
can lead to emergence of new
antigenic variants

Enterocytes
Moderate villous atrophy,
deepening of crypts
Pantropic variant has increased
virulence and causes systemic
disease

Usually mild, self‐limiting
diarrhea and vomiting

A distantly related Beta‐
coronavirus causes respiratory
disease in dogs similar to
SARS‐CoV in humans

Canine enteric
coronavirus
(Alpha‐ coronavirus,
Coronaviridae)

ssRNA, enveloped with
large spike proteins,
helical nucleocapsid;
genotypes CCoV‐I,
CCoV‐II (a & b)

Domestic and wild
canids

Canine distemper
virus (CDV)
(Morbillivirus,
Paramyxoviridae)

ssRNA, enveloped;
intracytoplasmic &
intranuclear inclusions

Domestic and wild
canids; wild felids;
variants infect
raccoons, skunks,
ferrets, marine
mammals

3–6 months Macrophages, lymphocytes,
epithelial cells, neurons, glial
cells (pancytotropic)

Canine rotavirus
(Rotavirus,
Reoviridae)

Segmented (11) dsRNA,
non‐enveloped;
reassortment with A
rotaviruses

Domestic and wild
canids
See Additional
information column

Neonates

Canine kobuvirus
(Kobuvirus,
Picornaviridae)

ssRNA non‐enveloped,
icosohedral capsid

Unknown
Domestic dogs and
foxes, likely other
canids – very few
epidemiologic studies
reported

Dog circovirus
(Circovirus,
Circoviridae)

ssDNA, non‐enveloped,
icosohedral capsid

Domestic dogs; wild
canids unknown

Closely related to human
measles & rinderpest
viruses

Closely related to porcine
circovirus

Healthy
dogs often
shed CCoV

Multisystemic disease: lethargy,
fever, vomiting, diarrhea,
coughing, dyspnea, nasal and
ocular discharge, conjunctivitis,
keratitis, photophobia,
seizures, dementia, ataxia,
hyperesthesia, hyperkeratosis

“Old dog” encephalitis – rare
form of CDV disease in older
dogs years after primary
infection

Usually mild, self‐limiting
diarrhea

Interspecies transmission and
zoonotic potential with
reassorted viruses

Not yet characterized

Has been isolated from stool
samples of diarrheic dogs, but
pathogenicity is currently
unknown

Genetically similar to human
Aichi virus A, a
gastroenteritis transmitted
through consumption of
oysters

Not yet characterized

Unclear – has been associated
with hemorrhagic
gastroenteritis, vasculitis and
vascular necrosis
Granulomatous lymphadenitis,
thrombocytopenia

Similar prevalence in healthy
and sick dogs; probably most
important as a co‐pathogen
with CPV‐2 – increased
mortality

Mild‐moderate villous atrophy,
hyperkeratosis, lymphoid and
thymic depletion,
encephalomyelitis
Mature enterocytes
Mild villous atrophy

6 weeks–6
months

Pantropic variant – fever,
lethargy, hemorrhagic diarrhea,
lymphopenia, neurologic signs

VetBooks.ir

82 Canine Viral Enteritis

derived immunity wanes and remain susceptible until
they acquire active immunity, either through natural
infection or through vaccination. The outcome of infection, ranging from subclinical infection to severe disease,
seems to depend on individual host factors, with some
breeds (notably American pit bull terriers, Rottweilers,
Doberman pinschers, and German shepherds) having
increased risk for severe enteritis.

­History and Clinical Signs
Most puppies infected with CPV‐2 present with a history of lethargy and inappetence. These signs are often
accompanied by fever, abdominal pain, vomiting and
diarrhea, which may lead to substantial dehydration.
Although profuse, hemorrhagic diarrhea is a typical
finding, many dogs with CPV enteritis will produce scant
mucoid feces instead. Extensive damage to the small
intestinal mucosa may result in coliform bacterial septicemia and endotoxic shock.
Lymphopenia is a consistent clinicopathologic finding;
other changes may include neutropenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia, electrolyte imbalances (especially h
­ ypokalemia),
hypoglycemia, and hypoalbuminemia. Serum C‐reactive
protein levels are often elevated in critically ill dogs and
correlate loosely with increased risk of mortality.
Myocarditis occurs with perinatal infection of puppies
born to naive bitches; puppies may present with dyspnea, weakness, and crying or experience sudden death.
This syndrome is not commonly seen in vaccinated and/
or CPV‐endemic populations.

­Diagnosis
Although parvovirus infection is the likely diagnosis in
an unvaccinated puppy presenting with enteritis, fever,
and lymphopenia, other enteric viruses may have a similar presentation. Diagnosis of parvoviral enteritis is best
accomplished by observation of clinical signs along with
detection of CPV‐2 antigen (point‐of‐care enzyme‐
linked immunosorbent assay [ELISA] or hemagglutination) or DNA (polymerase chain reaction [PCR]) in feces
or rectal swab specimens. PCR‐based tests are more sensitive than antigen tests and can be used to identify the
variant of the infecting CPV.

­Therapy
Ideally, puppies infected with CPV‐2 should be hospitalized and kept in isolation. Therapy for CPV‐2 enteritis
consists of aggressive supportive care to correct hydration, hypoglycemia, and electrolyte abnormalities such as

hypokalemia, control pain and maintain nutrition.
Antimicrobials should be administered to prevent and
treat secondary bacterial infections (gram‐negative and
anaerobic) that arise from bacterial translocation across
the compromised gastrointestinal tract or from neutropenia. Frequent (q8h) monitoring of blood glucose is necessary and supplementation of intravenous (IV) fluids with
dextrose is often needed. Colloid therapy with hetastarch
or plasma may be necessary in some patients, particularly
those with severe hypoalbuminemia (Figure 82.1).
Red cell transfusion may be necessary in patients with
significant blood loss. While treatment with recombinant human granulocyte stimulating factor and hyperimmune serum has not been shown to be of benefit,
feline interferon‐omega has shown promising results.

­Prognosis
Puppies with severe enteritis have a very poor survival
rate without treatment due to hypovolemic and septic
shock and electrolyte/acid–base disturbances, while
hospitalization with fluid therapy greatly improves their
prognosis for recovery. A protocol for outpatient treatment of puppies whose owners cannot afford hospital
care has been developed and is showing promise for
improving the prognosis in these patients.

­Prevention
Prevention of CPV‐2 infection is accomplished by limiting contact of susceptible animals with potentially
infected animals and premises while stimulating immunity with vaccination. Shelters, kennels, clinics, and
other high‐density units need to practice good sanitation, disinfection, and appropriate use of quarantine protocols and isolation facilities.
Because maternally derived antibody can interfere with
immunization, vaccination with modified live virus vaccine is recommended every 3–4 weeks beginning at 6
weeks of age until the puppy is 16 weeks old (or 20 weeks
old for high‐risk breeds). Although current vaccines,
which are composed of CPV‐2 or CPV‐2b, have been
effective in protecting dogs against CPV‐2c infection
under experimental conditions, it is still unclear how protective these vaccines are under some field conditions.

­Public Health Implications
Canine parvovirus‐2 variants do not infect people, but
feces should be treated as if other infectious agents that
cause intestinal disease in people are present.

859

Section 9 Infectious Disease

+

VetBooks.ir

860

Control Hydration &
Electrolyte Balance
• Crystalloids +
• Colloids

SUPPORTIVE CARE FOR CPV

Prevent 2°
Infections
• Ampicillin
• Enrofloxacin
• Metronidazole

Relieve Pain
• Buprenorphine

Maintain Nutrition
• Nasoesophageal
feeding**

+ Potassium supplementation is important and should be adjusted based on frequent measurement of serum potassium.
# Ampicillin or cefazolin may be sufficient however improved gram-negative coverage may be needed. There is a risk of cartilage
deformity in puppies treated with fluoroquinolones, however short-term(<7 d)therapy at 5 mg/kg q 24 hours may be warranted
Once the patient is hydrated, aminoglycosides may also be considered for improved gram-negative coverage.
Metronidazole may be used to improve anaerobic coverage if needed.
** Use of the GI tract and trickle feeding is associated with improved survival compared to fasting, and is preferred over
intravenous feeding due to the ability to provide nutrition to enterocytes and due to the risk of sepsis associated with parenteral
nutrition.

Figure 82.1 Supportive care for CPV.

­Further Reading
Anderson A, Hartmann K, Leutenegger CM, et al. Role of
canine circovirus in dogs with acute haemorrhagic
diarrhoea. Vet Rec 2017; 180: 542.
Decaro N, Buonavoglia C. Canine parvovirus – a review of
epidemiological and diagnostic aspects, with emphasis
on type 2c. Vet Microbiol 2012; 155: 1–12.
Di Martino B, di Felice E, Ceci C, di Profio F, Marsilio F.
Canine kobuviruses in diarrhoeic dogs in Italy. Vet
Microbiol 2013; 166: 246–9.
Hernández‐Blanco B, Catala‐López F. Are licensed canine
parvovirus (CPV2 and CPV2b) vaccines able to elicit
protection against CPV2c subtype in puppies? A

systematic review of controlled clinical trials. Vet
Microbiol 2015; 180: 1–9.
Li L, McGraw S, Zhu K, et al. Circovirus in tissues of dogs
with vasculitis and hemorrhage. Emerg Inf Dis 2013; 19:
534–41.
Sykes JE. Canine parvovirus infections and other viral
enteritides. In: Sykes JE, ed. Canine and Feline Infectious
Diseases. St Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2014, pp. 141–51.
Venn EC, Preisner K, Boscan PL, Twedt DC, Sullivan LA.
Evaluation of an outpatient protocol in the treatment of
canine parvoviral enteritis. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2017;
27: 52–65.

VetBooks.ir

861

83
Viral Papillomatosis
Margaret C. Barr, DVM, PhD
College of Veterinary Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA, USA

Dogs and cats, like many other species, are susceptible to
development of papillomatous growths (warts) on the
skin and mucous membranes. Most of the time, viral
papillomas are benign and transient lesions but they can
significantly affect the health of an animal if they pro­
gress to premalignant or malignant neoplastic lesions.
Canine and feline papillomas and the viruses that cause
them share many features and will be discussed together
in this chapter.

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Papillomaviruses (PV) are small nonenveloped viruses
with a circular double‐stranded DNA genome enclosed
in an icosohedral capsid. They belong to the large and
diverse viral family Papillomaviridae, which currently
includes over 280 types of papillomaviruses infecting
most (if not all) mammalian species and many nonmam­
malian species. Each PV type demonstrates a strong host
and tissue/site preference, with only a few examples of
interspecies transmission.
Papillomaviruses replicate in epithelial cells of skin and
mucous membranes, beginning their life cycle in the
basal layer and progressing as the cells mature. Viral
assembly and particle release are restricted to the stra­
tum granulosum and stratum corneum. This pattern of
replication is orchestrated by the complex expression of
a series of early and late genes.
Infections are often subclinical, with frequent detec­
tion of papillomavirus DNA in normal skin of healthy
dogs and cats. The typical presentation of papillomatosis
(cutaneous or oral warts) occurs when high levels of PV
early gene expression induce rapid expansion of the basal
epithelial cell population followed by cell differentiation,
epithelial thickening, hyperkeratosis, and exophytosis.

Progression to malignant lesions occurs rarely in both
dogs and cats, with some species differences in histologic
features and clinical presentation. Disregulation and
overexpression of two early genes, E6 and E7, have been
linked to the development of PV‐associated squamous
cell carcinomas (SCCs).
In most animals, mild inflammation and a cell‐mediated
immune response lead to spontaneous regression of papil­
lomas within 6–8 weeks. A humoral immune response
produces antibodies that protect against reinfection with
closely related types of PV. Immunocompromised animals
may develop persistent and generalized papillomatosis
with an increased risk of progression to malignant neo­
plastic transformation.

­Epidemiology
Papillomaviruses infect domestic and wild canids and
felids throughout the world. Although only a few canine
and feline PV have been sequenced to date, almost 150
human PV types have been reported. In general, PVs are
highly host specific; however, bovine papillomavirus
type 1 infection causes equine sarcoid tumors in horses,
and ruminant‐like PVs have been linked to the develop­
ment of feline sarcoids.
Papillomaviruses are transmitted through epidermal
microabrasions or transepidermal inoculation of virus
with contaminated fomites. Because the virus lacks an
envelope, it is relatively resistant to adverse environmen­
tal conditions and difficult to kill with disinfectants.
These facts, along with the ubiquity and diversity of PVs,
make it likely that most animals will be infected at
some point in their lives, but there is little information
on the prevalence of PV infection in canine and feline
populations.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

862

Section 9 Infectious Disease

­Signalment
Dogs and cats of all ages and breeds can be infected with
PVs. Young dogs are most likely to be affected by canine
oral papillomatosis, while older animals with chronic
persistent infections are more likely to develop bowe­
noid in situ carcinoma (BISC) and invasive SCC. Young
pugs and miniature schnauzers seem to be dispropor­
tionately affected by canine pigmented plaques, suggest­
ing that host genetic factors play a role in the development
of this disease. Oral papillomas in dogs rarely progress to
SCC but there is some indication that malignant trans­
formation of canine oral papillomas may be increasing.
Oral and cutaneous papillomatoses are not observed
as often in cats as in dogs; viral plaques are also uncom­
mon but have been more clearly associated with PV
infections in cats. Feline BISCs develop in middle‐aged
to older cats, occur disproportionately in cats with feline
retrovirus infections, and are most severe in hairless
breeds. Cutaneous and oral SCCs are common malig­
nancies of older cats, with ultraviolet (UV) exposure
being an important risk factor for some of these lesions.
While feline PV DNA has been identified frequently in
cutaneous SCCs found in UV‐protected areas of the
body, a strong association of oral SCC with PV infection
in domestic cats has not been established.

­Clinical Signs
Papillomatosis and viral plaque lesions are typically lim­
ited to the cutaneous or mucosal epidermis, sometimes
occurring singly but more often in multiples. Lesions can
range from papular or nodular lesions to pedunculated
or cauliflower‐like, hyperkeratotic masses. Infection
rarely generates more than a mild inflammatory
response, so systemic signs are not seen. Bowenoid in
situ carcinomas develop as multicentric irregular regions
of epidermal and follicular hyperplasia primarily on the
face, shoulders, and limbs. These premalignant lesions
are hyperkeratotic, pigmented plaques that may ulcerate.
If progression to SCC occurs, it is usually as a single non­
metastatic but potentially highly invasive tumor. A sum­
mary of diseases associated with canine and feline PV
infections is provided in Table 83.1.

Table 83.1 Papillomavirus‐associated disease in domestic
dogs and cats

Disease

Species
affected

Oral
papillomatosis

Canine
Feline – rare

Multiple, raised, smooth
nodular to pedunculated,
hyperkeratotic masses on oral
mucosa and lips (dogs), or
ventral tongue (cats);
spontaneous regression is
common

Exophytic
cutaneous
papillomatosis

Canine
Feline – rare

Single to multiple
pedunculated, hyperkeratotic
masses often on head or feet;
spontaneous regression is
common

Endophytic
cutaneous
papillomatosis

Canine

Unpigmented, raised firm
masses with central pores
found on ventral abdomen or
feet; do not usually regress

Pigmented
plaques

Canine

Small to medium‐sized flat to
slightly raised, darkly
pigmented, hyperkeratotic
masses found in clusters on
the limbs, axilla, ventral trunk
or abdomen; do not usually
regress; may progress to in situ
carcinoma

Viral plaques

Feline

Multiple variably sized, slightly
raised, hyperkeratotic masses
that may or may not be
pigmented; some may
spontaneously regress while
others progress to in situ
carcinoma

Clinical presentation

Feline
Multiple scaly, crusting to
Bowenoid in
situ carcinoma Canine – rare ulcerating plaques frequently
on face, neck and limbs; some
(BISC)
may be slowly progressive and
others become highly invasive
or progress to squamous cell
carcinoma
Squamous cell
carcinoma
(SCC)

Feline
Usually a solitary flattened
Canine – rare ulcerated mass found in UV‐
protected areas of the body
(as opposed to SCCs caused
by UV exposure); rarely
metastasize but can be highly
invasive and damaging to
surrounding tissue

­Diagnosis

Feline sarcoid

Feline

Diagnosis of oral papillomatosis is based on clinical
­presentation for most typical cases in young dogs. Other
types of lesions require full‐thickness excisional biopsy
with histologic examination for a morphologic diagn­
osis. The etiologic diagnosis of papillomatosis can be

UV, ultraviolet.

Slow‐growing, solitary to
multiple, smooth dense
fibroblastic nodules that may
ulcerate, located on head, neck
and extremities; do not
metastasize and are not highly
invasive

VetBooks.ir

83 Viral Papillomatosis

confirmed by immunohistochemical staining for PV
­
group‐specific antigens, in situ hybridization for PV
nucleic acid detection, or electron microscopy to visual­
ize viral particles. Polymerase chain reaction is a highly
sensitive and rapid method for detection of PV DNA in
biopsy specimens, but interpretation is difficult because
PV DNA is frequently amplified out of normal canine
and feline skin.

­Therapy and Prognosis
Spontaneous regression of many nonmalignant PV‐
associated lesions makes treatment unnecessary in
most cases. Immunosuppressive drugs like glucocorti­
coids and ciclosporin should be avoided, if possible, in
infected animals. Provision of a high‐quality diet and
management of stress may help support an animal’s
immune response to the virus. Interferons and other
immunomodulators have been tried in severe cases of
papillomatosis, but solid evidence of their efficacy is
not yet available. Azithromycin (10 mg/kg once daily
for 10 days) was used in one small trial to treat canine
oral and cutaneous warts with some apparent efficacy.
The mechanism of action is unclear but it may be
associated with immunomodulatory properties of the
drug.
Surgical removal or cryotherapy may be effective if few
lesions are present although new lesions may develop.

Removal of premalignant and malignant lesions like
BISCs and SCCs should include histologically confirmed
normal tissue margins on all borders.

­Prevention
Currently, there are no commercial vaccines available for
canine and feline papillomatosis. Because most PV infec­
tions are subclinical or produce benign self‐limiting
lesions, immunization has not been a priority. The diver­
sity of PVs makes it difficult to stimulate protective
immunity against this family of viruses. If specific types
of canine and feline PVs are demonstrated to be associ­
ated with the development of SCC, then targeting those
viruses with vaccines would make sense. The use of vac­
cines against some types of human PVs associated with
genital cancer suggests that vaccination could be effec­
tive against PVs in other species also.

­Public Health Implications
Canine and feline papillomaviruses have not been dem­
onstrated to be infectious to humans. However, human
PV‐9 was amplified from a cutaneous papilloma in a cat,
and bovine PV causes equine (and possibly feline) sar­
coids, proving that cross‐species infection can occur
under some circumstances.

­Further Reading
Egberink H, Thiry E, Möstl K, et al. Feline viral
papillomatosis: ABCD guidelines on prevention and
management. J Feline Med Surg 2013; 15: 560–2.
Lange CE, Favrot C. Canine papillomatosis. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 2011; 41: 1183–95.
Munday JS. Papillomaviruses in felids. Vet J 2014; 199: 340–7.
Munday JS, Thomson NA, Luff JA. Papillomavirus in dogs
and cats. Vet J 2017; 225: 23–31.

Nagata M, Rosenkrantz W. Cutaneous viral dermatoses in
dogs and cats. Compend Contin Educ Vet 2013; 35:
E1–E10.
Thaiwong T, Sledge DG, Wise AG, et al. Malignant
transformation of canine oral papillomavirus (CPV1)‐
associated papillomas in dogs: an emerging concern?
Papillomavirus Res 2018; 6: 83–9.

863

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

865

84
Canine Influenza Virus
Ellen Collisson, MS, PhD
College of Veterinary Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology

­Epidemiology

While influenza A viruses had for many years not been
considered pathogens of concern in dogs, they are today a
serious differential for canine respiratory problems. In
2004, a previously known equine strain of H3N8 influenza
A virus emerged as a canine respiratory concern during an
outbreak in greyhound racing dogs in Florida. Twenty‐
two dogs suffered from fever, followed by coughing and
either recovery or, in the case of eight dogs, peracute death
occurred associated with extensive hemorrhaging of the
lungs, mediastinum, and pleural cavity.
Severe respiratory illness with mortality was reported
in dogs in 2008 in Korea and later in China and Thailand
due to an H3N2 strain of influenza that has been shown
to originate from the avian virus and to also transmit
from dog to dog. In March 2015, canine influenza virus
(CIV) H3N2 was identified in the United States in the
Chicago area and during the same year identified in dogs
in at least 30 states throughout southern, eastern and
midwestern United States. In 2015, shelter cats in Indiana
were also diagnosed with an H3N2 strain.
Typical of other influenza A viruses, CIV viral particles
capable of cell‐to‐cell or host‐to‐host transmission carry H
(hemagglutinin) and N (neuraminidase) proteins that are
anchored in the bilipid envelope coating the viral particle.
These glycosylated proteins, used to define subtypes, are
prone to mutations that result in the evolution of new influenza strains. A hallmark of influenza viruses is the eight‐segmented RNA genome which provides a mechanism of rapid
genetic change through segment reassortment. Thus, infection with more than one type of influenza virus can result in
progeny that are a combination of RNA segments from
more than one parent strain. In addition, the RNA polymerase which generates the viral RNA segments for progeny
virus is error prone, creating mutations that may contribute
to altered viral tropism, pathogenesis, and antigenicity.

Influenza viruses are highly contagious and easily
transmitted from dog to dog by aerosol or contact
exposure, but the H3N2 also was found to infect cats,
resulting in respiratory illness. The H3N8 virus has
been shown experimentally to also infect cats. Animals
in high‐density environments, such as shelters, competition events, and breeding facilities, are at greatest risk
of infection.
The original canine H3N8 outbreak in greyhounds,
first recognized in January of 2004, had spread in a few
months to tracks in six states, and as of April 2013 had
been reported in 40 states (dogflu.com). Similar to influenza in other animals, a dog may be infected and shed
contagious CIV for up to four days before clinical signs
occur. Currently, infection of dogs is estimated to result
in 80% morbidity and 1–5% mortality although higher
rates of mortality have been reported. Humans have been
reported to also carry the virus from an infected animal
to a naive animal although the Centers for Disease
Control (CDC) states that human infections with the CIV
strains are not a health concern. This may be a matter of
adaptation and infection with or without clinical illness.
The virus isolated from the lungs of dogs in Florida
during the first cases of CIV was found to be a canine‐
adapted H3N8 virus originating from an equine H3N8
subtype, recognized as respiratory pathogens of horses
since 1963. Unlike previous reports of influenza infections in dogs, which were self‐limiting and not transmitted from dog to dog, the greyhound H3N8 virus of 2004
originating from an equine H3N8 virus and the H3N2
originating from an avian influenza virus were easily
transmitted from dog to dog and, at least the latter, also
from cat to cat. The sequencing of genomes of CIV isolates identified signature mutations that indicate stable
changes in the canine‐adapted viruses.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

866

Section 9 Infectious Disease

Cross‐species infections frequently occur with influenza A viruses but adaptation to a new species is not
common. Dogs are susceptible to infection with human
strains, normally without clinical illness or transmission
to other dogs. It is not known why the H3 strains seem to
have adapted to the dog as a stable host, but it is possible
that other strains could, with the appropriate mutations,
evolve into true canine pathogens. In 2012, a novel H3N1
human H1N1 and H3N2 reassortant virus was reported
to infect dogs subclinically in Korea but was not reported
to transmit from dog to dog.

­Signalment
Any dog that has not developed immunity specific for
the H3N8 virus can be infected regardless of age, sex or
breed. Being a highly contagious respiratory virus, the
length of time that a dog may remain in a shelter has
been associated with increased risk of infection with
CIV. With available vaccines and greater likelihood of
natural exposure, more animals will develop immunity
and morbidity will likely decrease in all ages and breeds,
and both sexes.

­History and Clinical Signs
Clinical history is indistinguishable from other respiratory diseases of dogs and resembles influenza infections
in other animals. Morbidity may be expected to be at
least 60%, but it has been reported that as many as 80% of
infected animals may develop clinical signs of infection.
Between two and four days following infection, dogs may
present with clinical illness, such as fever, sneezing,
dyspnea, anorexia, depression and coughing, and ocular
and nasal discharge that can become mucopurulent.
Illness, especially coughing, may continue for 10–30
days post infection. The mortality is generally low. A
minority of infected dogs will develop pneumonia with
tracheitis and bronchitis. Complications of secondary
infections from bacteria or mycoplasma may exacerbate
lung involvement, such as hemorrhage in the lungs,
mediastinum and pleural cavity, and greater mortality.

­Diagnosis
Because clinical illness is similar to that of other respiratory illnesses in dogs, CIV involvement must be diagnosed by detection of viral antigen, viral RNA or the
presence of specific antibody. Because of the short duration of virus infection, serology may be a more reliable

means of diagnosing infection. Serologic evaluations usually require comparisons of paired sera to document seroconversion to confirm infection. CIV‐specific antibodies
can be detected as early as seven days after infection.
Hemagglutination inhibition assays are used to determine
antibodies specific for the H serotypes. However, convalescent sera, in the absence of widespread exposure, can
often be used to identify specific infection. Enzyme‐
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) can be used to
detect group‐specific antibodies for influenza A viruses.
The group‐specific (not type‐specific) ELISA is based on
detecting specific antibody that binds to the nucleocapsid
protein, which coats the viral genome segments and is
highly conserved among all influenza A viruses.
Virus may be detected in samples collected with cotton
or Dacron nasal swabs within four days after clinical
signs are observed; that is, within seven days after infection. Necropsy‐collected tissue from lungs or associated
lymph nodes may be used to detect virus. Diagnosis of
viral infection is often first determined using real‐time
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
of the gene that encodes the highly conserved matrix
protein in influenza virion. A positive PCR result may be
followed by viral isolation (after up to three passages)
using Madin–Darby canine kidney cells or embryonated
chicken eggs in order to determine the H and N subtypes
of the isolated virus.
Subtyping the H and N of the viral isolates can also be
determined by laboratories that have the tools for
sequencing the viral genome. The hemagglutination
inhibition assay is often used to determine the serotype
of CIV strains in the US. Antibodies that react with virus
inhibiting red blood cell agglutination of CIV serotype
standards can be used to inhibit agglutination and thus
identify the H subtype of the CIV isolate.

­Therapy
Supportive therapy may be necessary to provide optimum conditions for the immune system to respond,
eliminating infection and reducing the severity of clinical
signs. Oxygen, intravenous fluids, and nebulization with
coupage may be needed for dogs with pneumonia. Good
nutrition and basic biosecurity measures that include
disposable or dedicated protective clothing and the use
of kennel‐approved disinfectants can help to prevent
viral spread. Soap and water hand washing which
destroys the bilipid envelope membrane of influenza
viruses is highly effective in inactivating the virus.
Isolation of infected or suspected infected animals may
protect dogs not exposed to the virus or vaccine although
exposure is difficult to assess since infection occurs prior
to the appearance of clinical illness.

VetBooks.ir

84 Canine Influenza Virus

Canine influenza virus survives in the environment for
more than 24 hours. Because secondary bacterial and
mycoplasma infections can cause complications, antimicrobials may be considered if clinical signs are severe or
suggest co‐infection. Antiviral drugs exist for influenza,
but such treatments have not been approved for use in
dogs. Information is lacking regarding their efficacy,
doses or negative side‐effects in dogs.
The Nobivac® Canine Influenza H3N8 and H3N2 inactivated bivalent vaccine from Intervet/Merck is labelled as
effective at reducing disease severity. However, the capacity for influenza A viruses to mutate provides the risk of
eventual adaptation and evasion of immunity from administered vaccines.

­Prognosis
From 60% to 80% of CIV‐infected dogs will present with
clinical illness, but subclinically infected dogs will also

shed contagious virus. Dogs will completely recover clinically within 2–3 weeks, sometimes, however, with a lingering cough. Animals that are generally in good health
and well nourished are expected to recover without complications. While most infections will be self‐limiting,
mortality is considered to be between 1% and 5%.

­Public Health Implications
With the reported transmissions of influenza from birds
and other mammals to humans, we should consider CIV
strains a potential public health concern. Influenza
viruses are commonly transmitted across species
although usually with subclinical infection and without
further transmission within the second species. However,
the CIV strains have not been reported to infect humans,
even owners with known infected dogs, and the Centers
for Disease Control does not consider the canine influenza viruses to be a human threat.

­Further Reading
Crawford PC, Dubovi EJ, Castleman WL, et al.
Transmission of equine influenza virus to dogs. Science
2005; 310(5747): 482–5.
He W, Li G, Zhu H, et al. Emergence and adaptation of
H3N2 canine influenza virus from avian influenza virus:
an overlooked role of dogs in interspecies transmission.
Transbound Emerg Dis 2019; 66(2): 842–51.
Ramírez‐Martínez LA, Contreras‐Luna M, De la Luz J,
et al. Evidence of transmission and risk factors for
influenza A virus in household dogs and their
owners. Influenza Other Respir Viruses 2013; 7(6):
1292–6.

Song DS, An DJ, Moon HJ, et al. Interspecies transmission
of the canine influenza H3N2 virus to domestic cats in
South Korea. J Gen Virol 2011; 92(Pt 10): 2350–5.
Song D, Moon HJ, An DF, et al. A novel reassortant canine
H3N1 influenza virus between pandemic H1N1 and
canine H3N2 influenza viruses in Korea. J Gen Virol
2012; 93(Pt 3): 551–4.
Su S, Wang L, Fu X, et al. Equine influenza A (H3N8) virus
infection in cats. Emerg Infect Dis 2014; 20(12): 2096–9.
Voorhees IEH, Glaser AL, Toohey‐Kurth K, et al. Spread of
canine influenza A(H3N2) virus, United States. Emerg
Infect Dis 2017; 23(12): 1950–7.

867

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

869

85
Feline Parvovirus
Margaret C. Barr, DVM, PhD
College of Veterinary Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA, USA

Feline parvovirus (FPV) is the causative agent of feline
panleukopenia, a disease that has also been called feline
infectious enteritis, feline plague or feline distemper.

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Feline parvovirus is so closely related to canine parvovirus type 2 (CPV‐2), mink enteritis virus, and raccoon
parvovirus that all these viruses are now classified as a
single species, feline panleukopenia virus. The genome of
this small single‐stranded DNA virus is packaged tightly
in an icosohedral, nonenveloped capsid that is very
resistant to environmental conditions. The feline transferrin receptor allows FPV access to a broad range of
host cells, where it replicates in actively dividing cells
including lymphocytes, enteric crypt epithelial cells, and
bone marrow myeloid progenitor cells. Similar to the
pathology seen with CPV‐2 infection in dogs, intestinal
villi are severely blunted, absorptive capacity is impaired,
and gastrointestinal integrity is compromised in FPV‐
infected cats. The interruption of myeloid cell proliferation along with lymphocytolysis and redistribution of
circulating white blood cells to inflamed tissues results
in the characteristic and severe panleukopenia seen with
this disease.
Perinatal infection (approximately three weeks before
birth to three weeks after birth) of kittens results in
infection of the central nervous system and impacts
development of the cerebellum. The virus replicates in
the dividing neuroblasts of the external granule cell
layer, causing cerebellar hypoplasia in kittens that survive the infection. There is also evidence of FPV replication in Purkinje cells of the cerebellum but it is unclear
how the virus replicates in these presumably postmitotic cells.

­Epidemiology
Domestic and wild felids are susceptible to FPV infection,
along with some nonfelid species like mink, raccoons, and
foxes. Although canids are resistant to FPV infection, only
a few mutations in the VP2 capsid protein gene led to the
emergence of CPV‐2. Feline parvovirus‐associated disease
is most often seen in multicat housing situations like animal
shelters and breeding catteries, especially if rigorous sanitation, isolation, and vaccination protocols are not followed.
Parvoviruses are shed at high titer in the feces of infected
animals for several days after infection. Transmission is
through the fecal–oral route, either directly or indirectly on
fomites such as shoes, clothing, or feeding dishes.
Extensive prevalence data are lacking. The prevalence
of anti‐FPV antibodies in cats entering a Florida animal
shelter, indicating either past exposure or vaccination,
was just under 40%. If other cat populations in the US are
similar, about 60% of cats are at risk for FPV infection.
Anecdotal reports also suggest a recent resurgence of
feline panleukopenia outbreaks, possibly associated with
antigenic variation in FPV variants and the associated
decreased efficacy of commercial vaccines.

­Signalment
Susceptible cats of all ages can be infected, but young kittens experience a higher mortality rate (up to 90%) than
older animals if not treated. There are no breed or sex
predispositions reported for FPV.

­History and Clinical Signs
The typical FPV patient will have a history of exposure to
other cats in a high‐density multicat environment and

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

870

Section 9 Infectious Disease

little or no evidence of vaccination for FPV after 12
weeks of age. About two‐thirds of FPV‐infected cats will
present with vomiting or diarrhea (occasionally bloody),
but these signs may be absent or only transiently observed
and reported as part of the animal’s history. Anorexia,
lethargy, and dehydration are also common clinical signs;
fever is a less consistent finding. Sudden death with no
apparent clinical signs may result from peracute FPV
infection, especially in young kittens.
Leukopenia, due to neutropenia and/or lymphopenia,
is present in most affected cats, but some cats are able to
maintain normal leukocyte counts or may even have leukocytosis in response to secondary bacterial infections.
Anemia, hypoalbuminemia, and electrolyte imbalances
often occur in these cats. Sepsis can lead to the development of disseminated intravascular coagulation.

­Diagnosis
Diagnosis of FPV infection is based on history (potential
exposure, poor vaccination history) and clinical signs,
including characteristic hematology changes. Confirmation
of the diagnosis can be made through detection of fecal
parvovirus antigens using point‐of‐care assays that are
marketed for detection of CPV‐2. Fecal samples or rectal
swab specimens may also be submitted for PCR analysis of
viral DNA.

­Treatment
The same general principles of supportive care used for
managing CPV‐2‐infected dogs can be applied to FPV
patients (see Chapter 82). Rehydration and maintenance
of electrolyte and acid–base balances, and blood glucose
are of primary importance. Parenteral administration of
broad‐spectrum antimicrobial agents is also indicated to
combat sepsis due to loss of integrity of the gastrointestinal tract lining and neutropenia. Extrapolation from
canine research suggests that early reintroduction of
enteral nutrition as soon as vomiting is controlled may be
beneficial. Cats with severe anemia or hypoproteinemia
may require blood or plasma transfusions, and intravenous nutrition should be considered for these cats if
enteral feeding is not possible. Ancillary treatments may
include immunomodulatory therapies such as passive
immunoglobulin transfer using feline serum containing
anti‐FPV antibodies and active immune stimulation with
feline recombinant interferon‐omega, although one study
showed no difference in survival for cats treated with the
latter agent compared to controls.

­Prognosis
Without treatment, a cat with severe enteric disease and
leukopenia due to FPV infection has a poor prognosis. It
is not clear just how effective good nursing care is at
improving the prognosis for recovery. One study noted a
51% recovery rate of ill cats with a median hospitalization time of seven days, with a poor prognosis associated
with leukopenia (specifically due to neutropenia),
thrombocytopenia, hypoalbuminemia, and hypokalemia. Age was not associated with outcome in this
group of treated cats. However, a recent retrospective
evaluation of outcome predictors and survival time for
FPV‐infected shelter cats determined that only about
20% of hospitalized cats survived to discharge, with a
median survival time of three days. In this population of
cats, animals with signs of lethargy, low body weight,
rectal temperature lower than 100.2 oF, and leukopenia
during hospitalization had the poorest prognosis.
Predictors of survival included history of antiparasitic
therapy, and treatment with amoxicillin‐clavulanic acid
and maropitant.

­Prevention
As with any virus infection, prevention of exposure to
FPV would be the ideal method for preventing infection;
however, the sturdy nature of the viral particles and high
potential for environmental contamination decrease the
feasibility of this approach. Good sanitation practices,
strict isolation procedures, and prevention of overcrowding are all important methods for preventing outbreaks of FPV in multicat situations.
Vaccination of cats with commercial modified‐live or
inactivated FPV vaccines is considered to be a safe and
effective method of FPV prevention, but recent studies
showing a high degree of interference with vaccination by
maternally derived antibodies have led to a change in vaccination protocols. Kittens should be vaccinated beginning at 6–8 weeks of age, continuing every 3–4 weeks
until 16–20 weeks of age. Cats older than 16 weeks should
be vaccinated twice, four weeks apart. Revaccination is at
one year after the primary series and then every three
years. If preexisting FPV antibody titers are relatively
high, revaccination may have little or no benefit.

­Public Health Implications
Feline parvovirus is not infectious to humans and does
not pose a public health risk.

VetBooks.ir

85 Feline Parvovirus

­Further Reading
Bergmann M, Schwertler S, Reese S, et al. Antibody
response to feline panleukopenia virus vaccination in
healthy adult cats. J Feline Med Surg 2018; 20: 1087–93.
DiGangi BA, Levy JK, Griffin B, et al. Prevalence of serum
antibody titers against feline panleukopenia virus, feline
herpesvirus 1, and feline calicivirus in cats entering a
Florida animal shelter. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 241:
1320–5.
Jakel V, Cussler K, Hanschmann KM, et al. Vaccination
against feline panleukopenia: implications from a field
study in kittens. BMC Vet Res 2012; 8:62.
Kruse BD, Unterer S, Horlacher K, Sauter‐Louis C,
Hartmann K. Prognostic factors in cats with feline
panleukopenia. J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24: 1271–6.
Poncelot L, Héraud C, Springinsfeld M, et al. Identification
of feline panleukopenia virus proteins expressed in

Purkinje cell nuclei of cats with cerebellar hypoplasia.
Vet J 2013; 196: 381–7.
Porporato F, Horzinek MC, Hofmann‐Lehmann R, et al.
Survival estimates and outcome predictors for shelter
cats with feline panleukopenia virus infection. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2018; 253: 188–95.
Truyen U, Parrish C. Feline panleukopenia virus: its
interesting evolution and current problems in
immunoprophylaxis against a serious pathogen. Vet
Microbiol 2013; 165: 29–32.
Truyen U, Addie D, Belák S, et al. Feline panleukopenia:
ABCD guidelines on prevention and management.
J Feline Med Surg 2009; 11: 538–46. (Updated most
recently December 2017; www.abcdcatsvets.org/
abcd‐guidelines‐on‐feline‐panleukopenia‐2012‐
edition/.)

871

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

873

86
Feline Coronavirus
Yvonne Drechsler, PhD
College of Veterinary Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Feline coronavirus (FCoV) is a highly contagious virus
that exists as two bioforms. Feline enteric coronavirus
(FECV) is ubiquitous in multicat environments. This
virus commonly causes an asymptomatic infection,
which can persist in certain individuals. Sporadically and
unpredictably, the infection turns pathogenic, in which
case the virus is referred to as feline infectious peritonitis
virus (FIPV), causing the highly fatal, systemic immune‐
mediated disease feline infectious peritonitis (FIP). The
current hypothesis is that FIPV arises from the FECV by
mutation, replicates in monocytes and disseminates,
resulting in vasculitis and pyogranulomatous inflammation. However, our understanding of the pathophysiology of FIPV is very limited due to difficulties in replicating
the virus in laboratory settings.

­Epidemiology
Feline coronavirus is distributed worldwide and is ubiquitous in virtually all cat populations. There is great variability in prevalence among different cat populations.
Two serotypes exist, I and II, with most epidemiologic
studies indicating that serotype I is more common.
However, most studies have been conducted in countries
outside the United States so further study on serotype
prevalence in the United States is needed.
The enteric virus, FECV, is readily transmitted via the
fecal–oral route herefore, the prevalence of FCoV infection
is generally associated with the number and density of cats
housed together. The length of time spent in multicat environments also increases the risk of exposure. For example,
the risk of exposure was estimated to be five times higher
for cats living in shelters for longer than 60 days than for
cats staying for shorter periods of time. Housing and

husbandry practices that reduce exposure to feces and
contaminated environments have a tremendous influence
on the number of cats exposed to the virus. Although
transmission of the pathogenic FIP virus occurs is controversial outbreaks in shelters have been reported. Therefore,
quarantine of suspected FIP‐infected cats is advisable.

­Signalment
Although typically a disease of young cats and kittens,
the age distribution of affected cats appears to be
bimodal. Cats younger than 2 years of age or geriatric
cats are most commonly diagnosed with FIP. In addition,
certain pure breeds, most notably Persians and Burmese,
appear to be more susceptible. Male and female cats are
affected equally in some studies while others show a male
predisposition. Immune‐compromised animals, such as
cats infected with feline leukemia virus (FeLV) or feline
immunodeficiency virus (FIV), are also at increased risk.

­History and Clinical Signs
Typically, cats from shelters, catteries, and multicat
households are at higher risk of exposure and development of FIP due to the ubiquitous nature of the enteric
virus in these settings. Stress due to overcrowding may
also contribute to immune compromise and increased
susceptibility to infection. Genetic predisposition has
also been hypothesized to play a role in increased susceptibility in certain breeds.
Clinical signs associated with the benign enteric virus
are typically gastrointestinal, manifesting as mild vomiting
and/or persistent or intermittent diarrhea. In cases of FIP,
cats may be asymptomatic or present with different levels
of lethargy and anorexia. Other common findings include

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

874

Section 9 Infectious Disease

weight loss, pale mucous membranes, fever of unknown
origin, and uveitis. Commonly, a distinction is made
between the wet (effusive) and dry (noneffusive) forms of
FIP, but they are not mutually exclusive. In the wet form,
abdominal distension due to the accumulation of exudative fluid is the most common presentation. A fluid wave
on physical examination may be evident, but some cases
will have less fluid accumulation, only detectable by
abdominal ultrasound. Pleural effusion with secondary
dyspnea, tachypnea, and muffled heart sounds may be
present, whereas pericardial effusion is uncommon.
Common signs of the dry form are mild and intermittent fever, decreased appetite, weight loss, stunted
growth, depression, pale or yellow mucous membranes,
and palpable abdominal organ enlargement. Clinical
signs may also reflect dysfunction of affected organs.
Pyogranulomatous lesions may develop in one or more
abdominal organs. If granuloma formation involves the
intestine, constipation, diarrhea, or vomiting may be the
major clinical signs observed. Enlarged mesenteric lymph
nodes and palpable nodular irregularities on the surface
of kidneys and liver may also be present on physical
examination. Uveitis is the most common ocular abnormality documented in FIP cases, but other ocular lesions
such as conjunctivitis, corneal precipitates, iritis, cuffing
of the retinal vasculature and retinal detachment may be
present. Neurologic signs can also be seen with FIP, the
most common being behavioral changes, ataxia, central
vestibular signs, hyperesthesia, nystagmus, and seizures.
Any part of the CNS can become affected in this disease.

­Diagnosis
With the exception of histopathology and immunostaining, no single laboratory test can definitely diagnose FIP.
Therefore, the diagnosis of FIP continues to be based
primarily on the combination of history of risk factors,
signalment, clinical abnormalities, and laboratory findings. The diagnostic process starts with a good history
and comprehensive physical examination.
Complete Blood Test and Biochemical Profile
Abnormalities may include anemia, which is usually
nonregenerative. Evidence of hemolysis, with or without
evidence of immune‐mediated destruction, may be present. Lymphopenia, neutrophilia, sometimes with a left
shift and toxic change, and thrombocytopenia also occur.
Hyperbilirubinemia and elevated aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) may
also occur. Hyperproteinemia (>8.0 mg/dL) due to hyperglobulinemia is a consistent finding, present in approxi-

mately 60% of cats with FIP. The hyperglobulinemia is
usually polyclonal, although monoclonal gammopathy
may occur. Hypoalbuminemia can be present, possibly
due to hepatic insufficiency, vasculitis, protein‐losing
nephropathy or enteropathy, or due to decreased production associated with the acute phase reaction. A normal or elevated serum albumin:globulin ratio can help
rule out FIP as it is often decreased in affected cats.
Acute Phase Proteins
Acute phase proteins are a class of proteins whose plasma
concentrations increase or decrease in response to
inflammatory disorders. Levels of alpha‐1‐acid glycoprotein, an acute phase protein, of >1.5 g/L in plasma or
effusions are suggestive of FIP in cats with compatible
clinical signs.
Effusion Fluid
Effusions from the abdomen or pleural space are typically
clear, straw‐colored, or viscous due to the high protein
content. Rivalta’s test can differentiate transudate from
exudate (www.abcdcatsvets.org/). A test tube is filled
with 7–8 mL of distilled water and one drop of acetic acid
(98%) and mixed thoroughly. One drop of the effusion
fluid is layered onto the surface of this solution. Diffusion
of the drop indicates a negative result, and therefore most
likely indicates a FIP‐negative animal. If the drop floats
slowly down in a drop or jellyfish‐like shape or stays at
the surface, the Rivalta’s test is positive and the fluid may
be considered an exudate. Fluid analysis is usually high
protein (>3.5 g/dL) with a low nucleated cell count consisting primarily of neutrophils and macrophages,
although findings may be variable. An effusion
albumin:globulin ratio below 0.4 is suggestive of FIP.
Serology
Although different assays that detect antibodies directed
against FCoV are commercially available, it is not possible to distinguish between exposure to FECV and FIPV
infection. High antibody titer in serum does not always
correlate with occurrence of FIP, and titers may be negative in cats with FIP. It has been suggested that many cats
without FIP and who would never develop FIP have been
needlessly euthanized due to a positive FCoV titer.
Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase
Chain Reaction
Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT‐
PCR) assays can detect FCoV in a variety of samples

VetBooks.ir

86 Feline Coronavirus

(feces, blood, effusion, cerebrospinal fluid [CSF], tissue,
and saliva) with high sensitivity. However, as with antibody tests, distinction of FECV from FIPV is not possible at this time. The finding of virus in blood or tissue
also does not confirm FIP because FECV may be amplified from these tissues in cats without FIP. A quantitative
PCR test for blood, effusion, and tissue is available. The
test is based on the hypothesis that replicating virus in
peripheral blood and tissues suggests FIPV rather than
FECV. However, because viremia also occurs with FECV
infection, healthy cats may also test positive using this
assay.
Histopathology and Immunostaining
Relatively distinctive inflammatory infiltrates associated
with FIP are characterized by variable degrees of severity
and contain a combination of macrophages, lymphocytes, and plasma cells, mixed with lesser numbers of
neutrophils. The hallmark of the histopathologic lesions
is a granulomatous to pyogranulomatous reaction with
vascular orientation and vasculitis. Detection of intracellular FCoV antigen in macrophages in effusions by
immunofluorescence, or in tissue by immunohistochemistry, can confirm the diagnosis, and is considered the
gold standard if properly performed. Immunostaining
may be falsely negative if virus is not present in a given
sample or if antibodies do not cross‐react with a particular strain.

­Therapy
Supportive care and reducing stress are important.
Specific treatment has been primarily focused on reducing the inflammatory and hyperimmune response to the
virus. Unfortunately, increased survival has not been
proven with any of these interventions. Of the immunosuppressants, prednisolone at immunosuppressive doses
is currently the most consistently recommended.
Although prednisolone may induce remission in some
cats, treatment is not curative and may only slow the
progression of the disease. Other immunosuppressive
drugs such as chlorambucil have been used in combination with prednisolone but the risk:benefit ratio and efficacy are unknown. Feline interferon‐omega treatment is
an immunomodulatory therapy that may be considered
to treat FIPV‐infected cats, though studies show differences in efficacy. Similarly, a recent study showed that
the immunostimulant polyprenyl extended the life of

three cats with mild dry FIP, with two cats still alive after
two years of the diagnosis. However, follow‐up studies
suggested no benefit in cats with more severe forms of
the disease and its use is not recommended by some
authors.
Recent studies by Pedersen et al. have focused on antiviral therapy. Initially, the investigators performed a
study using a 3C protease inhibitor (GC376) which
showed some success in treating cats with FIP. Although
19 of 20 cats recovered, disease relapse occurred and 18
months after infection only six cats remained disease
free. In another study, a small molecule nucleoside
analog, GS441524, was used in 10 infected cats who
were successfully treated and healthy eight months after
treatment, with two cats requiring a second treatment
after initial relapse. This nucleoside analog works by acting as an alternative substrate for the viral RNA polymerase terminating replication. These studies are
promising developments for future clinical trials and
treatments.

­Prognosis
With the development of FIP, prognosis is poor to grave,
with a reported median survival time of 49 days.
Euthanasia should be considered especially when quality
of life is poor and there is no response to therapy within
a short period of time. However, newer research indicates that antiviral therapy might be successful in cats
with complete reversal of clinical signs (see earlier).

­Prevention
The formation of antibody enhances disease, so development of an effective vaccine is difficult. At the time of
writing, the available vaccine is not recommended by the
American Association of Feline Practitioners. Reducing
stress and overcrowding, cleaning litterboxes daily,
avoiding fecal–oral contact by keeping litterboxes away
from food and water dishes, and separating newly
acquired cats and cats suspected of being infected are
recommended husbandry practices.

­Public Health Implications
Feline coronaviruses are not thought to infect humans.

875

VetBooks.ir

876

Section 9 Infectious Disease

­Further Reading
Drechsler Y, Alcaraz A, Bossong FJ, Collisson EW, Diniz
PPVP. Feline coronavirus in multicat environments. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2011; 41(6): 1133–69.
Murphy BG, Perron M, Murakami E, et al. The nucleoside
analog GS‐441524 strongly inhibits feline infectious
peritonitis (FIP) virus in tissue culture and experimental
cat infection studies. Vet Microbiol 2018; 219: 226–33.
Pederson NC. An update on feline infectious peritonitis:
virology and immunopathogenesis. Vet J 2014; 201: 123–32.

Pederson NC. An update on feline infectious
peritonitis: diagnostics and therapeutics. Vet J 2014;
201: 133–41.
Pedersen NC, Kim Y, Liu H, et al. Efficacy of a 3C‐like
protease inhibitor in treating various forms of acquired
feline infectious peritonitis. J Feline Med Surg 2017; 20:
378–92.

VetBooks.ir

877

87
Feline Leukemia Virus
David S. Bruyette, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)
Anivive Lifesciences, Long Beach, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Like all retroviruses, feline leukemia virus (FeLV) is an
enveloped RNA virus. It carries an enzyme (reverse transcriptase) that transcribes the viral RNA genome into
DNA (the FeLV provirus), which is then integrated into
the host’s cell genome. Exogenous FeLV isolates are
grouped into four major subcategories: FeLV‐A, ‐B, ‐C,
and ‐T. The dominant FeLV‐A subgroup is horizontally
transmitted and is found in all FeLV‐infected cats; it is
the most infectious but low in pathogenicity. FeLV‐B and
particularly FeLV‐C are less prevalent. They arise within
the individual cat after FeLV‐A infection: FeLV‐B develops via recombination of FeLV‐A with endogenous
FeLV‐related sequences and FeLV‐C and FeLV‐T evolve
from FeLV‐A via mutations or insertions in the surface
glycoprotein gene.
Feline leukemia virus is shed in large quantities via
saliva, but it can also be found in feces, urine, and milk.
FeLV is unstable in the environment and transmission is
thought to require intimate friendly (or aggressive) contact between infected and uninfected cats. Contact with
infectious saliva or, less probable, infectious feces may
also be sufficient to transmit the infection (sharing of
food bowls or litterboxes). In addition, FeLV can be
transmitted vertically from the queen to her kittens.
Feline leukemia virus infection usually starts at the
mucosa of the oropharynx. Subsequently, viral replication takes place in the adjacent tonsils and local lymph
nodes. The virus is spread in the lymphoid tissues
throughout the body via lymphocytes and monocytes.
Replication in the bone marrow and infection of neutrophil and platelet precursors favor the initiation of secondary viremia and systemic infection. Cats that undergo
bone marrow infection usually develop progressive
infection. In cats that do not undergo bone marrow
infection, only lymphocytes are provirus positive and

usually no viral RNA is detectable in peripheral blood
cells. In addition, some cats seem to abort infection prior
to provirus integration and an antibody response may be
the only sign of previous FeLV exposure.
After FeLV exposure, some, mostly young, cats develop
progressive FeLV infection, characterized by persistent
antigenemia/viremia. Cats with progressive infection
shed high copy numbers of FeLV and pose an infection
risk to other cats. Progressive infection is usually confirmed by repeated testing for antigenemia of the cat several weeks or a few months apart; only repeated positive
antigen testing verifies the presence of a progressive
infection, which is linked to a poorer prognosis than
regressive FeLV infection. Cats with progressive FeLV
infection are at high risk to die within a few months to
years with FeLV‐associated diseases (see Prognosis).
If a cat tests positive for FeLV p27 antigen, but upon
later retesting becomes FeLV antigen negative, it has
developed a regressive FeLV infection. Cats with regressive infection have mounted an effective immune
response and recovered from FeLV viremia. Fortunately,
most adult cats are found to develop regressive infections.
Cats with regressive infection usually do not develop
FeLV‐associated disease. Clearance of antigenemia is
observed mostly within a few (2–8) weeks, but in rare
cases it can also occur after many months although the
chance for recovery decreases with increasing time.
Following recovery from antigenemia (regressive infection), latent infection can be identified for a few months
to years by culturing bone marrow cells in the presence of
corticosteroids. Provirus polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) from peripheral blood or bone marrow is positive
in these cats and viral plasma RNA detected by reverse
transcriptase (RT)‐PCR may be positive. Infection may be
reactivated in latently FeLV‐infected cats. The potential
for reactivation seems to be associated with the FeLV isolate and generally decreases with increasing timespan.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

878

Section 9 Infectious Disease

­Epidemiology
The prevalence of FeLV infection documented in cross‐
sectional surveys in North America has been declining
throughout the past three decades and is attributed to
testing and vaccination efforts. In the United States, 3.1%
of cats in a large, nationwide dataset tested positive for
FeLV in 2010, with increased risk among outdoor cats,
unneutered males, and cats with other disease conditions (particularly respiratory disease, oral disease, and
abscessation). Prevalence was highest in the midwestern
and western regions of the United States and lowest in
the northeast. Seroprevalence surveys of varying statistical power have found rates of positive test results to
range from 3.6% in Germany and Canada to 4.6% in
Egypt and 24.5% in Thailand.
In a national (United States) study, FeLV infection was
diagnosed in 9% of cats undergoing treatment for bite
wounds, approximately three times the rate for cats in
general. FeLV is considered to be an age‐dependent disease; young kittens are at higher risk of progressive infection and more rapid disease progression, whereas adults
display some degree of age resistance. However, transmission can occur at any age, and factors affecting clinical course of disease are complex and incompletely
understood.

­Signalment
The susceptibility of domestic cats for FeLV infection
varies and is mainly age dependent. Kittens are more
prone to develop progressive FeLV infection than adult
cats.

­History and Clinical Signs
Feline leukemia virus‐related disorders are numerous
and include anemia, neoplasia, immunosuppression,
immune‐mediated diseases, reproductive problems,
enteritis, neurologic dysfunction, and stomatitis. Some
FeLV‐B‐infected cats develop lymphoid malignancies,
while FeLV‐C infection is associated with the development of aplastic anemia. FeLV‐T is a T cell tropic cytopathic virus that causes lymphoid depletion and
immunodeficiency in infected cats.
The anemia caused by FeLV is typically nonregenerative and normochromic. Less commonly, macrocytosis
or regenerative hemolytic anemia is seen in 10% of
FeLV‐induced anemia cases. The cause of nonregenerative anemia is usually bone marrow suppression due to
viral infection of the hematopoietic stem cells and the

­supporting stromal cells. Platelet dysfunction, thrombocytopenia, and neutropenia are all possible sequelae.
Lymphoma is the most frequently diagnosed malignancy of cats. Tumors such as lymphoma and lymphoid
leukemia develop in as many as 30% of cats with progressive FeLV infections. Regressive infections are also
implicated in the occurrence of these tumors in the
absence of viremia, but cats with progressive infections
may face an increased risk of lymphoma development as
high as 60‐fold. Most American cats with mediastinal,
multicentric, or spinal forms of lymphoma are FeLV positive. However, these forms of lymphoma are becoming
less common as the prevalence of FeLV decreases.
Diffuse gastrointestinal (GI) lymphoma (small cell; T cell
origin) is now more likely to be found in FeLV‐negative
cats of middle or older age and can be difficult to differentiate from inflammatory bowel disease. Fibrosarcomas
and quasi‐neoplastic disorders such as multiple cartilaginous exostoses (osteochondromatosis) can be associated with FeLV.
Leukemia is characterized by the neoplastic proliferation of hematopoietic cells originating in the bone marrow, including neutrophils, basophils, eosinophils,
monocytes, lymphocytes, megakaryocytes, and erythrocytes. Feline leukemias are strongly associated with FeLV
infection and typically involve neoplastic cells circulating in the blood. Lymphoid leukemias are further classified as acute and chronic. Acute lymphocytic leukemia is
characterized by lymphoblasts circulating in the blood,
whereas chronic lymphocytic leukemias have an
increased number of circulating lymphocytes with
mature morphology.
The immunosuppression caused by FeLV creates
increased susceptibility to bacterial, fungal, protozoal,
and viral infections. Numbers of neutrophils and lymphocytes in the peripheral blood of affected cats may be
reduced, and those cells that are present may be dysfunctional. Many FeLV‐positive cats have low concentrations
of complement which may contribute to FeLV‐associated immunodeficiency and oncogenicity, as complement is vital for antibody‐mediated tumor cell lysis.
Immune complexes formed in the presence of moderate antigen excess can cause systemic vasculitis, glomerulonephritis, polyarthritis, and a variety of other immune
disorders. In FeLV‐infected cats, immune complexes
form under conditions in which FeLV antigens are abundant and anti‐FeLV IgG antibodies are sparse, a situation
ideal for the development of immune‐mediated disease.
Reproductive problems are commonly associated with
FeLV infection. Fetal death, resorption, and placental
involution may occur in the middle trimester of pregnancy, presumably as a result of in utero infection of
fetuses by virus transported across the placenta in maternal leukocytes. Abortion typically occurs in late g­ estation.

VetBooks.ir

87 Feline Leukemia Virus

Transmission during birth and nursing constitutes the
greatest risk of producing live, viremic kittens. There is
some evidence that regressively infected queens may
pass virus on to their kittens either in utero or in milk.
Neonatal kittens are at risk of rapidly progressive infection with clinical manifestations of hypothermia, dehydration, failure to nurse, and early mortality, collectively
termed “fading kitten syndrome.” It is likely that transmission from infected queens to their kittens is the single
greatest source of FeLV infections.
Although neurologic disorders associated with FeLV
are most often caused by compression of the brain and
spinal cord by lymphoma tumor tissue, a mechanism for
neuropathology is also suspected to result in peripheral
neuropathies, urinary incontinence, and ocular pathology, including anisocoria, mydriasis, Horner syndrome,
and central blindness even in the absence of visible compressive lesions on diagnostic imaging. If antineoplastic
therapy is planned, it is important to distinguish neoplasia from neuropathy.
Stomatitis is more classically associated with feline
immunodeficiency virus (FIV) infection, but FeLV infection can also predispose cats to chronic ulcerative proliferative gingivostomatitis. Clinical sequelae include pain,
anorexia, and tooth loss. An immune‐mediated mechanism is likely, particularly in combination with co‐infections such as feline calicivirus.

­Diagnosis
The outcome of a FeLV infection can be characterized
using the results from virus isolation, immunofluorescence assays, detection of FeLV p27 capsid antigen in
serum or plasma, and detection of FeLV provirus or
viral RNA in the blood or some tissues by molecular
assays. Serologic assays for the detection of FeLV‐specific antibodies are currently not routinely used.
Antigenemia (presence of p27 capsid antigen) is a
marker of infection and in most, but not all cats, a
parameter for viremia (presence of replication‐competent virus). Detection of viremia by virus isolation is
not widely available, laborious, and time consuming. In
contrast, antigenemia can be easily detected using
enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in a specialized laboratory or by rapid point‐of‐care tests.
Most cats will test antigen positive within 3–6 weeks
after FeLV exposure. The detection of FeLV provirus in
the peripheral blood or certain tissues like bone marrow using RT‐PCR is more sensitive than the detection
of antigenemia or viremia to demonstrate previous
FeLV exposure. Thus, a certain proportion of pet cats
can be found to be PCR positive but antigen negative.
In an early study in Switzerland, 10% of pet cats were

found to be FeLV provirus positive and FeLV ­antigen
negative. Provirus PCR testing is positive sooner (1–2
weeks) after FeLV exposure than antigen detection in
blood.
Some specialized laboratories offer RT‐PCR for the
detection of viral RNA. The detection of viral RNA in the
saliva correlates well with the detection of antigen in
the blood of infected cats. However, FeLV viral RNA in
saliva and blood of experimentally infected cats was
found as early as one week after FeLV exposure, at least
two weeks before antigen detection in the blood.
Testing Cats for FeLV Infection
Test sick cats for the presence of FeLV antigenemia/
viremia (using antigen tests, virus isolation, RT‐PCR
from saliva).
–– Any cat that tests FeLV positive: retest the cat after
1–2 months to determine whether progressive or
regressive infection prevails. Quarantine the cat during this period since the cat is a FeLV infection source
for other cats. This procedure may be repeated if circumstances permit and/or the testing interval may
be discussed with the cat owner.
●● Test healthy cats for the presence of FeLV antigenemia/viremia (using antigen tests, virus isolation,
RT‐PCR from saliva).
–– Prior to the first FeLV vaccination, testing is recommended for every cat; prior to the second vaccination (booster of basic immunization), testing is
recommended if the cat may have been exposed to
FeLV in the last 4–8 weeks.
–– If the cat is at high risk for FeLV (outdoor access,
multicat environment, any husbandry with changing cats, etc.).
–– If the cat has moved to a new environment (new
home, shelter, cattery, etc.): if the cat tests negative,
quarantine (keep from other cats and any potential
FeLV exposure) and retest after 4–6 weeks for
absence of FeLV antigen prior to introduction into
the new environment.
–– Any cat that tests FeLV positive: retest the cat after
1–2 months to determine whether progressive or
regressive infection prevails. Quarantine the cat during this period since the cat is a FeLV infection source
for other cats. This procedure may be repeated if circumstances permit and/or the testing interval may
be discussed with the cat owner.
●● Test healthy cats for the presence of FeLV provirus in
the blood (PCR). Confirmatory of positive or questionable antigen tests; true antigen‐positive samples
are highly provirus positive.
–– Early infection: provirus PCR from blood tests
­earlier positive than antigen tests.
●●

879

VetBooks.ir

880

Section 9 Infectious Disease

–– If prior exposure to FeLV needs to be known:
­analysis of the FeLV situation in a cat colony with
FeLV problems.
–– If the cat is used as blood or organ donor: FeLV can
be transmitted by transfusion of FeLV provirus‐positive blood. Antigen testing is not sufficient.
●● Test sick cats for the presence of FeLV provirus in the
blood (PCR). Confirmatory of positive or questionable
antigen tests; true antigen‐positive samples are highly
provirus positive.
–– Early infection: provirus PCR from blood tests
­earlier positive than antigen tests.
–– If prior exposure to FeLV needs to be known:
analysis of obscure clinical cases, analysis of the
FeLV situation in a cat colony with FeLV problems, etc.
●● Test any cat for the presence of FeLV viral RNA in the
blood (RT‐PCR). Early infection: RT‐PCR tests earlier
positive than provirus PCR and antigen tests. Not frequently used.
Kittens can be tested any time for antigenemia – maternal antibodies do not interfere with the p27 testing. A
confirmed positive result is conclusive, while a negative
result is not always; in some cases the kittens became
positive only after weeks to months. Each kitten should
be tested individually.

­Treatment
Unfortunately, no curative treatment currently exists to
cure retroviral infection. In vitro studies have yielded
promising results suggesting virus‐suppressing activity
of human FDA‐approved drugs used to treat HIV and
other myelodysplastic syndromes against FeLV virus
(e.g., raltegravir, tenofovir, gemcitabine, decitabine).
Further research is needed to demonstrate efficacy and
safety in vivo and in field trials, as well as to address
affordability of these drugs for most cat owners. Feline
interferon‐omega and human interferon‐alpha have
been associated with improved survival, but concerns
surrounding availability, cost, and absence of strong
evidence in controlled field studies have limited their
widespread integration into standard treatment protocols for FeLV.
Anecdotal reports of various antiviral and immunotherapeutic agents to reverse viremia, improve clinical
signs, and prolong survival are abundant. Controlled
studies using naturally infected cats have either not been
performed or have not confirmed anecdotal observations. Treatment efficacy must be demonstrated in
­controlled clinical trials, because spontaneous reversion
to seronegative status or prolonged survival is not

uncommon, even in the absence of medical treatment.
Some FeLV‐positive cats can live without major disease
complications for years with routine prophylactic care,
good husbandry, minimal stress, and avoidance of secondary infections. Infected cats should be kept strictly
indoors to reduce the risk of exposure to infectious
agents and prevent transmission of the virus to other
cats. Physical examinations focusing on external parasites, skin infections, dental disease, lymph node size,
and body weight should be performed semiannually,
along with a routine program for parasite control and
annual fecal, complete blood count, chemistry panel, and
urinalysis testing. All infected cats should be neutered.
Owners should be advised to watch for signs of FeLV‐
related disease, particularly secondary infections.
Although FeLV‐positive cats often respond well to
treatment for secondary infections, therapy for such
infections or other illnesses should be early and aggressive because of immunocompromise. Because FeLV is
historically associated with rapid and grave disease, the
modern prognosis varies considerably depending on
husbandry, veterinary care, and individual immune system variation.

­Prognosis
Large‐scale studies have demonstrated an average survival of 2.4 years after diagnosis among positive cats
(versus six years after testing for negative control cats),
with 50% mortality in two years and 80% mortality by
three years after diagnosis. Progression of disease is
much more rapid in kittens, whereas some adult cats
remain healthy for many years and may succumb to conditions unrelated to their retroviral status.

­Prevention and Control
Feline leukemia virus is unstable in the environment and
is susceptible to all common detergents and disinfectants. In a hospital or boarding setting, infected cats may
be kept in the general population as long as they are
housed in separate cages. Medical and surgical equipment contaminated with body fluids, even when dried,
can be fomites for infection. Thorough cleaning and
sterilization of equipment, strict attention to washing
contaminated hands, and avoiding reuse and sharing of
single‐use and consumable supplies between patients are
critical practices to prevent iatrogenic transmission.
Feline leukemia virus vaccines are noncore and are
intended to protect cats against FeLV infection or reduce
the likelihood of persistent viremia. Types of vaccines
include killed whole virus, subunit, and genetically

VetBooks.ir

87 Feline Leukemia Virus

­engineered. Vaccines are indicated only for uninfected
cats, because there is no benefit in vaccinating an FeLV‐
positive cat. Vaccination is the most effective way to prevent FeLV‐associated disease. Currently, FeLV vaccines
are very safe and have up to 98% efficacy. The American
Association of Feline Practitioners (AAFP) Feline
Retrovirus Management Guidelines include the recommendation that all kittens should receive the two‐dose
FeLV vaccination as a component of the routine initial
vaccination series and should also receive a booster vaccination one year later. This is prudent, because rehoming and lifestyle changes such as outdoor access frequently
occur as cats mature. Annual revaccination after maturity would depend on the cat’s risk of FeLV exposure. The
adult cat’s risk of exposure to FeLV‐positive cats should
be assessed, and vaccines used only for those cats at risk.
FeLV vaccines have been associated with development of
sarcomas at the vaccination site, although the risk of
tumor development is very low. Uninfected cats in a
household with infected cats should be vaccinated; however, vaccination is not universally protective, and other
means of reducing transmission to uninfected cats, such
as physical separation, should also be used.

While testing of cats in an animal shelter environment
is considered optional for individual housing, FeLV
­status should be determined before placement in group
housing and is recommended at the time of adoption or
foster home placement. Because tests are not 100% accurate, shelter cats placed in group housing should be vaccinated against FeLV, especially in long‐term conditions
such as sanctuaries. Because of the equivalent prevalence
of FeLV among feral and free‐roaming pet cats and the
role of neutering in decreasing the spread of infection,
expending resources on FeLV testing is not considered a
mandatory component of community trap‐neuter‐
return programs.

­Public Health Implications
Some strains of FeLV can be experimentally grown in
human tissue cultures, leading to concerns of potential
for transmission to people. Studies addressing this concern have shown no evidence that any zoonotic risk
exists, and there are no known cases of zoonotic
transmission.

­Further Reading
Hartmann K. Clinical aspects of feline retroviruses: a
review. Viruses 2012; 4(11): 2684–710.
Levy J, Crawford C, Hartmann K. American Association of
Feline Practitioners feline retrovirus management
guidelines. J Feline Med Surg 2008; 10: 300–16.
Levy JK, Crawford PC, Tucker SJ. Performance of 4
point‐of‐care screening tests for feline leukemia virus
and feline immunodeficiency virus. J Vet Intern Med
2017; 31: 521–6.

Nesina S, Helfer‐Hungerbuehler K, Riond A, et al.
Retroviral DNA – the silent winner: blood transfusion
containing latent feline leukemia provirus causes
infection and disease in naïve recipient cats.
Retrovirology 2015; 12(1): 105.
Westman ME, Malik R, Hall E, et al. Comparison of three
feline leukaemia virus (FeLV) point‐of‐care antigen test
kits using blood and saliva. Comp Immunol Microbiol
Infect Dis 2017; 50: 88–96.

881

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

883

88
Feline Immunodeficiency Virus
Tom Phillips, DVM, MS, PhD, †
College of Veterinary Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA, USA, Deceased

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) is a member of the
Lentivirus genus in the Retroviridae virus family. As
such, it is an enveloped virus, has an icosahedral capsid,
and a genome composed of two (nearly identical) linear,
positive sense, single‐stranded RNA molecules.
Much has been learned about FIV since it was first
described in 1987, particularly in regard to its applica­
tion as a model to study the closely related lentivirus
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). In particular,
FIV and HIV share remarkable structure and sequence
organization, utilize parallel modes of receptor‐medi­
ated entry, and result in a similar spectrum of immuno­
deficiency‐related diseases due to analogous modes of
immune dysfunction.
The disease course for FIV is variable, likely dependent
upon the route of infection, strain of virus, age of the ani­
mal at time of infection, and the robustness of the
immune response generated to the virus. Transmission
is primarily through the bite of an infected cat, though
sexual transmission has been shown to occur in experi­
mentally infected cats. Infection by blood transfusion
may also potentially occur. Initially, FIV is transported by
tissue macrophages to lymphoid tissues, where it repli­
cates in lymph nodes, thymus, spleen, bone marrow,
brain, lung, gastrointestinal tract, and kidney. FIV gains
entrance into the cell primarily through receptor media­
tion. The main cellular receptors for FIV are the
chemokine receptor, CXCR4, and CD134, a receptor
expressed by T lymphocytes and activated macrophages.
Other mechanisms of virus entry may also be important,
such as the use of other receptors and antibody‐medi­
ated entry through FC receptors.
Experimentally, virus is detected in the blood of animals
usually by two weeks post infection, and remains easily

detectable for up to six weeks post infection. Generally,
FIV induces a strong but only partially ­effective immune
response. However, there are reports of detectable levels
of FIV DNA in cats without a detectable antibody
response. Generally, antibodies to FIV are detected by two
weeks post infection, and most cats develop antibody by
60 days post infection, although it may be delayed further
in some cats. Over the next few weeks after antibody
development, the virus levels in the blood are gradually
reduced to undetectable quantities and become clinically
latent. However, the virus is not truly latent, as it contin­
ues to replicate at low levels. During this clinical latent
phase, the virus infection gradually is eroding normal
immune function of the infected cat. FIV causes the
T helper cell numbers to decrease with an inversion of the
CD4:CD8 ratio. The effect of FIV on feline lymphocyte
numbers is likely due to several mechanisms operating
simultaneously: virus‐induced lysis of infected cells, virus
suppression of the ability of bone marrow and other lym­
phoid tissues to produce new lymphocytes, immune‐
mediated lysis of infected cells, and apoptosis. The ability
of lymphocytes from FIV‐infected cats to proliferate in
response to both B and T cell mitogens is impaired, as is
the expression of lymphocyte cell surface receptors that
are important in control and proliferation of the immune
response, such as cytokine receptors and MHC class II
antigens.
The pathophysiology of FIV neurologic dysfunction is
not completely understood as it occurs in the apparent
absence of virus replication in neurons, with minimal
inflammatory lesions in infected cat brains, and only low
levels of replication in astrocyte and microglia cells.
Infected astrocytes have impaired glutamate uptake
function, which may lead to an increased susceptibility
of glutamate toxicity, oxidative stress, and ultimately
neuron loss. Additionally, FIV envelope protein is toxic

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

884

Section 9 Infectious Disease

to rat neurons in culture and may play a role in neuro­
logic disease pathogenesis. The neurologic disease is
more prevalent with certain isolates of the virus, which
may point to certain envelope protein sequences being
more toxic and/or relate to the ability of virus to replicate
in the feline nervous system.

­Epidemiology
Feline immunodeficiency virus infection is common
around the world. The incidence of FIV varies (from 4%
to 47%) geographically, correlating with the percentage
of free‐roaming and feral cats in the population.

­Signalment
Although it is possible for any cat to be infected with FIV,
free‐roaming, nonpure‐bred, sexually intact, mature,
male cats are more likely to contract an FIV infection.
This is largely due to cat bites being the primary mode of
virus transmission.

­History and Clinical Signs
Acute clinical signs of the infection are generally mild
and often consist of the nonspecific signs of lethargy,
anorexia, pyrexia, diarrhea, and lymphadenopathy.
Generally, these clinical signs coincide with the viremia.
Once the viremia subsides, the virus appears to go into
a clinical latent phase, with virus not detected in the
blood and the apparent absence of most clinical signs.
This clinical latent phase is of variable length but often
lasts for years, as the virus slowly suppresses the
immune system. The last phase of the infection is
feline acquired immune deficiency syndrome (FAIDS).
Clinical signs of FAIDS are the result of opportunistic
infections, various neoplasias, and/or neurologic dis­
ease. Thus, clinical signs are variable depending upon
how the immune suppression is manifested. Stomatitis
is very common and can occur during any phase of the
infection. Persistent diarrhea is also fairly common, as
is respiratory disease. Neoplasia is common in FAIDS,
with B cell lymphoma being the most frequent.
Neurologic signs such as behavioral changes, disrupted
sleep, impaired learning, paresis, and seizures have
been reported. A wasting condition has also been
described late in the FAIDS phase of the disease.
Increased circulating immune complexes can result in
immune complex disease manifested as uveitis and
glomerulonephritis. ­

­Diagnosis
Complete blood count (CBC) abnormalities may include
anemia, lymphopenia, and neutropenia. Thrombocy­
topenia may sometimes occur. Hyperglobulinemia is the
most common biochemical abnormality. Proteinuria
may be seen in cats with glomerulonephritis.
Antibodies to FIV infection persist for life and thus
patient‐side ELISA antibody testing is recommended as
a screen for FIV infection. However, false‐positive and ‐
negative results may occur. If a kitten under 6 months of
age is antibody positive, it should be retested after 60
days, as maternal antibody could be the cause of the pos­
itive assay. If an animal is negative after a recent possible
exposure, it should be retested after 60 days, allowing
sufficient time for an active immune response to develop.
Tests used to detect antibody cannot distinguish between
infection and vaccination. Positive tests in healthy cats
should be confirmed using ELISA from another manu­
facturer, western blotting, or PCR. In cases where the
vaccination history is not known, real‐time quantitative
PCR should be considered, as this assay can detect a low‐
grade viremia, indicative of an active infection. However,
sensitivity and specificity of PCR are variable. PCR may
be negative due to low levels of viremia or mutations,
and false‐positive results have been reported in vacci­
nated cats.

­Management
The best therapy for FIV is prevention. Keeping cats
indoors and only allowing exposure to known FIV‐nega­
tive cats is the best way to prevent the infection. The vac­
cine for FIV is controversial, as efficacy is variable.
Additionally, using standard FIV screening assays, a vac­
cinated cat currently cannot be distinguished from an
infected cat. Since shelters may not perform a confirma­
tory assay on an animal that is found FIV positive by a
screening assay, it is advised to microchip the cat at the
time of vaccination with a chip whose data are linked to
vaccination status to assist shelter personnel in the inter­
pretation of a positive result.
The use of the routine feline vaccines in FIV‐positive
cats is controversial due to the suppressed immune system
of the FIV‐infected cat. Since it is best to keep infected cats
indoors to reduce the risk of FIV exposure to other cats,
the exposure of the infected cat to other common patho­
gens is also reduced, thereby decreasing the need for vac­
cination. Additionally, the duration of immunity to most of
the vaccinatable feline pathogens likely lasts for years. If
the cat has been vaccinated earlier in life, protective immu­
nity likely still remains. If, however, vaccines are to be used,

VetBooks.ir

88 Feline Immunodeficiency Virus

killed vaccines are preferred. Even if they are kept indoors,
housing cats in overcrowded conditions has been signifi­
cantly associated with disease progression in FIV‐positive
cats. Therefore, reducing stress and limiting exposure to
potential infectious agents are important husbandry prac­
tices that can decrease morbidity and mortality.
For cases of prolonged severe stomatitis, removal of all
the teeth is the treatment of choice. Zidovudine (AZT) at
a dose of 5–10 mg/kg PO or SC q12h has also been shown
to be effective in some cases of stomatitis. AZT is also
used, to some effect, in cases with neurologic signs of dis­
ease. AZT can cause bone marrow suppression. CBCs
should be monitored closely. AZT should not be used in
cats with myelosuppression. Alfaferone (natural human
alpha‐interferon) has been reported to increase the sur­
vival of FIV‐infected cats. Recombinant feline IFN‐omega
may improve clinical signs and reduce inflammatory
cytokine production but does not appear to affect viral
load. A recent publication demonstrated that an analog of
tenofovir, a widely prescribed anti‐HIV drug in human
medicine, may also be effective as a therapy for FIV, though
further investigation is needed. Griseofulvin treatment

of fungal disease should be avoided as bone marrow sup­
pression has been reported in FIV‐infected cats.

­Prognosis
Though the virus can never be cleared from an infected
cat, most infected cats have long life spans. While
many die from conditions that are unrelated to the
infection, many ultimately succumb to an FIV‐related
disease.

­Public Health Implications
Feline immunodeficiency virus infection of humans has
never been documented, even in veterinarians or indi­
viduals who have been bitten multiple times by FIV‐
infected cats. However, FIV has been shown to replicate
in human cells in vitro and cause disease in monkeys
experimentally infected with FIV‐infected autologous
cells. Thus, caution is still advised.

­Further Reading
de Oliveira Medeiros S, Abreu CM, Delvecchio R, et al.
Follow‐up on long‐term antiretroviral therapy for cats
infected with feline immunodeficiency virus. J Feline
Med Surg 2016; 18(4): 264–72.
Hartmann K, Wooding A, Bergmann M. Efficacy of
antiviral drugs against feline immunodeficiency virus.
Vet Sci 2015; 2(4): 456–76.
Levy J, Crawford C, Hartmann K, et al. American
Association of Feline Practitioners’ feline retrovirus

management guidelines. J Feline Med Surg 2008; 10(3):
300–16.
Miller C, Abdo Z, Ericsson A, et al. Applications of the
FIV model to study HIV pathogenesis. Viruses 2018;
10(4): ii.
Sahay B, Yamamoto JK. Lessons learned in developing a
commercial FIV vaccine: the immunity required for an
effective HIV‐1 vaccine. Viruses 2018; 10(5): ii.

885

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

887

89
Feline Viral Upper Respiratory Tract Disease
Yvonne Drechsler, PhD
College of Veterinary Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology

­Epidemiology

Feline viral infectious upper respiratory tract disease
is primarily caused by two viruses: feline herpesvirus
(FHV‐1) and feline calicivirus (FCV). Infection is common in multicat environments, and most cats have
been exposed. FHV‐1 is an enveloped single‐stranded
DNA virus belonging to the alpha‐herpesvirus family.
As such, the virus exists in a latent form in the trigeminal ganglia after initial infection and can be reactivated by stressors. This leads to shedding via secretions
from oral, nasal, and conjunctival membranes. Viral
replication is usually restricted to the upper respiratory tract, due to viral preference for lower temperatures. However, in young kittens and possibly
immunosuppressed cats, more severe systemic disease
can occur.
Feline calicivirus belongs to the Caliciviridae family,
and consists of a single‐stranded positive RNA genome.
This genome structure has a high mutation rate and
therefore the isolates are highly variable. Strains can vary
in their pathogenicity. Like FHV‐1, transmission occurs
via secretions from oral, nasal, and conjunctival membranes. FCV persists in tonsillar and other oropharyngeal tissues, leading to a carrier state, but the mechanism
of persistence is not well understood. In addition to
causing upper respiratory disease, FCV can be associated with lameness due to acute synovitis, possibly due
to antigen‐activated macrophages residing in the synovial membrane. Rarely, FCV can cause virulent systemic
disease (VSD). Lesions associated with VSD are severe
and include oral and dermal ulcerations, bronchointerstitial pneumonia, necrosis of the liver, spleen and pancreas, and death. The pathogenesis of VSD is not fully
understood.

Infection with both FHV‐1 and FCV is widespread in the
general cat population. The prevalence of infection and
clinical disease is higher in multicat households, colonies, catteries or shelters. Viral reactivation may occur in
latently infected cats when they are stressed or if their
immune system is compromised. FHV‐1 is short‐lived in
the environment, and transmission occurs mainly by
direct contact with an infected cat. However, transmission through fomites in crowded environments is also
important.
Cats infected with FCV may be carriers who shed virus
while appearing clinically healthy. Virus may be shed in
the urine and feces in addition to respiratory secretions.
FCV survives in the environment much longer than
FHV‐1 and is resistant to quaternary ammonium compounds. Therefore, in addition to direct and aerosol contact with respiratory secretions, fomites are a very
important means of transmission for FCV.

­Signalment
Cats of any sex and age can develop respiratory disease
caused by FHV‐1 or FCV, with kittens being more
susceptible.

­History and Clinical Signs
Cats from multicat households, colonies, catteries
or shelters are commonly infected. A history of stress
or immune suppression may be noted. FHV‐1 may
cause severe respiratory disease, especially in

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

888

Section 9 Infectious Disease

­immune‐­compromised animals. Nonspecific signs of
FHV‐1 infection may include depression, anorexia, and
pyrexia. Respiratory signs include sneezing and conjunctivitis associated with serous ocular and nasal discharge. Nasal turbinate destruction can lead to
recurrent rhinitis and sinusitis. Coughing and dyspnea
can develop in more severe cases. Ocular and nasal discharge that becomes mucoid or purulent may signal
secondary bacterial infection. In addition to conjunctivitis, keratitis and corneal ulcerations also occur with
FHV‐1 infection. Dendritic corneal ulcerations are
considered pathognomonic for infection with FHV‐1.
FHV‐1 might also play a role in other forms of ocular
disease. Skin ulceration and herpetic dermatitis may
also be caused by FHV‐1.
Feline calicivirus causes a range of clinical signs due to
strain variability. Similar to FHV‐1, upper respiratory
signs predominate. Sneezing and ocular discharge associated with conjunctivitis are common. In contrast to
FHV‐1 infection, corneal ulceration does not typically
occur with FCV infection. However, oral ulceration is
common, making FCV a top differential diagnosis for
oral ulcerations in cats. Stomatitis may be severe, and
lead to excessive ptyalism. Other signs of FCV infection
include depression, pyrexia, anorexia, enlarged lymph
nodes, and acute lameness. Infection with highly virulent strains of FCV causing VSD results in severe signs
such as high fever, cutaneous edema, jaundice, other
signs of multiorgan failure, and death.

­Diagnosis
History, clinical signs, and evidence of possible immunosuppression (due to retroviral infection, stress or
drug administration, for example) should increase the
index of suspicion for infection with one or both
viruses. For cats with signs of upper respiratory disease,
diagnosis is usually made based on clinical signs alone.
Specific laboratory tests documenting infection or
exposure may be used to help confirm infection, particularly in patients with more severe or atypical clinical signs, although each has limitations. Complete
blood count (CBC) and serum chemistry findings are
not specific in cats with upper respiratory disease
caused by FHV‐1 or FCV, although cats with stomatitis
caused by FCV may be hyperglobulinemic. Cats with
VSD may have anemia, thrombocytopenia, neutrophilia, and lymphopenia. Hypoalbuminemia, elevated
alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST), elevated bilirubin, and increased
creatine kinase (CK) also occur.
Direct testing for the presence of virus may include
culture, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), histopatho-

logic examination, and immunofluorescence staining.
False‐negative results may occur with any of these
assays as virus may not be present in specimens.
Laboratories should be contacted for appropriate sample acquisition and transport techniques for culture.
The sensitivity and specificity of PCR may vary depending on the laboratory and design of the test. It should
also be kept in mind that PCR may not detect all strains,
particularly for calicivirus, due to variability in nucleic
acid target sequences. Positive PCR results may occur
in healthy cats, so a positive result does not necessarily
mean that clinical signs may be attributed to infection.
In addition, vaccination with attenuated virus may
cause false‐positive PCR results. Serologic testing is
also available, but it is not easily interpreted as vaccination and previous exposure are common for both
viruses and the presence of antibody may not indicate
active infection.

­Therapy
In cases of acute respiratory disease, supportive care
including fluid therapy and/or nutritional support may
be indicated. Clinical signs resolve within 2–3 weeks.
Judicious administration of appropriate antibiotics is
indicated if evidence of secondary bacterial infection or
co‐infection with Chlamydia, Mycoplasma or Bordetella
is present. For more severe or recurrent disease, or if
keratoconjunctivitis or stomatitis is present, more
aggressive specific therapy may be indicated, including
antiviral or immunomodulating agents, and for stomatitis, dental extractions, antimicrobial treatment, and antiseptic mouthwashes.
Most antiviral therapies developed for human herpesviruses are too toxic for oral administration in cats,
although the use of famciclovir appears promising.
Topical use of idoxuridine, vidarabine, and other select
nucleoside analogs appears beneficial for treatment for
ocular disease. The therapeutic potential of feline interferon‐omega on FHV‐1 replication is under investigation. The use of oral L‐lysine to decrease clinical signs or
infection with FHV‐1 infection has shown conflicting
results.

­Prognosis
In general, cats will recover but both viruses persist, with
reactivation of FHV‐1 occurring due to stressors. FCV
carriers can shed virus continuously, increasing the likelihood of infecting other cats. FCV infection with strains
associated with VSD has been associated with greater
than 50% mortality.

VetBooks.ir

89 Feline Viral Upper Respiratory Tract Disease

­Prevention
Vaccination information and guidelines are available for
free online from the American Association of Feline
Practitioners (https://catvets.com/guidelines/practiceguidelines/feline-vaccination). Vaccination, stress reduction, avoiding overcrowding and implementing strict
disease prevention techniques in shelters and kennels are

important to prevent infection and associated clinical
signs (see Chapter 117).

­Public Health Significance
These viruses are not known to infect people.

­Further Reading
Dawson S, Bennett D, Carter SD, et al. Acute arthritis of
cats associated with feline calicivirus infection. Res Vet
Sci 1994; 56(2): 133–43.
Gould D. Feline herpesvirus‐1: ocular manifestations,
diagnosis and treatment options. J Feline Med Surg 2011;
13(5): 333–46.
Holland JL, Outerbridge CA, Affolter VK, Maggs DJ.
Detection of feline herpesvirus 1 DNA in skin biopsy

specimens from cats with or without dermatitis. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2006; 229(9): 1442–6.
Sykes JE. Feline respiratory viral infections. In: Canine and
Feline Infectious Diseases. St Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2014,
pp. 239–51.

889

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

891

90
Rabies in Dogs and Cats
Emily Beeler, DVM, MPH and Karen Ehnert, DVM, MPVM, DACVPM
Veterinary Public Health Program, Los Angeles County Department of Public Health, Los Angeles, CA, USA

­Etiology and Pathophysiology
The rabies virus is an enveloped, single‐stranded RNA
virus in the family Rhabdoviridae and the genus
Lyssavirus. There are 16 known lyssaviruses worldwide
capable of causing rabies‐like symptoms in mammals.
Bats are the reservoir for most of them. Rabies virus itself
is by far the most prevalent lyssavirus, and the only one
known to exist in the Americas. Rabies has the highest
mortality rate of all known infectious diseases.
Rabies is usually transmitted by the bite of a rabid animal. It may also be transmitted when virus‐laden saliva is
introduced into mucous membranes. Theoretically,
scratches may transmit the virus, if the claws are contaminated with fresh infectious saliva, but this mode of
spread is very rare in people. Because the virus may be
present in tissues throughout a rabid animal, exposure
may occur during necropsy. Rabies has occasionally
been spread by corneal and internal organ transplantation, transplacentally, through aerosolization in closed
spaces such as caves, and by ingestion of infected tissues.
Because it is readily destroyed by UV light, desiccation,
and most disinfectants, the rabies virus is not effectively
transmitted by fomites.
When the rabies virus first enters the body, it multiplies at a very low rate in a small amount of muscle cells
and fibrocytes, and curtails the local immune reaction by
inhibiting type I interferons. The majority of the incubation period, which can last for 3–12 weeks or more in
dogs and cats, likely passes with the virus localized at the
site of entry. The virus then enters the nervous system
through a peripheral motor nerve, and is drawn up the
axon at a rate of about 100 mm per day. Once the virus
reaches the neuronal cell body, it multiplies and disseminates rapidly, although unevenly, throughout the central
nervous system (CNS). Histologic analysis of brains
from rabies victims typically reveals little tissue damage.

When increased inflammation and damage do occur in
the CNS, they are usually found in patients in which paralytic clinical signs predominated. The total amount of
virus in the brain tends to be significantly higher in cases
of encephalitic, “furious” rabies than in cases of paralytic,
“dumb” rabies.
Some details of what happens at the molecular level of
rabies pathogenesis remain a mystery. The rabies virus
has an uncanny ability to evade early recognition and
clearance by the immune system, and to preserve the
health of cells of the nervous system throughout most of
the infection. In laboratory studies, rabies virus strains
that stimulate a significant immune response are less
pathogenic than those that suppress it.

­Epidemiology
Over 60 000 people die worldwide from rabies each year.
The vast majority of rabies victims are children who were
infected by bites from rabid dogs. Most cases occur in
countries where rabies vaccination rates for dogs are
below 50%, primarily in Asia and Africa.
The human death toll from rabies is much lower in
countries where animal control policies are well established and vaccination of pets is widespread. Over the
past two decades in the United States, an average of
three people per year died from rabies. Typically, the
cases occurred after a person failed to obtain timely
rabies postexposure prophylaxis, often due to lack of
awareness about the risk of rabies. About 70% of the
cases were caused by bat bites, and most others were
caused by a dog bite inflicted while the person was visiting another country.
The primary reservoirs for rabies are bats, domestic
dogs, raccoons, skunks, foxes, mongooses, and jackals.
In the past decade, 6000–7000 rabid animals per year

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

892

Section 9 Infectious Disease

were detected in the US. Over 90% were wild animals,
with raccoons, bats, and skunks constituting over 80% of
the total. Rabid foxes add another 5%. The island of
Puerto Rico has consistently reported about 30–40 rabid
mongooses each year.
Rabid cats (4% of rabid animals) have outnumbered
rabid dogs (1%) for many years, most likely because of
better vaccination coverage in dogs. In North America,
rabies cases are more frequent in spring and summer.
The number of rabid animals reported typically reflects
only those confirmed by laboratory testing; it is thought
that the number of undiagnosed rabies cases in wild animals is far higher.
There are multiple rabies virus substrains (aka variants), that are uniquely adapted to their reservoir hosts.
Rabies variants tend to be found in identifiable geographic
locations. This phenomenon is very useful for investigating the source of individual rabies cases. As an example, if
a stray dog in the US was found to be rabid, analysis of the
variant could reveal the source of the infection. Finding a
North American bat, skunk, or raccoon variant in the dog
would reveal that it caught the virus from indigenous
wildlife. Finding a Thai dog variant would suggest the dog
had recently been imported from Thailand, or had been
bitten by a rabid dog from Thailand.
In the Americas, insectivorous bat rabies variants are
widely distributed. Vampire bat variants are found in
certain areas in South America, Central America, and
southern Mexico. The canine rabies virus variant has
been eradicated from the US but is still present in parts
of Central and South America. So far, no feline variant
has been reported. The pathogenicity and virulence of
the variant, the behavior of the reservoir species (natural
behavior and behavior when rabid), and the degree of
overlap in habitat between the reservoir species and
other mammals all affect the risk of rabies transmission
to pets and people.
The risk of rabies exposure for domestic animals is
higher in areas where variants associated with terrestrial
animals (i.e., not just insectivorous bat variants) are prevalent. The risk is highest where the canine variant is
enzootic (example: India), and much lower in areas where
only insectivorous bat rabies variants are found (example:
southern California). Many islands in the world, such as
Hawaii, are considered completely rabies free.
The raccoon variant is found throughout the eastern
quarter of the US and in parts of eastern Canada.
Multiple variants of skunk rabies are found in large areas
in the center of North America, California, and parts of
Mexico. Fox variants have been found in Alaska, Arizona,
New Mexico, and Texas in the US, and in Ontario,
Canada. One variant found periodically in southern
Texas and northern Mexico appears to be adapted to
both dogs and coyotes.

Humans have spread rabies variants in the US by moving infected animals. Before the late 1970s, the raccoon
variant had been limited to the southeastern area of the
US. It was translocated to the mid‐Atlantic states by
people shipping raccoons from south to north for hunting purposes. The canine variant of rabies, which was
considered officially eliminated from the US in 2007,
could be reimported at any time from countries where
canine rabies is still enzootic. Rabid dogs have been
imported into the US many times but fortunately were
quickly detected, isolated, and euthanized. If imported
rabid dogs were released into populations of unvaccinated dogs, such as into a city with a significant stray
dog population, canine rabies could become reestablished in the US.
Mice, rats, and rabbits can be experimentally infected
with rabies, but rabies is very rare in them in nature.
Rabies has been detected in larger rodents in the US,
such as woodchucks, groundhogs, and beavers, usually
in areas where the raccoon variant is enzootic. It has also
been rarely seen in rabbits attacked by raccoons.
Opossums are partially resistant to experimental
rabies infection. So far, no marsupial has been found to
be a rabies reservoir. Nonetheless, opossums can
become infected. In California (where skunk and bat
rabies variants are enzootic), 11 rabid opossums were
detected between 1983 and 2012 (data from Dr Curtis
Fritz, California Department of Public Health). The
omnivorous nature of opossums would make it natural
for them to investigate a dying, rabid animal, and to
potentially be bitten.
Practitioners should have full understanding of the
rabies variants that are common in their area. However,
since rabies may be imported, a thorough travel history for
all patients should also be taken, with special focus on the
previous six months. The Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) maintains an online list of nations that
present a higher risk for importation of rabies in animals.

­Signalment
Any breed of dog or cat may present with rabies. Rabies
is highly unlikely in animals less than 4 weeks of age.

­History
Taking a thorough history is vital for clinical diagnosis.
The risk of rabies depends on the geographic area where
the pet lives or has spent time, especially in the previous
six months. Knowledge of the clinical course of illness
before presentation is also essential for diagnosis.

VetBooks.ir

90 Rabies in Dogs and Cats

A history that increases the likelihood of rabies may
include the following.
Travel. Pet imported within the last six months from a
country where canine rabies is enzootic (includes
many countries in Africa, Asia, and Central and South
America). Imported strays or street animals present
especially high risk. See the Public Health Implications
section below for more information.
●● Unvaccinated. No rabies vaccination in pet’s history.
Dogs and cats that were vaccinated only once or twice
against rabies may not be fully protected. Repeated
vaccination (>2 times) significantly reduces the risk of
rabies.
●● Exposure to wild animal or suspected rabid pet. History
of interaction with a wild animal (especially a known
rabid animal or rabies reservoir species) 10 days to six
months before presentation. Bite from the wild animal
will likely be healed by the time rabies signs begin.
Bites inflicted in thick fur or in the oral cavity, or bites
from bats, may have gone unrecognized.
●● Onset of clinical signs is gradual and steady. Once clinical signs begin, they worsen over days or hours.
Animals are unlikely to be rabid if they have a peracute
onset of neurologic signs, stabilization or improvement, or have survived through more than 10 days of
overt illness.
●●

­Clinical Signs
Rabies is rarely recognized on physical exam alone. The
initial clinical signs mimic other diseases and may not
seem neurologic. The most consistent finding is a steadily worsening clinical course over hours or days, with an
accumulation of signs that eventually reveal their neurologic origins. The pet will not respond to therapy, and
will usually die within 10 days. Close monitoring, with
the patient kept in isolation, is the most important premortem clinical tool.
The incubation length is highly variable. Most dogs
and cats develop clinical signs within six months after
exposure, but some may become ill in as few as 10 days.
The most common incubation period is 3–12 weeks.
In general, the clinical signs of rabies may be divided
into a prodromal phase, followed by a furious (excitatory or encephalitic) phase, then a dumb (paralytic)
phase, then death. However, the clinical course can
vary considerably. Phases may be absent or overlap.
The majority of cases are associated with a prominent
furious phase, followed by a short paralytic phase
before respiratory arrest and death. Approximately
20% of cases lack a furious phase (i.e., dumb or paralytic rabies).

Clinical signs in the prodromal phase are nonspecific. Dogs and cats may have fever, lethargy, dehydration, anorexia, vomiting or diarrhea. The animal may
withdraw and hide, or may appear to become more
sociable than usual. They may lick or chew at the site of
the original bite wound. Activation of the autonomic
nervous system may lead to piloerection, drooling, and
dilated pupils.
Furious (excitatory) phase clinical signs may include
the following.
Restlessness. When confined, animals may pace or
constantly readjust their body posture. When crouching, they may continuously shift the front paws.
Unconfined animals may walk or run for miles.
●● Hyperreactivity to sounds, movements, and touch.
●● Bizarre behavior. The animal may bite or strike at
unseen things, or stare at things in an unsettling manner. Dogs may lick their own urine or eat unusual
objects (pica), and may present with gastrointestinal
foreign bodies.
●● Vocalization. Dogs or cats may repeatedly howl, with a
noticeable change in voice because of alterations in
laryngeal function. Cats may make aggressive screeching sounds, especially in response to stimuli.
●● Aggression. Bites from rabid dogs usually occur without warning or behavioral cues (i.e., without snarling,
growling or posturing). Cats may combine striking and
biting. Confined rabid animals may repeatedly bite
and gnaw at cage doors and walls. Rabies has sometimes been associated with spectacular levels of
aggression, with the rabid animal repeatedly attacking
even while receiving grave injuries from the bite victim. Bites are often firmly inflicted, with the rabid animal latching onto the object or individual.
●● Grand mal seizures.
●● Fine muscle tremors, especially in cats.

●●

Dumb (paralytic) phase clinical signs may include the
following.
Persistent lethargy.
Cranial nerve deficits. Pharyngeal paresis may cause a
change in voice and dysphagia, leading to accumulation of saliva in the mouth and drooling. The animal
may repeatedly lap at water in unsuccessful attempts
to drink. Dogs often develop a dropped jaw and hanging tongue, and may gag and cough, causing them to
appear to be choking on an object.
●● Ataxia.
●● A stiff or hunched gait.
●● Paresis, usually beginning in the body part where the
original bite was inflicted. May be unilateral at first,
and the animal may present with an apparent limp.
Progresses as an ascending flaccid paralysis.
●●
●●

893

VetBooks.ir

894

Section 9 Infectious Disease

Rabid animals may exhibit a combination of excitatory
and paralytic signs, in which disorientation and anxiety
may be coupled with restlessness and weakness. Some animals die acutely. Most rabid animals eventually progress
to generalized paralysis, respiratory arrest, and death.

effective against rabies. Secure isolation and observation, or euthanasia, of the suspect rabid animal is the primary clinical intervention.

­Diagnosis

Grave – rabies is fatal.

There is no validated test available for diagnosing rabies in
a clinically ill, living animal. The direct fluorescent antibody (DFA) test is the gold standard for diagnosing rabies,
and is performed on brain tissue. This test is almost always
performed by a public health laboratory, and is the test
that must be used when human rabies exposure is possible. For most species, the DFA test requires submission of
the head or whole brain. When decapitation or debraining
is required, only trained, rabies‐vaccinated staff should
perform the procedure. Keep the specimen fresh and
refrigerated; fixation with formalin renders it untestable
by DFA. Freezing the sample will delay testing and complicate performance of the test. For bats, the entire body may
often be submitted. The laboratory should be contacted in
advance for requirements on specimen preparation, shipping, and submission.
Serology is not useful in the diagnosis of clinical rabies
in animals. Patients previously vaccinated against rabies
before the illness may have positive titers. Young, unvaccinated animals may have measurable maternal antibodies against rabies, clouding interpretation.
Fixed brain tissue may be examined for rabies through
immunohistochemistry (IHC) by certain laboratories.
Histopathology may reveal Negri bodies in rabies‐
infected neurons, but they are not consistently present.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing is used as an
antemortem test for rabies in people. The test is usually
performed on saliva and on skin from the back of the
neck of the human patient. The sensitivity of PCR testing
on tissue outside the CNS is too low to be used to make
decisions in managing a potential rabid animal, and is
not routinely used in animals because of the risk to public safety. PCR testing may be used to supplement DFA
testing on brain matter.
A direct, rapid immunohistochemical test (DRIT) is
used during surveys of rabies in wildlife.
There is no test available for evaluating healthy animals for exposure to rabies, primarily because the virus
usually remains localized and undetected by the immune
system during much of the incubation period.

­Therapy
If an animal is rabid, all clinical interventions will fail and
the animal will die. No antivirals have been shown to be

­Prognosis

­Prevention
A robust immune response is the only effective defense
against rabies. Standard rabies vaccination, when administered through proper protocols, affords protection
against all variants. Vaccine failure does occur, but is
very rare.
Numerous vaccines are licensed for use in the US.
Vaccines are either inactivated (killed) or recombinant,
in which a live canarypox virus expresses rabies proteins.
Most rabies vaccines are first administered at age 3
months, boostered a year later, and then every one or
three years thereafter. The vaccine label should be
reviewed carefully for the exact protocol required. Adult
dogs or cats being vaccinated for the first time should
have a booster a year later. An animal is considered
immunized about four weeks after its first rabies vaccination, or immediately after a booster.
Indoor‐only cats should be vaccinated against rabies.
Insectivorous bats, an important rabies reservoir in
North America, are sometimes found inside buildings.
In Los Angeles County (where the authors work), at least
one rabid bat is identified indoors every year.
The risk of injection‐site fibrosarcoma exists when
vaccinating cats. Recombinant vaccinations appear to be
associated with a lower risk than killed vaccines.
All states require rabies vaccination for dogs, and several require vaccination of cats. Individual cities or counties may require vaccination of cats even when their state
does not require it. Some states allow exemption from
rabies vaccination in cases where it may present a severe
risk to the health of the animal. The criteria for granting
exemption, and the protocol for obtaining one, vary by
state and locality. Note that rabies serologic testing is not
accepted in lieu of vaccination in most areas of the US.
Vaccination is not the only way to reduce the risk of
rabies exposure. Encourage clients to keep dogs leashed
when off property, and to keep cats indoors. Clients can
reduce the attractions for wildlife on their property by
keeping all pet food (and other consumables) and water
indoors, by bat‐proofing their home, and by keeping
crawl spaces and the underside of decks sealed off.
Clients who rescue stray, feral or wild animals, and
especially those who may participate in international
rescue efforts, may face a higher risk of rabies exposure.

VetBooks.ir

90 Rabies in Dogs and Cats

They should be given detailed information about rabies,
and be encouraged to budget for thorough veterinary
examination as part of the processing of each animal.
Rescue groups that import animals should be educated
about associated legal requirements (see later).

­Public Health Implications
Veterinarians routinely face rabies‐related circumstances
in which they are called upon to protect not only their
patient but also people and other animals. National
guidelines on rabies control are routinely published
by the National Association of State Public Health
Veterinarians (http://nasphv.org/documentsCompendia.
html). Local animal control and public health agencies
usually play the most prominent role in rabies control.
Contact your local agencies in advance for information
on rabies‐relating reporting, testing, and other protocols.
Ask for the phone number to call in case of an emergency.
Place the information in an easy‐to‐find location and
review it with clinic staff.
Four rabies‐related circumstances occur routinely in
small animal practice.
Dog or cat bit a person. Legally reportable. Rabid dogs
and cats can potentially shed rabies virus in their saliva
for a few days before clinical signs of rabies begin.
Quarantine and/or testing are typically required
regardless of the rabies vaccination status of the animal. The quarantine protocol may vary depending on
the severity of the bite and the requirements of the
jurisdiction. If the dog or cat remains healthy for
10 days or longer, the risk of rabies for the bite victim
is negligible. If the animal dies or is euthanized during
this 10‐day period, it should be tested for rabies.
The pet should not be vaccinated for rabies during this
10‐day quarantine.
●● Dog or cat vs wild mammal. Legally reportable in many
areas. (Note that certain wild mammal species may be
exempt – for example, in California, bites from wild
rabbits and small rodents are not reportable.) Bite
wounds from the wild animal exposure may or may
not be obvious. Pets found unattended near a wild
mammal may have wounds hidden in the fur or mouth.
Bite wounds from bats are especially hard to see, even
on human skin. Pets with unexplained bite wounds
may also have been exposed to a rabid animal. Ask the
pet owner about the location of the biting wild mammal. If it is deceased, its body should be retrieved for
testing – a negative rabies test on the wild mammal eliminates concerns about rabies. If the wild mammal is not available for testing, or tests positive for
the virus, the pet is ­considered exposed to rabies.
Regardless, the bite wound should be thoroughly
●●

cleaned to remove virus particles. The next steps
depend on the pet’s rabies vaccination status.
–– Pet’s rabies vaccination was current before incident. Revaccinate the pet immediately. The owner
should be advised that there is a risk of the pet
becoming rabid. The postexposure quarantine and
observation period in this case is usually 30–45
days, depending on the jurisdiction. The quarantine
may potentially be performed at the pet owner’s
home or may require a more secure setting, depending on the risk of rabies and local requirements.
–– Pet was not vaccinated at all before incident. Tell
the owner that there is an elevated risk of the pet
becoming rabid, presenting risk to them and their
family members. National guidelines call for the pet
to be euthanized to prevent it from becoming rabid.
Alternatively, the pet may be immediately vaccinated and then quarantined. In most states the
quarantine period is 4–6 months. Texas requires
only 90 days of quarantine, but also requires unvaccinated pets to be vaccinated three times while in
quarantine: the first week, then three and eight
weeks afterward. This three‐vaccine postexposure
“Texas Protocol” may provide some protection
against the development of rabies, and is sometimes
recommended in other localities.
–– Pet overdue for rabies vaccine at time of incident.
These cases are often managed similarly to unvaccinated pets with a rabies vaccination being given
immediately followed by a 4–6‐month quarantine
period (see earlier). However, the risk of rabies
transmission is lower, especially if the pet has a lifetime history of multiple rabies vaccinations, and
some jurisdictions may allow for a shorter quarantine of 45 days if there is proof of the earlier vaccination. If there is no proof of earlier vaccination,
national guidelines suggest a procedure called prospective serologic monitoring to determine if the
animal was likely vaccinated in the past. It involves
documenting a very rapid rise in rabies antibody
titers following boostering, by measuring antibody
levels in serum samples drawn just before the
booster and again 5–7 days later. This procedure
may or may not be accepted as proof of earlier vaccination, depending on the state and local law.
●● Dog or cat suspected of being rabid. Legally reportable.
Isolate the animal. Create a list of all people who may
have been bitten or exposed to the saliva of the animal,
and refer them to physicians for consultation. After the
animal dies or is euthanized, submit the head or brain
to your local rabies control agency following its protocols. Inform all the exposed individuals of the rabies
test result once available.
●● Pet imported from another country. Over the past decade, the globalization of the puppy trade and animal

895

VetBooks.ir

896

Section 9 Infectious Disease

rescue efforts has led to dramatic increases in animal
translocation. Rabid dogs have been imported into the
US several times. As a result of the increasing number
of imported dogs and an increase in noncompliance
with import regulations, dog import requirements in
the US were modified in 2014 to reduce the risk of
importing rabies.
CDC Requirements
As of 2019, a health certificate is not required to
import a dog or cat, but the imported pet must appear
healthy on arrival. Importers of dogs must provide
proof of rabies vaccination when the dog is imported
from countries designated as high‐risk for rabies
importation (see www.cdc.gov/importation/bringing‐
an‐animal‐into‐the‐united‐states/rabies‐vaccine.
html). The vaccination must have been given 28 days
or more before entry, when the dog was at least 3
months of age.
Unvaccinated dogs may only be imported if they
have lived in a country with a very low risk for rabies
exposure for the past six months or longer, are being
imported for research purposes, or on a rare case‐by‐
case basis. See www.cdc.gov/importation/bringing‐
an‐animal‐into‐the‐united‐states/index.html.
USDA Requirements
The US Department of Agriculture (USDA) requires
dogs and cats to be at least 8 weeks old when shipped
without their mothers. Dogs imported specifically for
resale or adoption (i.e., importation by international
dog rescue groups) must be healthy, at least 6 months
old and be accompanied by a health certificate, rabies
certificate, and proof of vaccination against distemper, leptospirosis, parvovirus, and parainfluenza
(DHLPP). See www.aphis.usda.gov/aphis/pet‐travel/
bring‐pet‐into‐the‐united‐states.
Federal, state, and local regulations regarding pet
importation may vary over time, and can include
additional requirements depending on the animal’s
country of origin. Veterinarians are recommended
to check the latest information on the websites for
both CDC and USDA‐APHIS as well as any additional requirements from US Customs and Border
Protection
(https://help.cbp.gov/app/answers/
detail/a_id/3695/kw/3695) and from the state
where the animal is arriving.
Unfortunately, many imported dogs and cats are not
physically inspected on arrival, so it is still possible
that sick animals, or those incubating rabies, will be
imported. Private practice veterinarians play a crucial
role in detecting imported cases of rabies, since they
may the first person to examine the pet after arrival. If
a clinician suspects an imported pet has rabies or any
other unusual disease, they should immediately contact their local authorities.

Bats and Public Health
Bats represent a special case when it comes to rabies.
Rabid insectivorous bats may transmit rabies via very
shallow bites, even bites that do not bleed. In fact, two
bat variants appear to have greater ability to infect
through shallow bites than the canine variant. Clinic
staff may hear about clients or staff who have handled
bats. They should urge such people to seek public health
or medical consultation. Bats found near pets, children
or sleeping people, or people with lowered levels of consciousness, may have bitten a person or pet, and rabies
testing of the bat should be prioritized. If the bat is not
tested, it should be assumed to have been rabid for
the sake of safety, and the exposed person needs to be
referred for medical care.
Oral Rabies Vaccination and Public Health
Clients and their pets may encounter oral rabies vaccines
(ORVs) that are intended for wildlife. ORVs distributed in
wildlife habitats in North America and Europe have been
very successful in controlling the spread of rabies in raccoons, coyotes, and foxes. Government agencies typically
work to alert the local population as to when and where
the baits are being distributed. These vaccines contain a
live, attenuated Vaccinia virus‐vectored rabies recombinant liquid vaccine in a packet surrounded by a flavored
bait. There is no live rabies virus in the vaccine. The
Vaccinia virus may cause illness in immunocompromised
people if the liquid vaccine comes into contact with
abraded skin or mucous membranes. Human exposure to
ORVs is rare. During 10 years of distribution of over 86
million ORVs in 18 states, only 296 incidents of human
exposure were reported, with six illnesses. Most people
were exposed when trying to remove the bait from their
dog’s mouth. Clients should be advised to keep their dogs
leashed when in areas that are part of an ORV baiting
program. If a client may have had direct contact with the
liquid vaccine inside the bait, they should wash their
hands, and collect the vaccine without touching it directly,
such as by wearing gloves or covering their hand with a
bag. There is a toll‐free phone number printed on the side
of the ORV bait that the person should call to report the
incident and seek medical consultation.
Rabies Preexposure Prophylaxis for Humans
The CDC recommends preexposure vaccination for all
people who routinely handle animals. Clinical staff, such
as veterinarians and veterinary technicians, should be
prevaccinated against rabies. The preexposure vaccine
series consists of three intramuscular human rabies vaccinations given on days 0, 7, and either 21 or 28. Antibody
titer levels should be checked every two years to insure

VetBooks.ir

90 Rabies in Dogs and Cats

that the body is still producing antibodies against the
virus. Preexposure vaccination alone is not considered
protective in the event of a rabies exposure.
Rabies Postexposure Prophylaxis
For people with a known, or suspected, exposure
to rabies, postexposure treatment is recommended.
In healthy, ­previously unvaccinated people, treatment

includes a dose of human anti‐rabies immune globulin
(HRIG) injected into the bite wound (with the excess
given intramuscularly) plus a series of four rabies vaccines over two weeks (on days 0, 3, 7, and 14). A fifth
vaccine dose may be needed for immunosuppressed
individuals on day 28. The HRIG should not be injected
in the same muscle as the rabies vaccine. Previously
vaccinated people only need a series of two vaccinations, on days 0 and 3, after an exposure.

­Further Reading
Ehnert K, Galland GG. Border health: who’s guarding the
gate? Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2009; 39(2):
359–72.
Greene CE. Rabies and other Lyssavirus infections. In:
Greene CE, ed. Infectious Diseases of the Dog and
Cat, 4th edn. St Louis, MO: WB Saunders, 2012,
pp. 179–97.
National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians.
Compendium of animal rabies prevention and control,

2016. www.nasphv.org/documentsCompendiaRabies.
html (accessed July 2, 2019).
Ugolini G, Hemachudha T. Rabies: changing prophylaxis
and new insights in pathophysiology. Curr Opin Infect
Dis 2018; 31: 93–101.
Wilson PJ, Oertli EH, Hunt PR, Sidwa TJ. Evaluation of a
postexposure rabies prophylaxis protocol for domestic
animals in Texas: 2000–2009. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010;
12: 1395–401.

897

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

899

91
West Nile Virus
Tracey McNamara, DVM, DACVP
College of Veterinary Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
West Nile virus (WNV) is a mosquito‐borne viral disease that causes disease primarily in birds, humans, and
horses. Sporadic disease has also been reported in a
number of other species including squirrels, chipmunks,
bats, dogs, cats, white‐tailed deer, reindeer, sheep,
alpacas, alligators, and harbor seals during periods of
intense local viral activity. WNV is a zoonotic mosquito‐
transmitted arbovirus belonging to the genus Flavivirus
in the family Flaviviridae. The virus can cause inapparent
infection, mild febrile illness, meningitis, encephalitis or
death. Dogs and cats are susceptible to WNV infection
and may become infected through the bite of a mosquito,
but they are significantly more resistant to disease than
horses, humans, and some species of birds. It is unlikely
that healthy dogs or cats will become ill. Limited information is available on WNV infections in dogs and cats
but experimental studies have shown that the virus targets the meninges, dorsal horn, brainstem, cerebellar
Purkinje cells, and cerebral cortex. In two naturally
occurring cases in a dog and a wolf cub, myocarditis was
also a finding.

­Epidemiology
Like other arboviruses, WNV is maintained in nature by
cycling through birds and mosquitoes. Migratory birds
are thought to be primarily responsible for virus dispersal. Serologic studies of dogs and cats have shown high
seroprevalence but little evidence of disease, suggesting
that dogs and cats suffer little to no ill effect. In a 2002
study in Louisiana, the incidence of seropositivity was 19
times higher in outdoor dogs than in indoor dogs.
Another study suggested that stray dogs and cats may

serve as better sentinels than chickens. There is a single
report of WNV being isolated from a sick dog in
Botswana in 1982 and in a 3‐month‐old wolf cub and
older dog with immune‐mediated disease. There are
three reports of naturally occurring WNV illness in cats,
including one cat in New Jersey in 1999 and two cats in
New York City in 2000. Experimentally infected dogs did
not develop clinical signs of illness or infectious levels of
viremia. Experimentally infected cats did develop brief
episodes of febrile illness, lethargy or decreased appetite
of short duration. Cats develop slightly higher levels of
virus in their bloodstream but it is unclear if it is sufficient to infect mosquitoes. Cats fed infected mice developed viremias similar to those caused by a mosquito bite,
suggesting that prey animals may serve as an important
source of infection for carnivores and that outdoor cats
are at greater risk of WNV infection. All dogs and cats
cleared WNV from the bloodstream within days and
mounted an antibody response. No evidence of prolonged or persistent infection was found. Neither dogs or
cats are likely to serve as an important amplifying host
epidemiologically.

­Signalment
Clinical signs of WNV infection are nonspecific and
diagnosis cannot be made on clinical presentation alone.
Based on a small number of naturally occurring cases,
dogs may present with lethargy, depression, ataxia, difficulty rising, weakness or paresis, muscle tremors or
twitching, abnormal head posture, fever, and nonlocalizable pain. Other differential diagnoses for these signs
would include bacterial meningitis, distemper, rabies,
fungal or rickettsial infections, and primary neurologic
disease. Cats develop nonspecific mild febrile illness.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

900

Section 9 Infectious Disease

­Diagnosis

­Public Health Implications

Diagnosis of WNV in the live patient requires paired
acute and convalescent serum samples for neutralizing
antibody. Due to the widespread seropositivity, single
serum samples are nondiagnostic. If a necropsy is performed (with appropriate biocontainment gear or facilities), the following tissues should be collected and
submitted chilled, not frozen, for WNV polymerase
chain reaction (PCR), immunohistochemistry and/or
virus isolation: heart, kidney, brain/brainstem, a section
of spinal cord.

As WNV is a biologic safety level (BSL) 3 pathogen, anyone performing a necropsy should wear protective
apparel and, if possible, work in a laminar flow hood. In
most cases, it would be preferable to send the body to a
diagnostic laboratory with appropriate facilities for testing. There is no documented evidence of dog‐ or cat‐to‐
person transmission of WNV. WNV has not been
detected in the saliva of dogs so dog bites would not
appear to be a risk factor for human infection. Neither
dogs or cats are considered epidemiologically important
amplifying hosts, although peak viremias in cats may be
high enough to infect mosquitoes at low efficiency.
Suspect cases should be reported to your state veterinarian, state diagnostic laboratory or reference laboratory. Positive cases should be promptly reported to your
local Department of Health. Clients may ask about
methods of mosquito protection in dogs and cats. It is
important to emphasize that DEET‐containing products
are not approved for use in pets and should not be used.
The same holds for citrus‐based oils that have been
found to cause contact dermatitis. Owners should be
advised to eliminate mosquito habitat and avoid outdoor
exposure of pets during peak mosquito feeding activity
(early morning and dusk).

­Therapy
There is no specific therapy for WNV infection.
Supportive care should be provided. An experimental
recombinant canarypox vectored WNV vaccine protected dogs and cats against mosquito challenge but is
not commercially available.

­Prognosis
Full recovery is likely.

­Further Reading
Austgen LE, Bowen RA, Bunning ML, Davis BS, Mitchell
CJ, Chang G‐JJ. Experimental infection of dogs and cats
with West Nile virus. Emerg Infect Dis 2004; 10(1):
82–88.
Karaca K, Bowen R, Austgen LE, et al. Recombinant
canarypox vectored West Nile virus (WNV) vaccine
protects dogs and cats against mosquito challenge.
Vaccine 2005; 23: 3808–13.
Kile JC, Panella NA, Komar N, et al. Serologic survey of
cats and dogs during an epidemic of West Nile virus

infection in humans. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005; 226(8):
1349–53.
Lichtensteiger CA, Heinz‐Taheny K, Osborne TS, Novak
RJ, Lewis BA, Firth ML. West Nile virus encephalitis and
myocarditis in wolf and dog. Emerg Infect Dis 2003;
9(10): 1303–6.
www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvbid/westnile/birds&mammals.htm
(accessed June 24, 2019).
www.oie.int/international‐standard‐setting/terrestrial‐
manual (accessed June 24, 2019).

VetBooks.ir

901

92
Ebola Virus
Linda Kidd, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
College of Veterinary Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology

­Epidemiology

Ebola virus is an enveloped, negative‐sense RNA virus
belonging to the genus Ebolavirus in the family Filoviridae.
Filoviruses cause severe lethal hemorrhagic disease in
people. The Ebola viral genome encodes a nucleoprotein
(NP), a glycoprotein (GP), an RNA polymerase (L), and
four structural proteins (VP 24, VP30, VP 35, and VP 40).
A soluble form of GP thought to be important in evading
humoral immunity is produced through receptor editing.
The primary target cells of Ebola virus are dendritic
cells (DC) and macrophages. Other cells, including
hepatocytes, endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and cells of
the adrenal gland, can be infected.
Ebola virus can both inhibit and evade innate and adaptive immunity. For example, the virus inhibits interferon
(IFN)‐alpha, IFN‐beta, and IFN‐gamma production.
Infection also inhibits DC expression of CD 40, CD 80/86,
and MHC II, co‐stimulatory molecules that are important
in the induction of adaptive immunity. Examples of evasion tactics include shielding of GP epitopes that may be
recognized by the immune system, and releasing soluble
GPs that act as “decoys” that bind protective antibodies.
Despite being able to avoid immune recognition,
infection is associated with massive production of proinflammatory cytokines. Thus, additional cells are
recruited and available for the virus to infect. The
­systemic effects of cytokines cause systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). Increased vascular permeability and endothelial cell activation associated with
infection are in part mediated by GP. Disordered hemostasis may arise from endothelial cell dysfunction and
damage. Tissue factor expression induced by virus or
cytokines appears to play a major role in activation of
coagulation and induction of disseminated intravascular
coagulation (DIC).

Ebola was first discovered in 1976 near the Ebola River in
what is now the Democratic Republic of Congo. Several
epidemics have occurred in Africa. The largest outbreak
began in 2014 and involved several West African countries. It was considered ended in 2016. Infection has been
reported in healthcare workers returning from Africa in
a few countries, including the United States, Spain, and
the United Kingdom. Further spread in these countries
has not occurred.
Handling of dead infected animals or consumption of
infected primates was thought to be the mechanism of
entry into the human population. Human‐to‐human
spread is the primary means of infection in people. Infection
occurs by exposure to bodily fluids through mucous
membranes or broken skin, or inoculation via needle sticks.
Importantly, fomites may also play a role in transmission.
The incubation period is thought to be 2–21 days.
Bats are believed to be the reservoir host in Africa but this
has not been confirmed. A summary of surveillance studies
of naturally infected species in outbreak areas detected
virus in nonhuman primates and bats and an ungulate.
Recovered human patients can still shed the virus in semen
and virus has been amplified from bodily fluids in patients
with uveitis and meningoencephalitis after recovery.
Antibodies have been detected in additional species,
including dogs; 27.2% of dogs had formed antibodies to
the virus in a survey of a 2001–2002 outbreak of Ebola in
people in Gabon. Dogs in the study were not ill. The dogs
were thought to be exposed to Ebola virus by eating carcases of dead infected wild animals (bush meat) and
vomit of infected people. No virus was amplified from
the blood samples. A recent in vitro study suggested that
both canine and feline cells are less susceptible to infection than primate and human cells.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

902

Section 9 Infectious Disease

At the time of this writing, whether Ebola can cause
viremia and be shed by or cause clinical signs in dogs and
cats is not known. As a precautionary measure, during
the 2014 Ebola outbreak, a healthy dog owned by an
infected Spanish nurse was euthanized by officials without testing. Global public outcry was significant given
that it had not been shown that dogs can be infected with
or shed the virus and that the risk was unknown. A call
for testing and not automatic euthanasia was made by
the World Small Animal Veterinary Association. Shortly
thereafter, a dog owned by an infected nurse in Texas
was quarantined and tested rather than euthanized.
Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT
PCR) testing of blood, urine, and feces was negative, and
the dog showed no evidence of illness during the 21‐day
quarantine.

­Clinical Signs
Ebola causes severe disease in humans and nonhuman
primates. Whether the virus causes clinical signs in dogs
and cats is not yet known. In people, flu‐like symptoms
occur, including fever, headache, and muscle pain.
Gastrointestinal signs also occur. Dramatic signs of
­disordered hemostasis such as maculopapular rash, petechiae, conjunctival hemorrhage, epistaxis, and hematemesis are common. Encephalopathy also occurs.

­Diagnosis
Diagnosis in people depends on the phase of infection.
Direct detection of the virus is attempted if clinical signs
have been present for a short period of time. Detection
techniques include virus isolation, antigen‐detecting

ELISA, immunohistochemistry, and RT PCR. RT PCR is
used in the emergent clinical setting. Detection of IgM
antibody or demonstration of seroconversion can facilitate diagnosis of acute infection.

­Therapy
Treatment of infection in people is primarily supportive.
Experimental therapies that appear to hold promise were
utilized in some cases in the 2014 outbreak. Vaccines are
in development.

­Prognosis
The mortality rate in people and nonhuman primates is
high. Prompt and adequate supportive care appears to be
important for survival.

­Public Health Implications
In the fall of 2014, the AVMA Ebola Companion Animal
Response Plan Working Group developed recommendations regarding dog and cat quarantine after exposure to
a human with confirmed Ebola virus disease. These recommendations are available at www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/
pdf/dog‐cat‐quarantine.pdf. Public health officials and
state veterinarians should be contacted immediately on
an emergency basis if a pet is exposed to a person with
Ebola virus infection. Regardless of whether infection
occurs in dogs and cats, recommendations for people
with exposure to Ebola virus include avoiding contact
with their pets due to the potential risk of fur acting as a
fomite.

­Further Reading
Allela L, Boury O, Pouillot R, et al. Ebola virus antibody
prevalence in dogs and human risk. Emerg Infect Dis
2005; 11(3): 385–90.
Ansari A. Clinical features and pathobiology of Ebola virus
infection. J Autoimmun 2014; 55: 1–9.
Han Z, Bart SM, Ruthel G, et al. Ebola virus mediated
infectivity is restricted in canine and feline cells. Vet
Microbiol 2016; 182: 102–7.
Martinez O, Leung L, Basler C. The role of antigen‐
presenting cells in filoviral hemorrhagic fever: gaps in
current knowledge. Antiviral Res 2012; 93(3): 416–28.

Mérens A, Bigaillon C, Delaune D. Ebola virus disease:
biological and diagnostic evolution from 2014 to 2017.
Med Mal Infect 2018; 48(2): 83–94.
Olson S, Reed P, Cameron K, et al. Dead or alive: animal
sampling during Ebola hemorrhagic fever outbreaks in
humans. Emerg Health Threats J 2012; 5: 1–9.
Spengler JR, Stonecipher S, McManus C, et al.
Management of a pet dog after exposure to a human
patient with Ebola virus disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2015; 247(5): 531–8.

VetBooks.ir

903

93
Ehrlichiosis and Anaplasmosis
Pedro P. Vissotto de Paiva Diniz, DVM, PhD
College of Veterinary Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis are tick‐borne diseases
caused by a group of gram‐negative intracellular bacteria
belonging to the family Anaplasmataceae, order
Rickettsiales (Figure 93.1). These organisms are capable
of causing an array of clinical signs and even death in
dogs. Some bacterial species from this family are capable
of infecting cats, horses, other animals, and humans.
Cats are generally subclinically infected so this chapter
will focus on infection in dogs.
Ehrlichia and Anaplasma preferentially parasitize leukocytes or platelets and form intracytoplasmic clusters
called morulae (Figure 93.2). Understanding the differences in the target cell type, clinical signs, primary vectors, and geographic distribution can help clinicians
differentiate the likely infecting organism, which has
therapeutic and other clinically relevant implications.
For dogs, Ehrlichia canis is the most pathogenic organism (see Figure 93.2a,b), targeting monocytes and rarely
lymphocytes. Ehrlichia canis is transmitted by the brown
dog tick, Rhipicephalus sanguineus, which has a ubiquitous distribution (Figure 93.3).
Like E. canis, E. chaffeensis also targets monocytes but
causes comparatively mild to moderate signs, and is
transmitted in the United States by Amblyomma americanum (the Lone Star tick), which has a more limited
geographic distribution (see Figure 93.3). Ehrlichia
ewingii and Anaplasma phagocytophilum target granulocytes (see Figure 93.2c,e,f ) and often cause acute lameness or ­
polyarthritis in dogs. These organisms are
transmitted by different ticks (A. americanum and Ixodes
spp., respectively) with distinct but overlapping areas of
distribution in the United States (see Figure 93.3).
­
Anaplasma platys is the only organism from this family
to target platelets (see Figure 93.2d), causing cyclic
thrombocytopenia and bleeding tendencies. A. platys is

probably transmitted by the brown dog tick so co‐­
infections with E. canis are not uncommon and result in
more severe clinical disease than either agent alone.
A summary of the species of importance in dogs and
cats, their associated vectors, target cell, and geographic
distribution is given in Table 93.1.
With advances in molecular methods of diagnosis, a
growing number of species of Ehrlichia that infect
humans have been documented in dogs, including
E. muris and Panola Mountain Ehrlichia sp.
After transmission via tick saliva, the incubation
period for E. canis and A. phagocytophilum ranges from
one to three weeks. The acute phase of the disease can
last 1–4 weeks, when the organism rapidly multiplies
within the targeted blood leukocytes and, in the case of
E. canis, tissue macrophages (spleen, liver, lungs, and
lymph nodes). Intracellular multiplication is achieved by
impairing the antimicrobial activity of host monocytes
or granulocytes by inhibiting lysosome fusion, decreasing the formation of reactive oxygen species, and inhibiting phagocytosis. The organisms also increase host cell
survival by inhibiting apoptosis and leukocyte migration
to tissues. In addition, Ehrlichia and Anaplasma spp.
avoid the immune system by repressing the early innate
immune response, and by antigenic variation of outer
membrane proteins. Consequently, infected monocytes
or granulocytes remain in circulation longer, facilitating
subsequent transfer to ticks. Genetic analyses have
demonstrated that multiple strains of E. canis and
­
A. phagocytophilum exist, which may be associated with
differences in pathogenicity. In addition, host susceptibility, size of the inoculum, and concurrent infection
with other tick‐borne diseases transmitted by the same
tick affect the clinical presentation.
An exacerbated host immune response against the
infection is likely an important mechanism of the disease. Dogs infected with E. canis may develop polyclonal

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Figure 93.1 Phylogeny of selected
organisms of veterinary importance from
Anaplasmataceae and Bartonellaceae
families. The scale bar indicates 0.02
substitutions per nucleotide position of the
16S rRNA gene.

Ehrlichia canis

VetBooks.ir

Ehrlichia chaffeensis
Ehrlichia ewingii
Anaplasma phagocytophilum
Anaplasma platys

Anaplasmataceae
Family

Wolbachia pipientis
Neorickettsia helminthoeca
Bartonella clarridgeiae
Bartonella vinsonii berkhoffii
Bartonella henselae
0.02

Bartonellaceae
Family

Bartonella koehlerae

(a)

(b)

10 μm

(c)

10 μm
(d)

10 μm
(e)

10 μm
(f)

2 μm

1 μm

Figure 93.2 Ehrlichial morulae (black
arrows) in canine leukocytes as seen in
blood smears (a–d) and by electron
microscopy (e,f ). (a) E. canis morula in a
monocyte. (b) E. canis morulae in a
lymphocyte. (c) Morula in a neutrophil
compatible with A. phagocytophilum or
E. ewingii. (d) A. platys morula in a
platelet. (e) Electron microscopy of a
morula in a granulocyte. (f ) Magnification
of the morula seen in (e). Source: (a–d)
from Allison and Little (2013).
Reproduced with permission from John
Wiley & Sons. (e,f ) Courtesy of Kristin
Nunez, Purdue University, USA.

93 Ehrlichiosis and Anaplasmosis

VetBooks.ir

or monoclonal hypergammaglobulinemia. Immune‐
mediated consumption of platelets is thought to contribute to thrombocytopenia in dogs infected with these
organisms. Other mechanisms of thrombocytopenia
such as splenic and vascular sequestration may also be
involved. Thrombocytopathia may also occur due to
antiplatelet antibodies. Deposition of immune complexes and infected cells in the vascular endothelium of
kidneys, joints, and eyes may predispose to glomerulonephritis, polyarthritis, and uveitis. Systemic inflammation associated with E. canis infection may also
contribute to myocarditis, meningitis, thrombosis,
hyperviscosity, and vasculitis. The development of high
circulating levels of antibodies against Ehrlichia or
Anaplasma spp. does not promote protective immunity
against reinfection.
The progression of the disease appears to vary according to the cell type targeted by the parasite. Granulocytic
anaplasmosis caused by A. phagocytophilum appears to
be an acute illness in naturally infected dogs that can be
self‐limiting. However, chronic persistent infection has
been shown in experimentally infected dogs, and has
been suspected in some naturally infected dogs. Similarly,
granulocytic ehrlichiosis caused by E. ewingii appears to
be self‐limiting, but persistent infection was detected in
experimentally infected dogs.
In contrast, monocytic ehrlichiosis associated with E.
canis infection causes an acute illness, which may vary
from mild to severe depending upon the pathogenicity of
the parasite, followed by subclinical phase of months to
years in duration. It is unclear if dogs are able to eliminate E. canis or if the organism remains sequestered in
the spleen, bone marrow or other primary niche indefinitely. Some dogs develop a chronic phase characterized
by hyperglobulinemia and bone marrow suppression,
which is more difficult to treat. E. chaffeensis also appears
to cause chronic infection in dogs, but dogs are generally
asymptomatic.

­Epidemiology

Figure 93.3 Distribution of Amblyomma americanum, Dermacentor
variabilis, Ixodes pacificus, Ixodes scapularis, and Rhipicephalus
sanguineus ticks in the USA. Source: Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, www.cdc.gov/ticks/geographic_distribution.html.

The presence of Ehrlichia and Anaplasma spp. primarily
follows the geographic distribution of their vectors and
mammalian reservoir hosts (see Figure 93.3). E. canis has
worldwide distribution, being one of the most common
tick‐borne pathogens in dogs in tropical and subtropical
regions. The ubiquitously distributed brown dog tick
(R. sanguineus) is well adapted to urban environments.
Consequently, dogs with no access to wooded areas are
still at risk of E. canis infection. In contrast, the Lone Star
tick (A. americanum), vector for E. ewingii and E. chaffeensis, is most frequently found in woodland habitats,
especially where a high number of white‐tailed deer are
present. The geographically limited distribution of dogs

905

VetBooks.ir

Table 93.1 Species of Ehrlichia and Anaplasma of importance to dogs and cats

Granulocytic ehrlichiosis

Granulocytic anaplasmosis

Cyclic
thrombocytopenia

Ehrlichia chaffeensis

Ehrlichia ewingii

Anaplasma phagocytophilum

Anaplasma platys

Monocyte

Granulocyte

Granulocyte

Platelet

Amblyomma americanum

A. americanum

Ixodes scapularis, I. pacificus, I ricinus,
I persulcatus

R. sanguineus

Dermacentor
variabilis

Dermacentor variabilis

Otobius megnini

I. spinipalpis, I. trianguliceps

Main animal host

Dog

Dog

Dog

Dog, horse

Other animal hosts

Cat

Coyote, lemur, raccoon

Main reservoir

Dog

White‐tailed deer

White‐tailed deer

White‐tailed deer, white‐footed mouse, dusky‐
footed woodrat, wood mouse

Dog

Other potential
reservoir(s)

Jackal, fox, coyote

Zoonotic disease

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Geographic
distribution

Worldwide

USA (southeastern and
south central US)

USA (southeastern and
south central US)

Worldwide

Worldwide

Disease

Monocytic ehrlichiosis

Organism

Ehrlichia canis

Main targeted cell

Monocyte

Main vector

Rhipicephalus
sanguineus

Other potential
vector(s)

Dog

Cat, cattle, goat, sheep

VetBooks.ir

93 Ehrlichiosis and Anaplasmosis

exposed to E. chaffeensis and E. ewingii in the United
States has recently been described (Figure 93.4).
A. phagocytophilum is transmitted by the blacklegged
tick (Ixodes scapularis or I. pacificus) in the United
States and by the castor bean tick (I. ricinus) and the
taiga tick (I. persulcatus) in Europe and Asia. In the
United States, A. phagocytophilum is more prevalent in
the Northeast and upper Midwest regions, and in

­northern California. Updated prevalence maps of canine
ehrlichiosis (E. canis and E. chaffeensis combined) and
anaplasmosis (A. phagocytophilum and A. platys combined) in the United States are available at the Companion
Animal Para­
site Council website (https://capcvet.
org/maps/#2019/all/anaplasmosis/dog/united‐states/).
A detailed world map of vector‐borne diseases and vectors by country is available at the Canine Vector‐Borne

Seroprevalence:
No Data
< 50 Samples
0%
0.1% – 1.6%
1.7% – 5%
> 5%

Seroprevalence:
No Data
< 50 Samples
0%
0.1% – 1.6%
1.7% – 5%
> 5%

Figure 93.4 Seroprevalence by state of E. chaffeensis (green) and E. ewingii (purple) in dogs. Source: Beall MJ, Alleman AR, Breitschwerdt EB,
et al. Seroprevalence of Ehrlichia canis, Ehrlichia chaffeensis and Ehrlichia ewingii in dogs in North America. Parasites Vectors 2012; 5(29):
1–11. Reproduced under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0).

907

VetBooks.ir

908

Section 9 Infectious Disease

Disease World Forum website (www.cvbd.org/en/
occurrence‐maps/world‐map/).
Recently, two new species of Ehrlichia have been
described in dogs in the United States: E. muris from a
sick dog in Minnesota, and Panola Mountain Ehrlichia
(PME) from a sick dog in North Carolina. E. muris is
believed to be transmitted by I. scapularis in the United
States, with wild rodents as reservoir, whereas PME is
transmitted by A. americanum, with white‐tailed deer as
the probable vertebrate reservoir in the United States.

­Signalment
Male or female dogs at any age can develop the disease.
German shepherd dogs are predisposed to a more severe
illness during E. canis infection. Despite the fact that cats
are naturally exposed to Ehrlichia and Anaplasma spp.
infection, clinical manifestations are rarely reported.

­History and Clinical Signs
The classic presentation in dogs is characterized by
depression, lethargy, mild weight loss, and anorexia.

Frequently, pet owners will not recall tick exposure, since
infection may have occurred weeks to months prior to
illness. Canine monocytic ehrlichiosis is more frequently
associated with history of epistaxis and signs of pallor,
petechiation, and uveitis (Table 93.2, Figure 93.5). Canine
granulocytic ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis are more frequently associated with history of reluctance to stand or
walk and signs of joint effusion and lameness (see
Table 93.2).
Anaplasma platys infection rarely causes clinical signs
in the United States, but moderate to severe manifestation has been described in Europe, the Middle East, and
South America. Fever, lymphadenopathy, and splenomegaly are common findings in monocytic or granulocytic ehrlichiosis. Severe cases of monocytic ehrlichiosis
caused by E. canis may present with central nervous system (CNS) signs, retinal hemorrhage and detachment,
and/or cardiac arrhythmias. The hallmark of the chronic
phase of E. canis infection is pancytopenia from hypoplasia of all bone marrow cell lines, but protein‐losing
nephropathy, diffuse muscle wasting, and secondary
infections, presumably due to immunosuppression, have
been described. Chronic illness associated with granulocytic ehrlichiosis/anaplasmosis has not yet been well
documented in naturally infected dogs.

Table 93.2 Main features of ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis in dogs

Disease

Monocytic ehrlichiosis

Granulocytic ehrlichiosis/anaplasmosis

Thrombocytic
anaplasmosis

Disease
course

Acute, subclinical, chronic

Acute

Acute, subclinical

History

Lethargy, depression, inappetence, weight loss,
epistaxis

Lethargy, depression, inappetence, weight Generally asymptomatic.
Weight loss, epistaxis
loss, weakness, reluctance to stand or
walk, lameness, stiff or stilted gait

Common
signs

Fever, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly,
petechiae, pallor, uveitis

Fever, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly,
joint effusion

Less
common
signs

Ecchymosis, bleeding gums, melena, ocular and Pallor, scleral congestion, uveitis, head
tilt, tremors, anisocoria, vomiting,
nasal discharge, scleral congestion, hyphema,
retinal detachment, ataxia, seizures, vestibular diarrhea
signs, peripheral edema, muscle atrophy,
cardiac arrhythmias, vomiting, diarrhea,
erythema multiforme

Common
laboratory
findings

Thrombocytopenia, neutropenia,
nonregenerative anemia, lymphocytosis or
lymphopenia, monocytosis, eosinophilia,
hyperglobulinemia (polyclonal or monoclonal),
increased ALT and ALP activities, proteinuria,
pancytopenia

Thrombocytopenia, lymphopenia,
eosinopenia, mild nonregenerative
anemia,spherocytes, polyclonal
hyperglobulinemia, increased ALT and
ALP activities, proteinuria, neutrophilic
polyarthritis

Thrombocytopenia, mild
nonregenerative anemia,
mild hypoalbuminemia

Main
differential
diagnoses

Rocky Mountain spotted fever, idiopathic
immune‐mediated hemolytic anemia, multiple
myeloma, lymphocytic leukemia, systemic
lupus erythematosus

Lyme disease, idiopathic immune‐
mediated polyarthritis, idiopathic
immune‐mediated hemolytic anemia,
systemic lupus erythematosus

Idiopathic immune‐
mediated
thrombocytopenia

ALP, alkaline phosphatase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase.

Fever, lymphadenopathy,
petechiae
Pallor, uveitis

93 Ehrlichiosis and Anaplasmosis

VetBooks.ir

­Diagnosis
No single laboratory test is capable of detecting Ehrlichia
or Anaplasma infection in all cases, so clinicians should
be aware of the limitations of each diagnostic test
(Table 93.3).
Diagnosis is generally based on clinical and hematologic abnormalities, response to therapy and presence of
specific antibodies against Ehrlichia and Anaplasma
spp. Common hematologic abnormalities are listed in
Table 93.2. In addition, it is worth noting that E. canis is
an important differential for lymphocytic leukemia or
multiple myeloma, as infection has occasionally been
associated with marked granular lymphocytosis and
monoclonal, rather than polyclonal gammopathy. E.
canis infection may also be associated with positive
Antinuclear Antibody (ANA) tests, so it should be ruled
out in suspected cases of systemic lupus erythematosus.

Figure 93.5 Corneal edema, opacity, and pigmentation in a dog
with uveitis caused by ehrlichiosis. Source: Courtesy of José Luis
Laus and Ivan Ricardo Martinez Padua, UNESP, Brazil.

Table 93.3 Features of diagnostic assays available for ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis in dogs
Assay

Advantages

Morulae detection

●●
●●

IFA serology

ELISA serology: SNAP
4Dx Plus

Fast and cost‐effective
Can be performed in practice

Gold standard, widely used
●● Antibodies can be quantified (titer)
●● E. canis antigens cross‐react with
Panola Mountain Ehrlichia
●● Can be used to monitor therapy
(decrease in titers generally associated
with successful therapy)
●●

Fast and cost‐effective
●● Can be performed in practice
●● Procedure is standardized
●● E. canis spot cross‐react with E.
chaffeensis
●● A. phagocytophilum spot cross‐react
with A. platys
●● Detects five Ehrlichia and Anaplasma
spp., including E. ewingii
●●

Disadvantages

Recommended testing time

Sensitivity and specificity are
low
●● Requires trained operator

Acute phase (first days of
illness)

Cannot be performed in
practice
●● Procedure not standardized
among veterinary laboratories
●● Indicates exposure, not infection
●● Four‐fold increase in titer is
required for definitive diagnosis
●● Assay not available for A. platys,
E. ewingii and E. muris as they
cannot be cultured
●● Lack of antibody titer in the first
weeks does not rule out
exposure

After 2–3 weeks post
infection.
Low antibody titers may be
detected as early as 7 days

●●

●●

After 2–3 weeks post infection
Does not quantify antibody
response
●● A. phagocytophilum and
E. canis: after 7–21 days
●● Intended to be a screening test,
post infection
not a diagnostic test
●
●
A. platys: after 10–21 days
●● Indicates exposure, not infection
post infection
●● Negative results in the first
weeks do not rule out exposure ●● E. ewingii: 3–4 weeks post
infection
●● May not detect Panola
Mountain Ehrlichia
●● Unknown sensitivity for
E. muris
●● Limited use for monitoring
therapy, as it remains positive
for months after exposure
●●

(Continued)

909

VetBooks.ir

910

Section 9 Infectious Disease

Table 93.3 (Continued)
Assay

Spinning‐disc
interferometry
serology: Accuplex4
Bio‐CD

Western
immunoblotting

Polymerase chain
reaction

Advantages

Detects antibodies against E. canis
and A. phagocytophilum
●● May detect E. canis antibodies
earlier than the ELISA
●●

Detects specific antibody response
to ehrlichial species
●● Less cross‐reactivity among species
than other serology methods
●●

Early detection of active infection
Highly sensitive for acute phase
●● Identifies pathogens at the species
level, and even new species or strains
●● Can test a wide variety of samples
(whole blood, buffy coat, cavitary
effusions, synovial liquid, tissue
aspirates or fragments, and
ectoparasites)
●● Can test frozen historical samples
●● Widely available
●●
●●

Disadvantages

Recommended testing time

Currently unknown.
Cannot be performed in
Recommended after 3–4
practice
●● Indicates exposure, not infection weeks post infection
●● Does not quantify antibody
response
●● May have less accuracy and
reproducibility than the ELISA
for Anaplasma spp.
●● Unclear if detects antibodies
against A. platys, E. chaffeensis,
E. ewingii, Panola Mountain
Ehrlichia, and E. muris
●●

Cannot be performed in
practice
●● Technically difficult
●● Not widely available
●● Primarily used on research

Subclinical or chronic phases

Cannot be performed in
practice
●● Procedure not standardized
among veterinary laboratories
●● Sensitivity and specificity
depend on assay design
●● Risk of false‐positive results if
laboratory quality control is not
implemented
●● Limited sensitivity for chronic
infection
●● Negative results do not rule out
infection, even after therapy, as
bacteria levels may be lower
than limit of detection of assay
●● Not recommended as a single
screening test for blood donors

Acute phase.
May detect carrier state and
chronically infected, but
sensitivity ranges from 25%
to 68%

●●

●●

ELISA, enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay; IFA, immunofluorescent antibody.

Visualization of morulae in blood smears using light
microscopy can facilitate diagnosis, but it is insensitive.
In addition, stain artifacts or basophilic precipitates can
be confused with inclusions so other diagnostic techniques are recommended. Serology based on assays
such as immunofluorescent antibody (IFA), enzyme‐
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), spinning‐disc
interferometry or western blotting is the most common
method used for diagnosis. Most of the serology methods cannot precisely identify the species of Ehrlichia or
Anaplasma involved due to serologic cross‐reactivity.
Serology only documents exposure to, not infection
with, one or more organisms, so previous exposure or
self‐limiting infection should be considered in a patient
with a positive result. Results of serology should be interpreted in light of clinical signs, laboratory ­abnormalities,

and other potential differential diagnosis. A single positive serology result in a healthy dog with no clinical,
hematologic or biochemical abnormalities or proteinuria may not require therapy. Because serology depends
upon production of specific antibodies, false‐negative
results may occur in the first 1–2 weeks post infection.
Seronegative dogs with compatible clinical signs should
be retested 2–3 weeks later to demonstrate seroconversion, and alternative methodologies, including polymerase chain reaction (PCR), should be utilized.
Continuous decrease in antibody titers after antibiotic
therapy may suggest clearance of infection; however, it
may take several months to years for titers to decrease.
In addition, dogs with chronic infection may be seronegative due to the ability of the pathogen to evade the
immune system.

VetBooks.ir

93 Ehrlichiosis and Anaplasmosis

Generally speaking, in contrast to serologic assays,
PCR assays are very sensitive during the acute phase of
infection when organisms are circulating in high numbers. PCR panels are widely available, and many can
identify the species of the pathogen(s) involved. Some
PCR panels can also detect and differentiate new species
or strains. Bodily fluids, effusions, cytology aspirates, tissues, and ectoparasites may all be tested using PCR.
However, a negative PCR result never rules out infection.
PCR assays have low to moderate sensitivity for subclinical or chronic infections because the pathogen may be
sequestered in the spleen or bone marrow, or be circulating in the bloodstream at very low levels, below the limit
of assay detection. Since the length of time since infection is generally unknown for a given patient, it is recommended that serology and PCR assays are used in
combination (see Table 93.3).

­Therapy
Doxycycline remains the treatment of choice for ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis. In this author’s experience, a dose
of 5 mg/kg PO q12h is associated with fewer gastrointestinal (GI) adverse effects (vomiting, anorexia) but has the
same clinical efficacy as 10 mg/kg PO q24h. For cats and
small dogs, liquid formulations are preferred, because
tablets may become stuck in the esophagus and cause
esophageal damage and stricture. Alternatively, at least
6 mL of liquid should be given PO following each tablet.
The optimum duration of therapy is unknown. Since
tetracyclines are bacteriostatic, it may require several
weeks of therapy. A minimum of 28 days is recommended
for acute and subclinical monocytic ehrlichiosis, and a
minimum of 14 days for granulocytic ehrlichiosis and
anaplasmosis for dogs and cats. Chronic cases may
require much longer treatments, and consequences of
long‐term infection such as bone marrow suppression
may not resolve despite appropriate antibiotic therapy.
Because clinical improvement generally occurs as early
as 24–48 hours after the beginning of therapy, clients
should be reminded not to interrupt or terminate the
therapy early. Aggressive tick control should be implemented. After appropriate treatment of a dog with acute
or subclinical infections, the pathogen should no longer
be detected in the bloodstream by PCR or culture, but
dogs with chronic infections may remain intermittently
positive. Decrease of antibody titers within 6–9 months
post infection may indicate clearance of the pathogen,
but titers can remain elevated for more than 30 months
after infection.
If the patient does not tolerate oral antibiotics, IV doxycycline, oxytetracycline (7.5–10 mg/kg IV q12h) or
chloramphenicol (25–50 mg/kg IV or SC q8h) can be

used until GI signs subside. Of note, chloramphenicol
should be avoided in dogs with severe anemia and pancytopenia. The use of enrofloxacin is associated with initial clinical improvement, but it is not recommended as
single therapy due to antibiotic resistance by E. canis.
Imidocarb dipropionate should be avoided due to limited efficacy.
Supportive therapy may be crucial for survival in
advanced cases. IV fluids and blood transfusions are frequently used in severe anemic and thrombocytopenic
cases. Granulocyte colony‐stimulating factor and recombinant human erythropoietin were used with success in
one case of bone marrow suppression. Desmopressin
acetate (DDAVP), a synthetic vasopressin analog, has
been successfully used to treat bleeding associated with
ehrlichiosis when used at 1 μg/kg SC q24h for three days.
In addition, low immunosuppressive doses of prednisone
(1–2 mg/kg PO q24h for 2–7 days) are recommended
when thrombocytopenia fails to resolve with antibiotic
therapy, or when severe or life‐threatening thrombocytopenia is present. Treatment of seropositive dogs without clinical or laboratory abnormalities is currently not
recommended.

­Prognosis
Acute ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis have very good
prognosis if antibiotic therapy is initiated immediately.
Dogs with severe anemia, severe leukopenia, hypokalemia, prolonged activated partial thrombin time (APTT)
and protein‐losing nephropathy have a higher risk of
mortality. Prognosis is guarded in cases of bone marrow
hypoplasia or aplasia.

­Public Health Implications
Several ehrlichial species have been detected in humans
worldwide. Most human cases are presented with acute
evolution of fever, malaise/fatigue, myalgia and arthralgia, and fully respond to doxycycline therapy. No direct
transmission from dogs to humans has ever been documented, but dogs can serve as environmental sentinels,
as well as natural reservoirs of some species. Blood from
infected dogs should be handled with caution and needle
sticks should be avoided.
Humans get infected by the bite of an infected tick so
measures to prevent exposure to ectoparasites are fundamental to avoid disease in humans. E. chaffeensis is the
etiologic agent of human monocytic ehrlichiosis, while
A. phagocytophilum is the etiologic agent of human
granulocytic ehrlichiosis, and E. ewingii causes human

911

VetBooks.ir

912

Section 9 Infectious Disease

monocytic ehrlichiosis. They are considered emerging
diseases in the United States, with over 7400 human
cases reported in the United States in 2017. Human ehrlichiosis is most frequently reported in the southeastern
and south‐­central regions of the United States. Three
states (Oklahoma, Missouri, and Arkansas) account for
30% of all reported cases. Conversely, human anaplasmosis is most frequently reported in the upper midwestern and northeastern US, with six states (New York,
Connecticut, New Jersey, Rhode Island, Minnesota, and
Wisconsin) accounting for 90% of all reported cases.
Additionally, E. chaffeensis has been documented in

Africa, Asia, the Middle East, Central and South
America, while A. phagocytophilum has been documented in Europe, Asia, and South America. The fatality
rate of human ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis ranges from
0.2% to 3.7%. Ehrlichia canis infection in humans has
been documented by molecular methods, but only in
Venezuela (named Venezuelan human ehrlichiosis). In
2008, Panola Mountain Ehrlichia was first detected from
a sick human in Georgia. In addition, infection with E.
muris eauclairensis, formerly E. muris-like agent
(EMLA), has been reported in 115 human cases in the
upper Midwest. No deaths have been described.

­Further Reading
Allison RW, Little SE. Diagnosis of rickettsial diseases in
dogs and cats. Vet Clin Pathol 2013; 42(2): 127–44.
Diniz PPVP, Breitschwerdt EB. Anaplasma phagocytophilum
infection (canine granulocytotropic anaplasmosis). In:
Greene CE, ed. Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat. St
Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2012, pp. 244–54.
Dumler JS, Barbet AF, Bekker CP, et al. Reorganization of
genera in the families Rickettsiaceae and
Anaplasmataceae in the order Rickettsiales: unification
of some species of Ehrlichia with Anaplasma, Cowdria
with Ehrlichia and Ehrlichia with Neorickettsia.
Descriptions of six new species combinations and
designation of Ehrlichia equi and ‘HGE Agent’ as

subjective synonyms of Ehrlichia phagocytophila. Int J
Syst Evol Microbiol 2001; 51(Pt 6): 2145–65.
Harrus S, Waner T, Neer TM. Ehrlichia canis infection. In:
Greene CE, ed. Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat. St
Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2012, pp. 227–38.
Neer TM, Breitschwerdt EB, Greene RT, Lappin MR.
Consensus statement on ehrlichial disease of small
animals from the Infectious Disease Study Group of the
American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine. J Vet
Intern Med 2002; 16(3): 309–15.
Sykes JE. Ehrlichiosis. In: Canine and Feline Infectious
Diseases. St Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2013,
pp. 278–89.

VetBooks.ir

913

94
Salmon Poisoning Disease
Pedro P. Vissotto de Paiva Diniz, DVM, PhD
College of Veterinary Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Neorickettsia helminthoeca, also known as salmon
poisoning disease (SPD), belongs to the family
­
Anaplasmataceae (Figure 94.1). The organism causes an
acute febrile and often fatal disease in dogs. In contrast
to other pathogens of this family, N. helminthoeca does
not depend on blood‐sucking ectoparasites for transmission. Dogs acquire the infection by ingesting fish infected
with the SPD vector, the trematode Nanophyetus salmincola. In order to complete its life cycle, this trematode requires a snail (Oxytrema silicula), a fish (salmon,
trout, lamprey, goldfish, stickback, among others), and a
­mammal or a bird (human, dog, coyote, raccoon, fox,
river otter, bobcat, rat, heron, merganser, among others).
Once the trematode matures and attaches to the gastrointestinal (GI) tract of the dog, N. helminthoeca is transmitted, initially multiplying in the epithelial cells and
intestinal lymphoid tissue and then spreading systemically to visceral and somatic lymph nodes, where proliferation within macrophages occurs. After 8–12 days
post infection, the organisms circulate in high numbers
in the bloodstream, spreading to brain, liver, lungs, and
spleen, causing systemic signs. Death of the dog occurs
around 18 days post infection. The disease also occurs in
other canids (foxes, coyotes) and bears, but it has not
been described in domestic cats.

­Epidemiology
Salmon poisoning disease is endemic in the Northwest
Pacific of the United States (coastal regions of northern
California, Oregon, and Washington) and southern

British Columbia in Canada. A similar syndrome has
been described in dogs from south Brazil.

­Signalment
Dogs from any breed, age, and sex can be infected with
N. helminthoeca and develop SPD. In one study, intact
male dogs and Labrador retrievers were overrepresented,
probably associated with the popularity of this breed.

­History and Clinical Signs
History of consumption of raw or improperly cooked
fish, obtained by fishing or purchased at the supermarket, is very common among sick dogs. However, dogs
can also be infected by swimming in rivers and lakes
where contaminated cercaria are present.
Inappetence and depression are usually the first findings, followed by progressive weight loss. Fever and
peripheral lymphadenopathy are frequently seen during
initial physical exams. Because of the multiplication of
the pathogen in mesenteric and ileocecal lymph nodes,
with consequent inflammation and tissue edema, vomiting, diarrhea, and dehydration are present in over 70% of
the cases. Melena, hematemesis, and abdominal pain
may occur in one‐third of cases. The hemorrhagic gastroenteritis may be indistinguishable from canine parvoviral enteritis in some dogs. Less frequently, polyuria,
polydipsia, serous to purulent ocular discharge, neurologic signs, tachypnea, peripheral edema, hyphema,
splenomegaly, scleral injection, and epistaxis may be
seen. If left untreated, the illness progresses quickly,

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 9 Infectious Disease

Figure 94.1 Fine-needle aspirate of
mesenteric lymph node of a dog with
salmon poisoning. Black arrowheads
indicate the presence of intracytoplasmic
inclusions (morulae) within macrophages.
Left figure: close-up of a macrophage with
three morulae. Wright’s-Giemsa stain,
x100 objective. Source: Johns et al. (2006).
Reproduced with permission of John
Wiley & Sons.

VetBooks.ir

914

which can cause severe hypotension, mucosal pallor, cardiac arrhythmias, and death.

­Diagnosis
Thrombocytopenia, anemia, lymphopenia, and neutrophilia with a left shift are the most consistent hematologic abnormalities. Hypocalcemia, hypoalbuminemia,
hyponatremia, and hypokalemia are frequent abnormalities in the serum biochemistry. Urinalysis may
reveal bilirubinuria and proteinuria. Coagulation testing may indicate evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulation.
Fecal microscopy for the detection of N. salmincola is
a fast, cost‐effective, and specific diagnostic procedure
that can be performed in practice. Both the sedimentation and the zinc sulfate centrifugal flotation tests should
be performed for better sensitivity. Light brown operculated eggs are present in fecal samples 5–8 days after
ingestion of infected fish. However, eggs may not be
detected in the feces of every infected dog. Fine needle
aspirates from peripheral and mesenteric lymph nodes
or spleen may reveal intracytoplasmic neorickettsial
bodies within macrophages and histiocytic inflammation. However, the absence of morulae does not rule out
the disease.
Currently, serologic assays for N. helminthoeca are
not available from commercial diagnostic laboratories.
However, due to acute presentation of the disease and
the time needed for production of specific antibody,
serology tests may not help the diagnosis. Polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) assays are available for the specific
detection of N. helminthoeca DNA from blood, aspirates
of lymph nodes, spleen or liver, tissue samples, and feces.
Because PCR assays can be specific and highly sensitive,
they may aid the diagnosis of SPD if the laboratory has a

short turnover time. Due to the high mortality of SPF,
clinicians should not wait for laboratory confirmation
before starting appropriate antibiotic therapy.

­Therapy
Tetracyclines are the antibiotic class of choice, and clinical improvement is seen within 24–72 hours. If the
patient can receive oral medication, doxycycline 5 mg/kg
PO q12h for 1–2 weeks is recommended. Vomiting
dogs should receive doxycycline (5 mg/kg IV q12h) or
oxytetracycline (7–10 mg/kg IV q8h) until GI signs
subside. Trematode infection should be treated with
praziquantel (10–30 mg/kg PO q24h for 1–2 days). For
complicated cases, hospitalization and intensive care
may be required.

­Prognosis
Survival is directly related to early diagnosis and introduction of appropriate antibiotic therapy and support care,
achieving >85% success rate. Most untreated ­animals die
within 6–10 days of the onset of clinical signs. In contrast
to other pathogens in the family Anaplasmataceae, infection with N. helminthoeca generates protective immunity
against the same strain; however, alternate strains can still
cause illness.

­Public Health Implications
No confirmed case of human infection has ever been
reported, although humans can be naturally infected
with the trematode N. salmincola, which may cause
abdominal discomfort and GI signs.

VetBooks.ir

94 Salmon Poisoning Disease

­Further Reading
Dumler JS, Barbet AF, Bekker CP, et al. Reorganization of
genera in the families Rickettsiaceae and
Anaplasmataceae in the order Rickettsiales: unification
of some species of Ehrlichia with Anaplasma, Cowdria
with Ehrlichia and Ehrlichia with Neorickettsia.
Descriptions of six new species combinations and
designation of Ehrlichia equi and ‘HGE Agent’ as
subjective synonyms of Ehrlichia phagocytophila. Int J
Syst Evol Microbiol 2001; 51(Pt 6): 2145–65.
Gorham JR, Foreyt WJ, Sykes JE. Neorickettsia
helminthoeca infection (salmon poisoning disease). In:
Greene CE, ed. Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat. St
Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2012, pp. 220–4.

Headley SA, Scorpio DG, Vidotto O, Dumler JS.
Neorickettsia helminthoeca and salmon poisoning
disease: a review. Vet J 2011; 187(2): 165–73.
Johns JL, Strasser JL, Zinkl JG, et al. Lymph node aspirate
from a California wine-country dog. Veterinary Clinical
Pathology 2006; 35(2): 243–246.
Sykes JE. Salmon poisoning disease. In: Canine and Feline
Infectious Diseases. St Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders,
2013, pp. 311–19.
Sykes JE, Marks SL, Mapes S, et al. Salmon poisoning
disease in dogs: 29 cases. J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24(3):
504–13.

915

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

917

95
Wolbachia pipientis Infection
Pedro P. Vissotto de Paiva Diniz, DVM, PhD
College of Veterinary Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Wolbachia pipientis is a gram‐negative bacteria belonging
to the family Anaplasmataceae. The organism is found in
all developmental stages of Dirofilaria immitis, the filarial
helminth that causes heartworm disease in dogs and cats.
Wolbachia is an endosymbiont of D. immitis (Figure 95.1)
and supports the nematode’s survival, maturation, and
reproduction. It is transmitted by the mosquito vector along
with the nematode, and is released into the bloodstream in
large numbers during parasite molts, microfilaremia, and
upon death of the parasite.
It was originally believed that Wolbachia was not pathogenic to mammals. However, in recent years, studies
have shown that components of their surface membranes
stimulate production of inflammatory and vasoactive
cytokines from neutrophils and endothelial cells, resulting

in inflammatory lesions and pulmonary artery vasoconstriction. Experimental infection with D. immitis free of
Wolbachia results in a reduced inflammatory response
after anthelminthic therapy. Furthermore, antibiotic
therapy that targets Wolbachia results in a significant
reduction in inflammatory reactions when anthelmintic
drugs are used to kill D. immitis in infected dogs. It has
been shown that cats naturally infected with D. immitis
and seropositive for Wolbachia surface proteins (WSP)
have a greater acute inflammatory response at bronchial,
vascular, and parenchymal levels when compared to
healthy cats. WSP have also been detected in glomerular
capillaries and may contribute to the glomerulonephropathy seen in heartworm disease. It is currently
unclear if Wolbachia can cause disease in animals without the presence of D. immitis, because the bacterium has
never been cultured in vitro.

Figure 95.1 Ultrastructural location of Wolbachia within their filarial host (black asterisks), characterized by bacteria within host vacuoles.
Scale bar = 5 μm (left) and 1 μm (right). Source: Taylor et al. (2013). Reproduced with permission of John Wiley & Sons.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

918

Section 9 Infectious Disease

­Epidemiology

­Therapy

Wolbachia is ubiquitous in D. immitis, being present in
100% of the helminths. Therefore, the distribution of
Wolbachia follows the presence of D. immitis, which is
endemic in North, Central, and South America, the coastal
regions of Africa, southern Europe, India, north, central‐
east and south China, Southeast Asia, and Australia.
Updated prevalence maps for heartworm are available at
the Canine Vector‐Borne Disease World Forum website
(www.cvbd.org/en/occurrence‐maps/world‐map/).

Because of the symbiotic relationship between Wolbachia
and D. immitis, decreased bacterial load affects embryogenesis, maturation, and survival of heartworm. Treating
dogs infected with D. immitis with an antibiotic that targets Wolbachia results in a decrease in microfilaremia, and
when combined with ivermectin, fewer pathologic pulmonary lesions are observed compared to adulticide therapy
alone (melarsomine). Therefore, the current therapeutic
recommendation from the American Heartworm Society
is to administer doxycycline at 10 mg/kg PO BID for four
weeks in combination with ivermectin prior to adulticide
therapy. Doxycycline eliminates >90% of the Wolbachia
organisms from the nematode for at least three months.

­Signalment
Because of the life cycle of D. immitis, clinical signs are
generally detected in animals older than 1 year. Dogs are
more frequently affected than cats.

­History and Clinical Signs
While Wolbachia may collaborate in the pathogenesis of
D. immitis infection, clinical signs are indistinguishable
from heartworm disease.

­Diagnosis
Wolbachia DNA can be detected using polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) on EDTA–anticoagulated blood samples.
Interestingly, using PCR to detect Wolbachia has been
proposed as a tool to detect early D. immitis infection.
WSP can also be detected using serology, but because all
D. immitis stages are infected with Wolbachia, the presence of the organism is assumed in a dog with a positive
test for occult heartworm antigen. Interestingly, one
study suggested that dogs infected with D. immitis and
seropositive for WSP were more likely to have proteinuria than WSP‐seronegative dogs.

­Prognosis
Because all D. immitis are infected with Wolbachia, the
prognosis of Wolbachia infection follows the prognosis
for treatment of heartworm infections. Patients with no
abnormal physical examination findings or radiographic
changes have an excellent prognosis. Those with mild
clinical signs and mild thoracic radiograph abnormalities
have a good prognosis if adequately treated. Patients
with moderate to severe disease, including caval syndrome, have a poor prognosis.

­Public Health Implications
Dirofilaria immitis is able to infect humans, where it
generally causes granulomatous lesions in lungs and
subcutaneous tissue. Similar to what has been documented in dogs and cats, inflammatory reactions to
these parasites in humans may be associated with
their co‐infecting Wolbachia, but it is unclear if
Wolbachia can cause disease without the presence of
filarial nematodes.

­Further Reading
American Heartworm Association. Current canine
guidelines for the diagnosis, prevention, and
management of heartworm (Dirofilaria immitis)
infection in dogs. www.heartwormsociety.org/
veterinary‐resources/canine‐guidelines.html (accessed
June 24, 2019).
Frank K, Heald RD. The emerging role of Wolbachia
species in heartworm disease. Compendium 2010; 32: E4.
Garcia‐Guasch L, Caro‐Vadillo A, Manubens‐Grau J, et al.
Is Wolbachia participating in the bronchial reactivity of
cats with heartworm associated respiratory disease? Vet
Parasitol 2013; 196: 130–5.

Morchon R, Carreton E, Grandi G, et al.
Anti‐Wolbachia surface protein antibodies are present
in the urine of dogs naturally infected with Dirofilaria
immitis with circulating microfilariae but not in dogs
with occult infections. Vectorborne Zoonot Dis 2012;
12: 17–20.
Nelson CT. Wolbachia pipientis infection. In: Greene CE,
ed. Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 4th edn. St
Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2012, pp. 225–6.
Taylor MJ, Boronin D, Johnston K, et al. Wolbachia filarial
interactions. Cellular Microbiology 2013; 15(4):
520–526.

VetBooks.ir

919

96
Bartonellosis
Pedro P. Vissotto de Paiva Diniz, DVM, PhD
College of Veterinary Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Bartonellosis is a complex syndrome caused by gram‐
negative bacteria of the genus Bartonella, which are
transmitted by blood‐sucking arthropods and have tropism for mammalian erythrocytes, endothelial cells, and
bone marrow progenitor cells. There are at least 14 species, subspecies or species candidatus of Bartonella
capable of infecting dogs, with at least six species capable
of infecting cats (Table 96.1).
Most species of Bartonella reported from dogs and cats
can also infect humans. Few Bartonella spp. are host specific,
such as B. bacilliformis in people, with the vast majority of
species having a preferred host but being capable of infecting
other terrestrial mammals and even some marine animals.
Bartonella spp. cause absent to minimal clinical manifestations in their preferred hosts. However, when a Bartonella sp.
infects a nonadapted incidental host, clinical abnormalities
are commonly seen. Severe illness is more frequently seen in
immunosuppressed hosts or when co‐infection with other
vector‐borne disease agents occurs. Bartonella causes
chronic infections in dogs, cats, and humans, many of which
are misdiagnosed and misreported.
Unlike some other vector‐borne disease agents, species of
Bartonella that infect dogs and cats do not form intracytoplasmic morulae. Therefore, they cannot be seen on blood
smears or cytologic specimens without the use of special
staining. Based on genetic analysis and presence of virulent
factors, Bartonella spp. are divided into four lineages, with
B. bacilliformis being the ancestor of all other species. The
vast majority of Bartonella spp. capable of infecting dogs
and cats (lineages 3 and 4) have virulence factors that mediate erythrocyte adhesion in a host‐specific manner (Trw
type IV secretion system [T4SS]) and transfer effector proteins into host cells (VirB T4SS) to promote chronic infection. Consequently, Bartonella can invade and multiply in
erythrocytes and endothelial cells and evade the host’s

immune system. Other virulence factors also participate in
the pathogenesis of the infection. These include adhesion
molecules, regulatory systems and a factor capable of inhibiting proinflammatory responses mediated by Toll‐like
receptor IV. Bartonella spp. also infect dendritic cells,
microglial cells, monocytes, macrophages, and CD34+ progenitor cells in the bone marrow. From these primary niches,
Bartonella spp. are periodically shed into the bloodstream.
Like bacteria belonging to the family Anaplasmataceae,
Bartonella spp. inhibit apoptosis of host cells. This allows
infected cells to remain in circulation longer, and increases
the likelihood of acquisition by a blood‐sucking arthropod
vector. The pathogen often establishes subclinical bacteremia that can last from weeks to several months. It is still
unclear why some dogs or cats may develop clinical manifestations while other animals infected with the same Bartonella
species are asymptomatic. Factors such as host immune
response, species virulence, predisposing factors (congenital
valvular disease), infection chronicity, and concomitant
infections may play a role in disease manifestation.

­Epidemiology
Bartonella spp. can be transmitted by an increasing
number of arthropod vectors. In dogs and cats, cat fleas
(Ctenocephalides felis) have been well defined as the
major mode of transmission. However, epidemiologic
evidence also supports the role of ticks in transmission
to companion animals. Other suspected vectors include
Pulex flea species, lice, and biting flies.
The prevalence of Bartonella infection differs significantly between dogs and cats, being generally low in
dogs and high in cats. There are also differences in infecting species, with the most common species detected in
dogs being B. henselae and B. vinsonii subsp. berkhoffii,
and the most common species in cats being B. henselae,

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

920

Section 9 Infectious Disease

Table 96.1 Species of Bartonella detected in dogs, cats, and other hosts
Bartonella spp.

Preferred host

Other hosts

Vector

B. bovis

Cattle

Dog, cat, deer, elk

Biting flies?

B. clarridgeiae

Cat

Dog, human

Cat flea

B. elizabethae

Rat

Dog, human

Rodent fleas

B. grahamii

Wild mouse, vole

Dog, human

Rodent fleas

B. henselae

Cat, dog

Human, other terrestrial
and marine mammals

Cat flea

B. koehlerae

Cat

Dog, human

Cat flea

B. quintana

Human

Dog, cat, monkey

Body louse

B. rochalimae

Dog and other canids,
raccoon

Human

Fleas

B. taylorii

Wild mouse

Dog

Rodent fleas

B. vinsonii subsp. arupensis

Wild mouse

Dog, human

Ticks?

B. vinsonii subsp. berkhoffii

Dog and other canids

Cat, human, sea turtle

Fleas? Ticks?

B. volans‐like

Squirrel

Dog, human

Unknown

B. washoensis

Squirrel

Dog, human, rat

Unknown

Candidatus B. merieuxii

Dogs and other
canids

Unknown

Unknown

followed by B. clarridgeiae and B. koehlerae. It is believed
that infection with these Bartonella species in dogs and
cats has a worldwide distribution, but epidemiologic
data are limited. Bartonella spp. are more frequently
documented in temperate regions of the world, especially in warm and humid areas.
Bacteremia documented by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) ranges from 1% to 17% in sick or healthy dogs,
depending upon the geographic location evaluated. In the
United States, up to 10% of sick dogs with clinical manifestations compatible with tick‐borne diseases are infected with
Bartonella spp. Exposure to Bartonella spp. in dogs, documented by serology methods, is generally ≤10% of tested
dogs, with higher prevalence detected in sick dogs and in
some tropical countries. Conversely, bacteremia prevalence
in cats ranges from 5% to 40%, with prevalence of ≥ 80% in
some populations (feral cats, colonies with frequent flea
infestation). Seroprevalence is also frequently high, with
some colonies having over 90% of cats seroreactive to
Bartonella species. Because of its ubiquitous presence in
cats, establishing a causal relationship between Bartonella
infection and illness is challenging in this species.

­Signalment
Dogs from any breed, sex, and age can be infected but in
one study, over 95% of dogs bacteremic for Bartonella spp.
were older than 12 months. Outdoor access, residence in
a rural environment, and tick exposure are considered risk
factors for infection in dogs. Similarly, cats from any breed

and sex can become infected with Bartonella spp. Young
cats (≤1 year) are more likely to be bacteremic, while older
cats are more likely to be seropositive. Stray or feral cats
are more likely to be infected than pet cats.

­History and Clinical Signs
Bartonella spp. have been associated with a wide range
of diseases in dogs and cats (Box 96.1). Endocarditis is
the most commonly reported manifestation in dogs
(Figure 96.1).
In one study, Bartonella spp. infection was confirmed
as the cause of culture‐negative endocarditis in 20% of
canine cases presented at a US tertiary hospital. Aortic
valve involvement and congestive heart failure are more
frequent in dogs with endocarditis from Bartonella spp.
infection despite most of these patients having no fever.
Because of the cyclic shedding of the pathogen into the
bloodstream, several other organs can be affected.
Consequently, the most frequent signs in dogs are nonspecific, including fever (40% of cases), lethargy (40%), weight
loss (34%), anorexia (32%), and lymphadenopathy (30%). In
one study, weight loss was significantly associated with
Bartonella when compared to other dogs suspected of vector‐
borne diseases. Although Bartonella spp. DNA has been
detected in dogs and cats with diverse signs and syndromes
(see Box 96.1), causal relationships have mainly been confirmed in dogs and cats with endocarditis, myocarditis,
fever of unknown origin, and specifically in cats, fetal reabsorption and stillbirth. (see Box 96.1).

VetBooks.ir

96 Bartonellosis

Box 96.1 Clinical signs and syndromes potentially
associated with Bartonella infection in dogs and cats
Reported from dogs and cats
Endocarditis
Fever of unknown origin
Hepatitis
Lameness
Lymphadenopathy
Myocarditis
Skin lesions
Uveitis
Only reported from dogs
Bacillary angiomatosis
Cavitary effusion
Chronic erosive polyarthritis
Epistaxis
Granulomatous hepatitis
Hyperviscosity syndrome
Meningoradiculoneuritis
Peliosis hepatis
Polyarthritis
Systemic pyogranulomatous disease
Only reported from cats
Cholangitis
Diaphragmatic myositis
Gingivitis
Hepatitis
Interstitial nephritis
Lower urinary tract disease
Neurologic signs (nystagmus, focal motor seizures,
behavior changes)
Osteomyelitis
Reproductive failure (fetal reabsorption, stillbirth)
Stomatitis

(a)

Chronic infection in dogs is associated with pyogranulomatous disease, which can be located in several sites,
including lymph nodes, liver, and the central nervous
system (Figure 96.2). Consequently, clinical signs vary
depending upon the extent of damage caused in one
or more organs. Bartonella infection in humans is associated with vasculoproliferative disease (bacillary
angiomatosis and peliosis hepatis), which has been also
described in dogs (Figure 96.3).
Despite the growing number of reports of sick dogs
infected with Bartonella spp., two recent studies failed to
reproduce clinical signs in dogs that were experimentally
infected with B. henselae, B. vinsonii subsp. berkhoffii,
and B. rochalimae. In addition, another study documented that 18% of asymptomatic dogs carry Bartonella
DNA in the blood or lymph nodes. In one study, 8% of
Bartonella‐infected dogs were seropositive for at least
one other vector‐borne pathogen. Therefore, the pathogenesis of bartonellosis in dogs is still unclear, and clinicians should rule out other relevant differentials before
considering this diagnosis.
In naturally infected cats, clinical signs are rarely
reported. Similarly, experimental infection often causes
mild and transient clinical signs such as fever, lethargy,
and lymphadenopathy in less than a third of infected
cats. However, more severe manifestations have been
reported from experimental studies, including mild neurologic signs (nystagmus, intermittent tremors, and focal
motor seizures), epaxial muscle pain, reproductive failure, and severe myocarditis (respiratory distress, cardiac
murmurs, and arrhythmias). As seen in dogs, Bartonella
infection in cats can be associated with granulomatous
lesions in several organs. Osteomyelitis (Figure 96.4),
uveitis, hepatitis, gingivitis, and stomatitis, among other
syndromes (Table 96.2), have been associated with natural Bartonella spp. infection in cats.
(b)

Figure 96.1 Endocarditis caused by Bartonella vinsonii subsp. berkhoffii in a dog. (a) Heart of a dog with mitral valve perforation (black
arrow). (b) Close‐up of the perforation in the supravalvular region of the mitral valve. Source: Chomel et al. (2009). Reproduced with
permission of John Wiley & Sons.

921

VetBooks.ir

922

Section 9 Infectious Disease

(a)

(b)

Figure 96.2 Computed tomography (CT) of spinal cord compression (a, black arrow) and vertebral bone reabsorption (b, black arrows)
caused by an inflammatory granuloma (m, mass lesion) in a dog infected with B. vinsonii subsp. berkhoffii. Source: Cross et al. (2008).
Reproduced with permission of John Wiley & Sons.

(a)

(b)

(c)

200 μm

30 μm

Figure 96.3 Bacillary angiomatosis in a dog. (a) Erythematous nodular skin lesion. (b) Proliferating capillaries (arrowheads) seen in skin
nodules. (c) Bacteria present within the lesion, positively stained by Warthin–Starry. Source: Yager et al. (2010). Reproduced with
permission of John Wiley & Sons.

­Diagnosis
The most common laboratory abnormalities in dogs
with endocarditis caused by Bartonella spp. are leukocytosis (78%), hypoalbuminemia (67%), thrombocytopenia (56%), and elevated liver enzymes (56%). Commonly,
dogs infected with Bartonella spp. have laboratory abnormalities indistinguishable from other vector‐borne diseases. Interestingly, although hyperglobulinemia occurs
in dogs with bartonellosis, in one study, the presence of
hypoglobulinemia was more frequent in Bartonella‐
infected dogs than dogs suspected of other vector‐borne
disease. In cats, laboratory abnormalities, when present,
are limited to transient mild anemia, inflammatory
leukogram, and/or eosinophilia in most cases.
­
Hyperglobulinemia, particularly polyclonal gammopathy, is associated with Bartonella spp. in cats.
Because of the diversity of clinical presentations, the lack
of an in‐clinic rapid diagnostic test, and the limited
diagnostic value of serology, diagnosis of canine or feline

bartonellosis is a great challenge. For life‐threatening
illnesses such as endocarditis, myocarditis, and neurologic disease, clinicians should promptly investigate the
presence of Bartonella spp. and presumptively treat for
this infection, because specific antibiotic therapy is
required for adequate management (see therapy section).
The diagnostic approach of nonlife‐threatening cases is
based on ruling out other illnesses, including other vector‐borne pathogens present in the area, submitting samples for microbiologic tests, banking samples, and
evaluating response to antibiotic treatment, since laboratory test results may take weeks to months to become
available. This author strongly recommend clinicians to
bank samples at –20 °C (EDTA‐blood, serum, plasma, tissues, etc.) collected prior to antibiotic therapy, which can
be later tested by DNA and culture methods, because
antibiotic therapy rapidly decreases the chances of detection of Bartonella spp. by these laboratory methods.
The microbiologic diagnosis of Bartonella infection
is based on detection of Bartonella from whole blood,

VetBooks.ir

96 Bartonellosis

(a)

(b)

Figure 96.4 Radiograph images of the right forelimb of a cat with
osteomyelitis due to Bartonella vinsonii subsp. berkhoffii.
Dorsopalmar (a) and mediolateral (b) views show cortical bone
destruction, irregular osteoproliferation and moderate thickening
of the soft tissue (white arrows). Source: Varanat et al. (2009).
Reproduced with permission of John Wiley & Sons.
Table 96.2 Average bacteremia level found in immunocompetent
cats, dogs, and humans
Cats

Humans

Dogs

Host type

Reservoir

Accidental

Accidental

Genome
copies/μL

105–106

1–10

1–10

Bacteria per red
blood cell
(RBC)

1/10–100
RBC

1/105–1/106
RBC

1/105–1/106
RBC

Source: Breitschwerdt et al. (2010). Reproduced with permission of
John Wiley & Sons.

other body fluids (cavitary effusions, synovial fluid,
cerebrospinal fluid, etc.) or tissue specimens by specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays or isolation by blood culture. While isolation remains the
microbiologic gold standard, standard blood culture
has limited diagnostic use because Bartonella spp.
are fastidious bacteria that take months to grow in
standard culture media. In addition, Bartonella bacteremia levels in dogs are very low (see Table 96.2) when
compared to cats. Therefore, sensitivity of standard
blood culture is very low in dogs. Consequently, preenrichment techniques are required in dog samples
to increase the number of organisms to detection levels of PCR assays. Currently, the most sensitive diagnostic technique combines preenrichment culture in
an insect‐based liquid media (BAPGM) coupled with

isolation in blood‐based solid media and specific PCR
testing of samples pre‐ and postenrichment culture,
with DNA sequencing to confirm the species of
Bartonella involved (so‐called “enrichment PCR” platform). This approach is capable of detecting more than
twice the number of infected dogs than the direct PCR
from clinical specimens. In addition, using this platform allows initial results to be obtained as early as two
weeks, with a number of new Bartonella species being
detected in dogs. This assay is available at one commercial laboratory (www.galaxydx.com).
The direct detection of Bartonella DNA by PCR from
blood, other body fluids or tissues is also available through
commercial laboratories. Depending upon the assay
design, this test may have high specificity but sensitivity is
always limited by the magnitude of bacteremia (see
Table 96.2). Therefore, direct PCR is a good diagnostic
tool for feline samples, but it has limited sensitivity for
canine samples. In a recent study, direct PCR from clinical specimens only detected 44.7% of dogs infected with
Bartonella spp. Therefore, negative PCR results should
never be used to rule out Bartonella spp. infection in
dogs. It is important that clinicians choose a diagnostic
laboratory that offers PCR testing for the entire Bartonella
genus, not only for selected species, because a growing
number of new Bartonella species has been described in
sick and healthy companion animals recently.
Serology assays are available through veterinary laboratories, but have limited diagnostic use in dogs and cats
because presence of antibodies does not correlate with
infection. Only one‐third to one‐half of infected dogs
and cats have detectable antibodies against Bartonella
spp. Therefore, negative serologic testing does not rule
out infection with Bartonella spp. Also, seropositivity
does not indicate infection because only one‐third of
seropositive animals are bacteremic. When seropositive
dogs are detected, serology may be helpful to monitor
therapy progression, because many dogs that experience
resolution of disease manifestation have decrease in
antibody titers within 3–6 months following treatment.
Serology has better diagnostic use in Bartonella endocarditis, which is usually associated with high antibody titers. There is some level of cross‐reactivity among
Bartonella spp. but multiple species‐specific assays
should be performed, including specific assays for B.
henselae, B. vinsonii subsp. berkhoffii, B. koehlerae, and
B. clarridgeiae (which cross‐reacts with B. rochalimae).

­Therapy
The optimal treatment protocol for Bartonella spp.
infection in dogs and cats is unknown. Similar to other
vector‐borne infections, elimination of Bartonella may

923

VetBooks.ir

924

Section 9 Infectious Disease

not be achievable in all cases despite long‐term use of
antibiotics. Clinicians should focus on resolution of
clinical abnormalities and monitor therapeutic success
with serologic testing, PCR, and culture. Antibiotic
therapy is recommended for two weeks past clinical resolution, which may require more than three months in
some cases.
In dogs, while single therapy with doxycycline or
azithromycin has been previously used with moderate
success, rapid development of resistance has been documented. The current recommendation for clinically
stable dogs is doxycycline at 5 mg/kg PO q12h for
seven days, adding a second antibiotic such as a fluoroquinolone (enrofloxacin at 5 mg/kg PO q12h for 4–6
weeks) or rifampin (5 mg/kg PO p24h for 4–6 weeks).
This stepwise approach is recommended in order to
decrease the risk of Jarisch–Herxheimer reaction,
which is caused by rapid death of bacteria and release
of endotoxins with consequent increase of inflammatory cytokines in the bloodstream. Dogs that experience this reaction show lethargy, vomiting, and signs
resembling bacterial sepsis that can last for a few days,
and can be misinterpreted as an adverse drug event.
Therefore, clinicians should not interrupt antibiotic
therapy if a Jarisch–Herxheimer reaction occurs.
Empirically, corticosteroids at antiinflammatory doses
generally alleviate these signs.
Life‐threatening diseases associated with Bartonella
spp. infection in dogs (such as endocarditis, myocarditis,
meningoencephalitis, etc.) should be treated with a combination of a fluoroquinolone or doxycycline with an
aminoglycoside (amikacin at 15–20 mg/kg IV/IM/SC
q24h), with constant monitoring of renal function. When
discharged, these patients should receive doxycycline
and enrofloxacin as described above.
In cats, administration of antibiotics generally limits bacteremia but does not eradicate the infection
in all cats. The current recommendation from the
American Association of Feline Practitioners (AAFP)
is based on doxycycline at 5 mg/kg PO q12h or 10 mg/
kg PO q24h for a minimum of four weeks. If a poor
clinical response is observed in the first seven days of
therapy, enrofloxacin at 5 mg/kg PO q24h or pradofloxacin at 3–5 mg/kg PO q24h should be used. It is
currently unknown if these fluoroquinolones should
be used in addition to doxycycline or as monotherapy
in cats, as is recommended in dogs. Pradofloxacin has
been shown in vitro to have superior activity against
feline and human Bartonella isolates than enrofloxacin. Therefore, it is currently recommended for bartonellosis in cats. However, no information is
currently available about the efficacy of pradofloxacin
for canine bartonellosis.

­Prognosis
Prognosis of bartonellosis in dogs and cats varies with
the organ or system affected. For nonlife‐threatening
bartonellosis, anecdotal reports indicate moderate to
good prognosis when adequate antibiotic therapy is
instituted. Bartonella endocarditis has guarded prognosis, with dogs having shorter survival time than those
with other causes of endocarditis.

­Public Health Implications
Human bartonellosis ranges from benign self‐limiting
manifestation of cat scratch disease (CSD) to devastating
hemolytic anemia seen in Oroya fever. The most common manifestation of human bartonellosis is cat scratch
disease, followed by bacillary angiomatosis in immunocompromised patients and blood culture‐negative endocarditis. Recent reports have associated Bartonella spp.
infection with chronic neurologic disease, rheumatic
signs, and small vessel syndrome. Direct transmission
from infected dogs has not been documented, but they
can be a reservoir for vector‐mediated transmission to
humans. Conversely, since Bartonella spp. can survive in
flea feces for several days, cats can transmit Bartonella
spp. to humans through scratching when cat claws are
contaminated with infected flea feces.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and
the AAFP currently recommend the following steps to
avoid human infection.
Flea control should be initiated and maintained year
round.
●● If a family member is immunocompromised and a new
cat is to be acquired, adopt a healthy cat >1 year of age
and free from fleas.
●● Immunocompromised individuals should avoid contact with cats of unknown health status.
●● Be cautious about adding stray cats or cats from shelters to the household without controlling fleas.
●● Cat claws should be trimmed regularly, but declawing
of cats is generally not required.
●● Scratches and bites should be avoided (including rough
play with cats).
●● Cat‐associated wounds should be washed promptly
and thoroughly with soap and water and medical
advice sought.
●● While Bartonella spp. have not been shown to be
transmitted by saliva, cats should not be allowed to lick
open human wounds.
●● Keep cats indoors to minimize hunting and exposure
to fleas and other possible vectors.
●●

VetBooks.ir

96 Bartonellosis

­Further Reading
Breitschwerdt EB, Maggi RG, Chomel BB, Lappin MR.
Bartonellosis: an emerging infectious disease of zoonotic
importance to animals and human beings. J Vet Emerg
Crit Care 2010; 20: 8–30.
Brunt J, Guptill L, Kordick DL, Kudrak S, Lappin MR.
American Association of Feline Practitioners 2006 Panel
report on diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of
Bartonella spp. infections. J Feline Med Surg 2006; 8:
213–26.
Chomel BB, Kasten RW, Williams C, et al. Bartonella
endocarditis: a pathology shared by animal reservoirs
and patients. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2009: 1166: 120–6.
Cross JR, Rossmeisl JH, Maggi RG, et al.
Bartonella‐associated meningoradiculoneuritis and
dermatitis or panniculitis in 3 dogs. J Vet Intern Med
2008; 22: 674–8.

Diniz PPVP. Canine bartonellosis. In: Bonagura JD, Twedt
DC, eds. Kirk’s Current Veterinary Therapy, 15th edn. St
Louis,MO, Elsevier Saunders, 2014, pp. 1261–7.
Guptill L. Bartonella infections in cats: what is the
significance? In Practice 2012; 34: 434–45.
Harms A, Dehio C. Intruders below the radar: molecular
pathogenesis of Bartonella spp. Clin Microbiol Rev 2012;
25: 42–78.
Sykes JE, Chomel BB. Bartonellosis. In: Sykes JE, ed.
Canine and Feline Infectious Diseases. St Louis, MO:
Elsevier Saunders, 2013, pp. 498–511.
Varanat M, Travis A, Lee W, et al. Recurrent osteomyelitis in a
cat due to infection with Bartonella vinsonii subsp.
berkhoffii genotype II. J Vet Intern Med 2009; 23(6): 1273–7.
Yager JA, Best S, Maggi RG, et al. Bacillary angiomatosis in
an immunosuppressed dog. Vet Dermatol 2010; 21: 420–8.

925

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

927

97
Hemotropic Mycoplasma
Séverine Tasker, BSc, BVSc (Hons), PhD, DSAM, DACVIM-CA, PGCertHE, MRCVS
Bristol Veterinary School, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
The hemotropic mycoplasmas (hemoplasmas) are unculturable bacteria that parasitize red blood cells and can
induce hemolysis, causing anemia. Commonly recognized
feline and canine hemoplasma species are shown in
Table 97.1. Mycoplasma haemofelis is the most pathogenic
of the feline and canine species described, and can cause
significant hemolytic disease in immunocompetent cats.
In cats, Mycoplasma haemofelis appears to be most
pathogenic during acute infection, whereas chronic infection is not usually associated with significant anemia.
Candidatus Mycoplasma haemominutum and Candidatus
Mycoplasma turicensis infections are not usually associated with clinical signs, unless concurrent disease or
immunusuppression exist in the host cat, such as feline
leukemia virus (FeLV) infection, neoplasia. However, anemia due to these agents has occasionally been reported in
immunocompetent cats. Ca. M. haemominutum has also
been associated with the development of myeloproliferative diseases in cats with concurrent FeLV infection.
In dogs, M. haemocanis and Ca. M. haematoparvum
infections are not often associated with hemolytic anemia unless infection occurs in a splenectomized host
(particularly for M. haemocanis) or in association with
concurrent disease or immunosuppression.
Asymptomatic carrier status can exist with all of the
hemoplasma species, and so the detection of hemoplasma infection is not always indicative of clinical disease associated with that species.

­Epidemiology
The prevalence of the commonly recognized feline and
canine hemoplasma species is shown in Table 97.1; these
vary considerably due to the differing populations of cats

and dogs sampled in studies used to generate these data.
Retroviral‐infected cats are also usually found to be at
increased risk in studies, although results are variable for
FeLV and feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV). A recent
study in the United States reported a low prevalence of
canine hemoplasma infection in dogs.
The prevalence of feline hemoplasma infections is
increased in cats that are male, non-pedigree and with
access outdoors.
The natural route of transmission of hemoplasma
infection in the field has not yet been determined but the
clustered geographic distribution of infection in some
studies supports the role of an arthropod vector in
hemoplasma transmission. The cat flea, Ctenocephalides
felis, has been implicated in feline hemoplasma transmission, but this has not been definitively proven in
experimental studies, and transmission of M. haemocanis
by the brown dog tick, Rhipicephalus sanguineus, has
been suggested.
Studies have successfully transmitted feline hemoplasma infection via subcutaneous inoculation of blood
containing low numbers of organisms, suggesting that
transmission by aggressive interaction (e.g., fights) in the
field is possible. Blood transfusion is another potential
route of transmission, and blood donors should be
screened for hemoplasma infection. Vertical transmission may also occur.

­Signalment
Older cats are more likely to be infected with Ca. M.
haemominutum whilst younger cats are more likely
to show disease due to M. haemofelis infection. Canine
hemoplasma infections appear to be more common
in kennel‐housed dogs, younger dogs, and dogs with
mange.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

928

Section 9 Infectious Disease

Table 97.1 Hemoplasma species, their prevalence
and pathogenicity
Hemoplasma

Prevalence

Pathogenicity summary

Mycoplasma
haemofelis

0.4–46.6%

Can result in hemolytic
anemia in
immunocompetent cats

Candidatus
Mycoplasma
haemominutum

8.1–46.7%

Candidatus
Mycoplasma
turicensis

0.4–26%

Can result in a drop in
erythrocyte parameters
but not usually severe
enough to cause anemia
unless cat has concurrent
disease or is
immunocompromised,
e.g., retrovirus infection

Mycoplasma
haemocanis

0–45%

Candidatus
Mycoplasma
haematoparvum

0–33%

Hemolytic anemia
primarily seen in
splenectomized dogs,
and occasionally in
immunocompromised
dogs (e.g., with neoplasia)

­History and Clinical Signs
When anemia results from hemoplasma infection, historical features can include lethargy, inappetence, pallor,
weakness, pica, and weight loss. In immunocompromised hosts, evidence of concurrent disease is present.
Dogs may have a history of splenectomy.
Clinical signs can include pyrexia, weakness, pallor,
tachypnea, tachycardia (sometimes with a hemic murmur), bounding pulses, dehydration, cardiac murmurs,
sometimes splenomegaly (in nonsplenectomized hosts)
and, occasionally, jaundice.

­Diagnosis
Acute hemoplasma infections are typically associated
with a regenerative anemia with reticulocytosis, macrocytosis, polychromasia, and anisocytosis. However,
the anemia may be nonregenerative if the animal is
sampled early in the disease process (i.e., during the
preregenerative phase) or if concurrent disease is present that inhibits regeneration (e.g., concurrent FeLV
infection, neoplasia).
Acute M. haemofelis and M. haemocanis infections
can be associated with the presence of persistent saline
autoagglutination or positive Coombs’ testing, indicating the presence of erythrocyte‐bound antibodies. Auto­
agglutination may be noted on blood smear examination
but the contribution of such antibodies to the develop-

ment of hemoplasma‐associated anemia has not been
confirmed.
Serum biochemistry may reveal elevated liver
­parameters (ALT and AST) due to anemia‐associated
hypoxia, mild to moderate hyperbilirubinemia due to
hemolysis, and prerenal azotemia due to dehydration.
Hyperproteinemia may occur. Hemoplasmas are
­currently unculturable in vitro.
Cytologic detection of hemoplasma organisms on
blood smears is occasionally possible but this is known
to be very insensitive and shows poor specificity, and
cytology cannot differentiate between hemoplasma species. When organisms are visible, they appear as small
basophilic organisms on the surface of erythrocytes with
Romanowsky‐based stains (e.g., Wrights’, Diff‐Quik™).
M. haemocanis has a tendency to form chains on the surface of erythrocytes, and so may be easier to differentiate
from stain artifacts and other erythrocyte inclusions
with which hemoplasmas are confused.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays are usually
sensitive and specific, if designed appropriately, for the
diagnosis of hemoplasma infection, and species‐specific
assays exist for both dogs and cats. EDTA‐anticoagulated blood is usually the appropriate sample type for
PCR. Real‐time PCR (qPCR) assays are now increasingly
used, and these allow for quantification of hemoplasma
organism numbers (Figure 97.1), as well as detection of
infection. Organism numbers in feline hemoplasma
infections are often high during acute infection but it
should be noted that large fluctuations in blood organism numbers can occur over time in some M. haemofelis‐infected cats, meaning that qPCR results may not be
correlated with anemia.
In addition, PCR results may be negative in an infected
cat if a sample is obtained when the number of circulating
organisms is very low, below the limit of detection of the
PCR assay. Furthermore, the existence of asymptomatic
carrier cats for all hemoplasma species means that the PCR
results should always be interpreted in conjunction with
the patient’s clinical signs, the degree and nature of the
anemia present, and any concurrent signs or diseases that
could be contributing to the clinical presentation.

­Therapy
Therapy for hemoplasmosis is required if infection is diagnosed in an animal with clinical signs and clinicopathologic changes consistent with hemoplasma infection.
However, no treatment regime has yet been described that
consistently eliminates hemoplasma infection with all
species and the aim of most treatment protocols is resolution of clinical signs associated with infection.

Figure 97.1 Hemoplasma organism
numbers in the blood of four cats infected
with 103 M. haemofelis organisms by
subcutaneous inoculation on day 0 post
infection. Cats infected with M. haemofelis
often show marked fluctuations in blood
organism numbers, especially during early
infection. Such fluctuations, in the absence
of treatment, should be considered when
interpreting quantitative PCR results in M.
haemofelis‐infected cats. Longer term
fluctuations in organism numbers in the
blood are seen in some M. haemofelis‐
infected cats. In contrast, cats infected with
Ca. M. haemomintum and Ca. M. turicensis
do not show these blood organism
number fluctuations at any stage of
infection.

1010
M. haemofelis organism numbers/mL blood

VetBooks.ir

97 Hemotropic Mycoplasma

109
108
107
106
105
104
103
102
101
1

Non detected

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Day post infection

A number of antibiotics, notably tetracycylines (primarily doxycycline at 10 mg/kg once daily PO or 5 mg/kg
twice daily PO; as some formulations have been associated with esophagitis following incomplete swallowing,
all doses should be followed with food or water) and fluoroquinolones (e.g., marbofloxacin 2–5.5 mg/kg once daily
PO, pradofloxacin 5 mg/kg once daily PO), have been
shown to be effective in reducing feline hemoplasma
(especially M. haemofelis) organism numbers and cause
resolution of clinical signs. Courses of two weeks are usually recommended although some have suggested that
longer treatment courses (up to six weeks) increase the
likelihood of eliminating infection. Pradofloxacin may be
more effective at clearing M. haemofelis than doxycycline. One recent study has suggested that clearance of M.
haemofelis infection may be possible using 28 days of
doxycycline followed by marbofloxacin for 14 days if the
cats remained PCR positive.
Only limited information is available regarding the
response of canine hemoplasma infections to antibiotic
therapy. Tetracycline or fluoroquinolone treatments
have both been associated with clinical improvement,
but infection has sometimes persisted.
Ideally, response to antibiotic treatment in both cats and
dogs should be monitored by qPCR to ensure organism
numbers are decreasing with therapy but clinical improvement usually occurs within 2–3 days of effective treatment.
Affected dogs and cats may also require aggressive
supportive treatment with crystalloids or blood products
(blood transfusions).
Corticosteroids have been recommended as adjunct
treatment for hemoplasmosis, to treat the immune‐

mediated component of anemia. However, the vast
majority of hemoplasma‐infected cats, including those
that have erythrocyte‐bound antibodies confirmed,
respond to antibiotic treatment and supportive care
alone without the need for corticosteroids. Indeed,
immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids have been
used experimentally to exacerbate hemoplasma infection, so their routine use is not advised.
In view of the potential for vector transmission of
hemoplasmas, control for fleas and ticks should also be
instigated.

­Prognosis
With prompt and appropriate therapy, the prognosis for
feline and canine hemoplasmosis is good. However, the
disease can be fatal if untreated, due to severe hemolytic
anemia, collapse, and death.

­Public Health Implications
Polymerase chain reaction methods have recently documented human hemoplasma infections and some have
documented infection with veterinary hemoplasma
­species such as Ca. M. haematoparvum. In view of this,
blood from potentially infected animals should be handled with care and vector control initiated. Future ­studies
should evaluate the zoonotic potential and transmission
of these emerging pathogens.

929

VetBooks.ir

930

Section 9 Infectious Disease

­Further Reading
Baumann J, Novacco M, Riond B, Boretti FS, Hofmann‐
Lehmann R. Establishment and characterization of a
low‐dose Mycoplasma haemofelis infection model. Vet
Microbiol 2013; 167(3–4): 410–16.
Compton SM, Maggi RG, Breitschwerdt EB. Candidatus
Mycoplasma haematoparvum and Mycoplasma
haemocanis infections in dogs from the United States.
Compar Immunol Microbiol Infect Dis 2012; 35(6):
557–62.
Maggi RG, Compton SM, Trull CL, et al. Infection with
hemotropic Mycoplasma species in patients with or
without extensive arthropod or animal contact. J Clin
Microbiol 2013; 51(10): 3237–41.

Novacco M, Meli ML, Gentilini F, et al. Prevalence and
geographical distribution of canine hemotropic
mycoplasma infections in Mediterranean countries and
analysis of risk factors for infection. Vet Microbiol 2010;
142: 276–84.
Novacco M, Sugiarto S, Willi B, et al. Consecutive
antibiotic treatment with doxycycline and marbofloxacin
clears bacteremia in Mycoplasma haemofelis-infected
cats. Vet Microbiol 2018: 217:112–20.
Steer JA, Tasker S, Barker EN, et al. A novel hemotropic
Mycoplasma (hemoplasma) in a patient with hemolytic
anemia and pyrexia. Clin Infect Dis 2011; 53(11):
e147–51.

VetBooks.ir

931

98
Nonhemotropic Mycoplasma, Ureaplasma, and L‐Form Bacteria
Joachim Spergser, Dipl.Tzt., Dr. Med. Vet., DECVM
Institute of Microbiology, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria

­Etiology
Mycoplasmas (general name for members of the class
Mollicutes) are unusual bacteria representing the small­
est and simplest self‐replicating organisms. They are
distinguished from ordinary bacteria by their complete
lack of a cell, resulting in cellular pleomorphism and
resistance to cell wall‐inhibiting antimicrobials. The
lack of a protective cell wall also makes mycoplasmas
fragile outside their hosts. Due to their extremely small
genome size, mycoplasmas possess limited anabolic
and metabolic capabilities and maintain intimate para­
sitic lifestyles, depending on nutrients from their host
cell environment. To keep this parasitic mode of life,
mycoplasmas have developed sophisticated mecha­
nisms to colonize their hosts and resist host defense. A
highly dynamic, versatile membrane surface architec­
ture appears to be crucial for their survival, and for
establishing and maintaining a subtle relationship with
their host. Certain mycoplasmas are capable of entry
into nonphagocytic cells, providing them with the abil­
ity to resist host defenses or antibiotic treatment, which
may contribute to chronic infection.
Nonhemotropic mycoplasmas usually exhibit a rather
strict host and tissue specificity with predilection for
mucous membranes of the respiratory and urogenital
tract. Pathogenic mycoplasmas are not considered highly
virulent and mostly cause mild, slowly progressive,
chronic infections. Host cell damage and the resulting
clinical manifestations appear to be mainly due to host
immune reactions and inflammatory responses rather
than to direct toxic effects of mycoplasma components.
Nonhemotropic mycoplasmas that have been isolated
from cats and dogs include species within the genera
Mycoplasma, Ureaplasma, and Acholeplasma. Some
canine and feline mycoplasmas are considered mere

commensals, but certain members are proven pathogens
or play an etiologic role as opportunists in miscellaneous
conditions (Table. 98.1).
Little is known about the virulence factors of canine
and feline mycoplasmas so far. However, the availability
of the complete genome of two canine Mycoplasma spe­
cies (M. canis, M. cynos) will certainly increase under­
standing of their pathogenic properties in the future.
Recently, a hemagglutinin that is probably involved in
cytadherence to host cells has been identified and char­
acterized in M. cynos. Furthermore, a secreted sialidase
that presumably promotes colonization and tissue inva­
sion has been proposed as a candidate virulence factor of
M. canis and M. cynos. Its expression in canine myco­
plasmas varies significantly among strains which may
contribute to the variable spectrum of clinical manifesta­
tions and disease outcomes. Intracellular localization of
M. canis has also been demonstrated which may contrib­
ute to chronicity of infection or perturbation of cell func­
tion and integrity.
L‐forms are cell wall‐deficient morphotypes of normal
bacteria that resemble mycoplasmas. L‐forms can be
generated from many bacterial species by treatment with
lysozyme or by exposure to beta‐lactam antibiotics or
host immune responses. Knowledge of the clinical sig­
nificance of L‐form bacteria is fragmentary and their role
as a cause of disease is still under debate.

­Epidemiology
Mycoplasmas are common inhabitants of the orophar­
ynx and upper respiratory tract of dogs and cats wherein
they are thought to be part of the normal bacterial flora.
Mycoplasmas have been isolated from lungs of dogs and
cats with pneumonia, are shown to be absent in the lungs

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

932

Section 9 Infectious Disease

Table 98.1 Nonhemotropic mycoplasmas frequently isolated from domestic dogs and cats
Primary
colonization site

Diseases associated with or caused by mycoplasmas isolated
from domestic dogs and cats

ONP, RT, UGT

CIRD, tracheobronchitis, bronchopneumonia, pyothorax

ONP, RT, UGT

Urethritis, epididymitis, orchitis in male dogs; endometritis,
metritis, adverse pregnancy outcomes in female dogs

Mycoplasma edwardii

ONP, RT, UGT

Polyarthritisa, meningoencephalitisa

Mycoplasma molare

ONP, UGT

ND

Mycoplasma
maculosum

ONP, RT, UGT

ND

Mycoplasma
opalescens

ONP, UGT

ND

Mycoplasma
mucosicanis

ONP, RT, UGT

ND

Mycoplasma
spumans

ONP, RT, UGT

Polyarthritisa

Ureaplasma
canigenitalium

UGT

Infertility in male dogsa

C, ONP, RT

Conjunctivitis, keratitisa, URTD, bronchopneumonia,
pyothorax, polyarthritis, meningoencephalomyelitisa

Mycoplasma gateae

ONP, RT

Polyarthritis, bronchopneumoniaa

Mycoplasma
feliminutum

ONP, RT

ND

Ureaplasma felinum

ONP

ND

ONP

ND

ONP, RT, UGT

ND

UGT

ND

Species

Primary host

Mycoplasma cynos

Domestic dogs
(canine mycoplasmas)

Mycoplasma canis

Mycoplasma felis

Domestic cats (feline
mycoplasmas)

Ureaplasma cati
Mycoplasma arginini
Acholeplasma
laidlawii

Various (ubiquitous
mycoplasmas)

C, conjunctiva; ND, not defined, likely to be a commensal; ONP, oro‐ and nasopharynx; RT, respiratory tract; UGT urogenital tract.
a
Single reports.

of healthy cats but can be isolated from the lungs of
healthy dogs. Younger, group‐living animals with syn­
demic viral/bacterial infections or underlying diseases
that impair defense mechanisms are more likely to be
infected by mycoplasmas. They are efficiently transmit­
ted through oronasal contact with aerosolized respira­
tory secretions or contact with freshly contaminated
fomites.
Mycoplasmas are among the recognized normal flora
of the vagina and prepuce of dogs but are rarely isolated
from the feline urogenital tract. They have been associ­
ated with canine urogenital diseases in subpopulations of
colonized individuals. Reasons and risk factors for dis­
ease development and progression are unknown. Canine
genital mycoplasmas may be transmitted via sexual
intercourse, artificial insemination or orogenital contact.
Mycoplasmas may also be transmitted vertically to fetus
or offspring by ascending intrauterine infection, hema­
togenously acquired placental infection, or during pas­
sage through the birth canal.

­Signalment
Younger, immunosuppressed dogs and cats are more
likely to be affected by mycoplasmas and develop more
severe diseases.

­History and Clinical Signs
Ocular Mycoplasma Infections in Cats
Mycoplasma felis is considered a major pathogen in con­
junctivitis of cats. The prevalence rate of the agent in
ocular swabs taken from cats displaying conjunctivitis
was 9.6% or 25% which is significantly higher than the
respective rates of 2.3% or 0% present in clinically healthy
cats. In contrast, M. arginini and M. gateae more often
exist on the conjunctival surface of healthy cats.
Experimental infections of M. felis have produced con­
junctivitis only in young cats or when a large inoculation

VetBooks.ir

98 Nonhemotropic Mycoplasma, Ureaplasma, and L‐Form Bacteria

dose was used. Natural Mycoplasma conjunctivitis pre­
dominantly occurs when infected cats are housed in
groups or in kittens soon after weaning. The clinical
signs observed may vary in severity and have been
described as blepharospasm, conjunctival hyperemia,
chemosis, and serous discharge followed by mucoid to
sticky exudate. The cornea is usually not involved; how­
ever, M. felis and M. gateae have been occasionally asso­
ciated with ulcerative keratitis and/or keratomalacia.

disease. Clinical findings were fever, productive cough,
and leukocytosis with a left shift. Radiographs fea­
tured alveolar and bronchointerstitial pulmonary den­
sities and mild pleural effusion. Infection was fatal
for some pups and necropsy findings were mucopuru­
lent airway exudates and hemorrhagic fibrinous necro­
tizing bronchopneumonia. M. cynos was abundantly
demonstrated at neutrophilic inflammatory sites using
immunohistochemistry.

Respiratory Mycoplasma Infections in Cats

Urogenital Mycoplasma Infections in Dogs

Mycoplasmas have been associated with chronic and
acute feline upper respiratory tract disease (URTD) by
epidemiologic evaluation, but available data are more
inconclusive hypotheses than definite proofs of causality.
Studies have also suggested that approximately 22% of
cats with lower airway disease may have a concurrent
Mycoplasma infection.
Experimental challenge with M. felis induced pneumo­
nia in kittens, emphasizing its role as a primary pathogen
in the lower respiratory tract. Naturally occurring infec­
tions with M. felis have been increasingly reported in the
feline host associated with suppurative bronchitis and/or
pneumonia. Radiographic or computed tomography
(CT) findings may include diffuse interstitial pulmonary
disease similar to that observed in adult human patients
with M. pneumoniae pneumonia. Cats with concurrent
pleural effusion show minimal signs of dyspnea and a
nonodorous fluid is expected with uncomplicated
Mycoplasma pyothorax.

Mycoplasmas are commonly present in the lower uro­
genital tract of dogs. They have occasionally been asso­
ciated with canine reproductive diseases including
poor conception rates, early embryonic death, fetal
resorption, abortion, weak pups, and neonatal death.
M. canis and U. canigenitalium are the species most
consistently associated with canine genital mycoplas­
mosis. Mycooplasma canis has been isolated from dogs
urogenital disease and infertility, despite pro­
with ­
longed antibiotic therapy. It has also been cultured
from the prostate, epididymis, and chronically inflamed
bladder wall. Experimental infection with Mycoplasma
canis produced urethritis, prostatitis or epididymitis in
males and endometritis or metritis in females. In a sin­
gle study, U. canigenitalium was associated with infer­
tility in male dogs. Nevertheless, as conclusive evidence
is lacking, further studies are required to establish
whether M. canis or U. canigenitalium is linked to geni­
tal tract infections and infertility.

Respiratory Mycoplasma Infections in Dogs

Arthritis in Cats and Dogs Caused by
Mycoplasmas

Mycoplasmas have been isolated from 78% of tracheo­
bronchial lavages of younger dogs with pulmonary dis­
ease but may also be present in the lower respiratory
tract of healthy individuals (20–25%). Consequently,
the role of certain canine Mycoplasma species as patho­
gens in canine pulmonary disease is still a subject of
controversy. Experimental infection with M. canis, M.
gateae, and M. spumans failed to produce pulmonary
disease. However, M. cynos has been consistently asso­
ciated with canine respiratory diseases, including
­tracheobronchitis and bronchopneumonia, conditions
that have been reproduced experimentally. A more
recent study noted a correlation of M. cynos with canine
infectious respiratory disease (CIRD) in younger dogs
(<1 year). Dogs acquired infection during the first two
weeks after being kenneled and seroconversion to M.
cynos was correlated with the development of clinically
respiratory disease. Further evidence of the primary
pathogenic role of M. cynos was its isolation as sole
pathogen from a litter of pups with severe respiratory

Only a few cases of naturally occurring mycoplasma
mono‐ and polyarthritis in cats (M. felis, M. gateae)
and dogs (M. edwardii, M. spumans) have been docu­
mented so far. In most cases, predisposing factors such
as immunosuppressive therapy, acquired immunodefi­
ciency or traumatic bites have been identified. The
pathogenic potential of M. gateae in cats, however, has
been substantiated by intravenous injection resulting
in polyarthritis.
Mycoplasma Central Nervous System
Infections in Cats and Dogs
Mycoplasma felis has been isolated from brain and spinal
cord sections of a young cat with meningoencephalomy­
elitis. A similar infection has been documented in a
young dog with suppurative meningoencephalitis caused
by M. edwardii, and a penetrating wound close to the
skull was suspected as the source of infection.

933

VetBooks.ir

934

Section 9 Infectious Disease

Abscesses and Cellulitis in Cats Caused by
Mycoplasmas and L‐Form Bacteria
Abscess formations caused by mycoplasmas presumably
introduced by bite wounds have been reported in cats.
Nonodorous, nondegenerate, neutrophilic, gram stain‐
negative exudates are characteristic for Mycoplasma
abscesses. L‐form bacteria have been isolated from cats
with persistently draining cellulitis and synovitis. Usual
sources of infection with L‐form bacteria have been pen­
etrating bite wounds or surgical incisions. Spread of
infection can occur manifested by polyarthritis or dis­
tant abscess formation.

been developed. Alternatively, PCR‐denaturing gradient
gel electrophoresis (DGGE) may be applied, enabling pri­
mary detection and differentiation of mycoplasmas in
clinical material even if mixed infections occur. Recently,
matrix‐assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight
(MALDI TOF) mass spectrometry has become an excel­
lent method for the identification and differentiation of
animal mycoplasmas, representing a promising alterna­
tive to the currently practiced cumbersome diagnostics.
No serologic assays for the detection of immune responses
to canine or feline mycoplasmas have been standardized
and made commercially available so far.

­Diagnosis

­Therapy

The fragile nature of mycoplasmas mandates careful
attention to specimen collection, inoculation of trans­
port medium, and proper transportation and shipping
conditions. Laboratory diagnosis of canine and feline
mycoplasmas is commonly achieved by cultivation
(Figure 98.1) which also allows quantification or by poly­
merase chain reaction (PCR) if a particular Mycoplasma
species is sought.
Cultivation is, however, expensive and requires special­
ized media and expertise not commonly available at all
laboratories. Culture results are usually available within
2–4 days for most canine and feline mycoplasmas, but
definitive species identification requires additional tests
which traditionally include serologic methods depending
on specific antisera to each individual Mycoplasma spe­
cies. Such specific antisera are not readily available in
most diagnostic laboratories and multiple cross‐reactions
may occur.
To circumvent the limitations of serologic differentia­
tion methods, more accurate and rapid identification
schemes employing PCR‐restriction fragment length pol­
ymorphism (RFLP) of the 16S‐23S intergenic region have

In most diagnostic laboratories, susceptibility testing of
mycoplasmas to antimicrobials is not available. As is
known, mycoplasmas are inherently resistant to beta‐
lactam antibiotics. Treatment with nonbeta‐lactams
such as macrolides, tetracycline, chloramphenicol, clin­
damycin or fluoroquinolones should be effective against
most canine and feline mycoplasmas providing that ani­
mals are treated for an extended period. For example, in
cats with URTD, M. felis was eliminated with either pra­
dofloxacin or doxycycline treatment for 42 days. No vac­
cines are currently available to prevent Mycoplasma
infections in dogs and cats although they are successfully
used in other animals.

­Public Health Implications
Due to their rather strict host specificity, mycoplasmas
of the dog and cat are not considered a major public
health risk. Zoonotic infections have only been occa­
sionally documented, predominantly involving immuno­
suppressed individuals.
Figure 98.1 Cultivation.

VetBooks.ir

98 Nonhemotropic Mycoplasma, Ureaplasma, and L‐Form Bacteria

­Further Reading
Brown DR, May M, Michaels DL, Barbet AF. Genome
annotation of five Mycoplasma canis strains. J Bacteriol
2012; 194(15): 4138–9.
Greene CE, Chalker VJ. Nonhemotropic mycoplasmal,
ureaplasmal, and L‐form infections. In: Sykes J,
Greene C, eds. Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat,
4th edn. St Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2012, pp.
319–25.
Kastelic S, Cizeli I, Narat M, et al. Molecular characteri­
sation of the Mycoplasma cynos haemagglutinin HapA.
Vet Microbiol 2015; 175(1): 35–43.
May M, Brown DR. Secreted sialidase activity of canine
mycoplasmas. Vet Microbiol 2009; 137(3‐4): 380–3.
McAuliffe L, Ellis RJ, Lawes JR, Ayling RD, Nicholas RA.
16S rDNA PCR and denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis: a single generic test for detecting and

differentiating Mycoplasma species. J Med Microbiol
2005; 54(8): 731–9.
Michaels DL, Leibowitz JA, Azaiza MT, et al. Cellular
microbiology of Mycoplasma canis. Infect Immun 2016;
84(6): 1785–95.
Pereyre S, Tardy F, Renaudin H, et al. Identification and
subtyping of clinically relevant human and ruminant
mycoplasmas by use of matrix‐assisted laser desorption
ionization‐time of flight mass spectrometry. J Clin
Microbiol 2013; 51(10): 3314–23.
Spergser J, Rosengarten R. Identification and differentiation
of canine Mycoplasma isolates by 16S‐23S rDNA PCR‐
RFLP. Vet Microbiol 2007; 125(1‐2): 170–4.
Walker CA, Mannering SA, Shields S, Blake DP, Brownlie
J. Complete genome sequence of Mycoplasma cynos
strain C142. Genome Announc 2013; 1(1): ii.

935

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

937

99
Spotted Fever and Typhus Group Rickettsia
Linda Kidd, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
College of Veterinary Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Spotted Fever Group (SFG) and Typhus Group (TG)
Rickettsia are alpha‐proteobacteria belonging to the
genus Rickettsia, family Rickettsiaceae, order Rickettsialis.
There are over 20 species of SFG Rickettsia, whereas the
TG Rickettsia include only R. typhi and R. prowazekii.
The division of Rickettsia into groups is based on phenotypic and, more recently, genotypic characteristics.
One of the clinically important phenotypic characteristics
that differentiates the SFG and TG Rickettsia is their
vectors. Members of the SFG Rickettsia are primarily transmitted by ticks whereas R. typhi is transmitted by fleas, and
R. prowazekii is transmitted by lice and other ectoarasites.
Interestingly, R. felis, a Rickettsia that has characteristics of
both TG and SFG, is transmitted by both fleas and ticks.
Spotted Fever Group Rickettsia have both pathogenic
and nonpathogenic species. The two most pathogenic and
well‐studied members of the SFG Rickettsia are R. rickettsii,
the cause of Rocky Mountain and Brazilian spotted fever,
and R. conorii, the cause of Mediterranean spotted fever
(MSF) in people. Infections with many other species of
SFG Rickettsia have been described in people with spotted
fever‐type illness in recent years. Some of these new rickettsioses are caused by newly discovered species while
others have been associated with species previously
thought to be nonpathogenic endosymbionts of ticks.
Discovery of the pathogenicity of atypical species has been
greatly facilitated by advances in molecular biology that
allow easy and accurate differentiation of species.
Illness caused by R. rickettsii is very well characterized
in dogs and is quite similar to Rocky Mountain spotted
fever (RMSF) in people. Recently, a spotted fever‐type
illness associated with R. conorii infection was also
described in dogs. Many recent studies have shown that
exposure to and infection with additional species of SFG
Rickettsia occur in dogs. The ability for these additional

species to cause illness has not been well characterized
to date. However, it is important for practitioners to be
aware of their potential as disease‐causing agents.
The ability of SFG Rickettsia to cause disease in cats is
not known. Antibodies to several SFG Rickettsia have
been detected in cats and recently, DNA from some SFG
Rickettsia species most closely resembling R. massiliae
Bar29 and R. conorii has been amplified from naturally
infected cats. Although antibodies to R. rickettsii are
detected in cats in endemic areas, active infection and
associated clinical signs have not been documented.
Thus, whether RMSF occurs in cats is not known.
Rickettsia felis, a SFG Rickettsia transmitted by the cat
flea (Ctenocephalides felis), is an important cause of illness in people. Rickettsia felis has been amplified from
the blood of dogs and experimentally infected cats.
Although the organism has been detected in the gingiva
of naturally infected cats, bacteremia in naturally infected
cats has not been documented. No association between
infection or seropositivity and illness in cats or dogs has
been documented.
The ability of TG Rickettsia to cause disease in cats and
dogs is also not known. However, R. typhi, the cause of
murine typhus in people, infects cat fleas and has been
detected in the blood of cats and dogs. Cats and dogs in
domestic areas commonly have antibodies to R. typhi.
Whether the organism causes disease in dogs or cats
remains to be determined.
Because it is well characterized and the most common
cause of illness caused by Rickettsia species in small
animals, canine RMSF caused by R. rickettsii is the focus
of the remainder of this chapter. However, practitioners
should keep in mind that infection and illness with other
SFG and TG Rickettsia could occur in cats and dogs.
Importantly, the flea and tick vectors that transmit these
organisms must be controlled on pets to protect their
human companions.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

938

Section 9 Infectious Disease

Rickettsia rickettsii in Dogs
Rickettsia rickettsii is a tick‐transmitted obligately intracellular coccobacillus that infects endothelial cells.
Because it is endotheliotropic, vasculitis is a major clinical manifestation of infection. This results in disordered
primary hemostasis, tissue edema, hypovolemia, and
microthrombosis. Thrombocytopenia is common in
dogs, and occurs due to vasculitis and antibody‐mediated platelet destruction. Increased vascular permeability and associated edema and hypovolemia result from
disruption of endothelial cell adherens junctions and
endothelial cell death, and expression of inflammatory
cytokines. Organisms also induce changes in platelet
adherence to endothelium, increased tissue factor
expression, and increased plasminogen activator inhibitor, and cause the release of von Willebrand factor, all of
which likely contribute to microthrombosis.

Dogs are sentinels for spotted fever rickettsioses in
people. RMSF in dogs can occur before, or coincide with,
outbreaks of RMSF in people in the same household or
community. Similarly, there is an increased risk of RMSF
in people living near seropositive dogs in endemic areas.
It is likely that as more species of SFG Rickettsia are
shown to infect dogs, they will play a role as sentinels for
these novel rickettsial infections as well.

­Signalment
Young and pure‐bred dogs are overrepresented in some
but not other studies. Although some studies suggest
male dogs may be at increased risk, no definitive sex predilection has been documented.

­Diagnosis
­Epidemiology
Rickettsia rickettsii is transmitted by several hard (ixodid) ticks including Dermacentor variabilis (American
dog tick), Dermacentor andersoni (Rocky Mountain
wood tick), Amblyomma americanum (Lone Star tick),
Amblyomma cajennense (Cayenne tick), and Rhipicephalus
sanguineus (brown dog tick). Historically, the geographic
distribution of RMSF in the US has primarily followed
that of its primary tick vectors, D. variabilis and D.
andersoni. In endemic areas, most cases of canine and
human RMSF are reported from April through October,
months of peak tick activity. Dogs living outdoors, particularly those with access to shrubs and high grass, are
at increased risk.
Increasing travel and the effects of climate change on
tick populations and habitat are changing the geographic
distribution of RMSF and other emerging infectious diseases. For example, a recent fatal outbreak of RMSF in
people occurred in a nonendemic area of Arizona. The
outbreak was caused by the ubiquitously distributed tick
R. sanguineus. Retrospectively, it was shown that infection existed in the dog population before the fatal outbreak in people. Rhipicephalus sanguineus is the primary
vector of R. rickettsii in Mexico. In South America,
Amblyomma species are the main vectors. Recently, A.
americanum was implicated in the transmission of R.
rickettsii to a person in North Carolina. In fact, the
importance of D. variabilis as a vector for RMSF in
endemic areas of the US has recently come into question.
Veterinarians should consider the possibility of transmission by novel vectors if dogs present with clinical
signs of RMSF in nonendemic areas or at an unusual
time of year.

Clinical Signs
The clinical signs and response to therapy for canine
RMSF are very similar to RMSF in people. It is very
important to be familiar with clinical signs of the disease
because treatment must begin prior to diagnostic confirmation. RMSF is primarily an acute disease. Chronic
infection has not been documented in naturally infected
dogs. However, a recent experimental study documented
an apparent relapse of clinical signs and bacteremia in a
dog after treatment. Low numbers of SFG Rickettsia typically circulate in blood free or in detached endothelial
cells for a short period of time after infection (13 days).
This is the time when clinical signs are observed. Co‐
infection with other vector‐borne agents is common and
should be considered if the clinical presentation is atypical, there is an incomplete response to doxycycline therapy or clinical signs have been present chronically.
Because R. rickettsii infects endothelial cells, vasculitis
is the major clinical sign associated with infection.
However, due to variation in the extent and severity of
vascular injury among dogs, a range of signs can occur
and disease manifestations are initially mild and nonspecific. The nonspecific nature of the clinical signs makes
diagnosis difficult. This is very important because a delay
in diagnosis and appropriate antimicrobial therapy dramatically increases morbidity and mortality in people
and dogs. Therefore, the clinician must have a high index
of suspicion in order to correctly diagnose and treat this
disease. This can be difficult because often there is no
known history of a tick bite. Lethargy and anorexia are
common, and may be the only clinical signs. Vomiting
and diarrhea occur frequently. Melena may also occur.
Central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities including

VetBooks.ir

99 Spotted Fever and Typhus Group Rickettsia

vestibular disease and seizures may be observed. Dramatic
and rapid weight loss has been described.
On physical examination, fever and ocular abnormalities are common. Ocular signs may include mucopurulent discharge, scleral and conjunctival injection and
hemorrhage, conjunctivitis, uveitis, retinal hemorrhage,
and retinitis. Lymphadenomegaly, splenomegaly, nasal
discharge, epistaxis, tachypnea, dyspnea, petechiae,
ecchymosis, peripheral edema, hyperemia, and necrosis
may occur. Cutaneous lesions are not always present in
dogs or people. Orchitis and scrotal edema, hyperemia,
and epididymal pain are common in intact male dogs.
Generalized myalgia and arthralgia can be observed.
CNS abnormalities can be focal or generalized and
include paraparesis, tetraparesis, ataxia, hyperesthesia,
central or peripheral vestibular signs, stupor, seizures,
and/or coma. Arrhythmias may be noted. Microvascular
hemorrhage, thrombosis, hypotension, oliguric renal
failure, cardiovascular collapse, and brain death occur
terminally. Thoracic radiographs may show an unstructured interstitial pattern.
Laboratory Testing
Complete blood count (CBC) commonly shows thrombocytopenia but it does not occur in all dogs with
RMSF. Leukopenia or leukocytosis may be observed.
Neutrophils may have toxic change. Nonregenerative
anemia may be present. Serum biochemical abnormalities may include hypoalbuminemia, elevated alkaline
phosphatase, hyponatremia, and mild hyperbilirubinemia. Prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time
(APTT), prothrombin time (PT), and elevated fibrinogen and fibrin degredation products may occur.
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is uncommon. Urinalysis results are variable and may include proteinuria, hematuria, bilirubinuria, and pyuria. Granular
casts can be observed. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis
may reveal a mixed cellular, neutrophilic, or lymphocytic
pleocytosis. Arthrocentesis may reveal a neutrophilic
polyarthritis. Cytologic examination of enlarged lymph
nodes is consistent with reactive lymphoid hyperplasia.
Active infection with a SFG Rickettsia is confirmed in a
patient with compatible and clinical signs and demonstration of the organism using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
or immunohistochemistry, or documentation of seroconversion. Importantly, serology and PCR can be negative at
the time of testing because clinical signs can occur before
seroconversion, and organisms circulate transiently in
blood in low numbers. Repeat testing using PCR can
increase sensitivity. Infection also cannot be definitively
diagnosed by documenting a single positive titer because of
cross‐reactivity with nonpathogenic SFG Rickettsia, and the
potential for long‐lived antibody levels after infection.

Therefore, documenting a fourfold change in titer is necessary to confirm acute infection with SFG Rickettsia using
serology. That said, a single high titer in the context of acute
and compatible clinical signs and an appropriate response
to therapy is suggestive of infection.
Of note, most antibody‐based diagnostic tests do not
differentiate among species of SFG Rickettsia. Some
PCRs can differentiate among species of infecting
Rickettsia while others only amplify rickettsial DNA targets conserved among several species. Veterinarians
should check with their laboratory regarding the sensitivity and specificity of a given PCR, keeping in mind
that in vitro (absolute) sensitivity is higher than in vivo
sensitivity due to low circulating copy numbers of
Rickettsia in blood. Therefore, PCR can enable definitive
diagnosis but a negative PCR does not rule out infection.
It is also important to note that PCRs that specify that
they target SFG Rickettsia may not detect TG Rickettsia.

­Therapy
Appropriate antibiotic therapy must be instituted immediately based on clinical suspicion, before diagnostic tests
confirm infection. Inappropriate or delayed antibiotic therapy may increase morbidity and mortality. Treating with an
antibiotic that is not effective allows rapid progression.
Some antibiotics such as trimethoprim sulfa may worsen
disease in people. Doxycycline (5 mg/kg PO or IV q12h) is
the treatment of choice. It is highly effective at eliminating
R. rickettsii. Furthermore, it provides effective empiric therapy for A. phagocytophilum, Ehrlichia spp., and Borrelia
burgdorferi, agents that are differential diagnoses or may
co‐infect patients with RMSF. Enrofloxacin has been shown
to be effective against R. rickettsii in experimentally infected
dogs. Chloramphenicol was effective in experimentally
infected dogs but may be less effective in treating RMSF in
people. The duration of therapy for RMSF is short, with
7–14 days being adequate in most cases. Treatment a few
days past defervesence is recommended. A longer course of
(doxycycline) therapy is recommended for patients co‐
infected with an Ehrlichia sp. or B. burgdorferi.
Many patients require hospitalization. Intravenous
antibiotic therapy may be necessary in debilitated
patients. Aggressive supportive care for complications
such as thrombosis, CNS deficits, and gastrointestinal
signs may be necessary. Due to the loss in vascular integrity, fluids should be administered with caution and colloids may be warranted in some cases. The use of
corticosteroids in dogs with RMSF is controversial.
Antiinflammatory and immunosuppressive doses did
not affect overall outcome in experimentally infected
dogs, but rickettsemia was prolonged in dogs concurrently treated with doxycycline and immunosuppressive

939

VetBooks.ir

940

Section 9 Infectious Disease

doses of corticosteroids. Antiinflammatory doses of corticosteroids have been used in dogs with severe CNS
manifestations and may be necessary topically or systemically for treatment of ocular abnormalities.
Response to appropriate antibiotic therapy is very rapid
(24–48 hours). Co‐infection with B. burgdorferi, Ehrlichia
spp., Babesia spp., and Bartonella spp. should be considered in dogs with severe or prolonged clinical signs and
those that fail to respond to doxycycline. Residual CNS
and other deficits may occur in severely affected patients.
A convalescent serum sample should be drawn 2–3 weeks
after the initial serologic sample in PCR‐negative patients.

­Prognosis
The prognosis is good to excellent if the disease is diagnosed and treated with appropriate antibiotics and supportive care early in the course of illness.

­Public Health Implications
Rocky Mountain spotted fever is reportable in people
in the US. It is also a reportable disease for dogs in

some counties in the US. Because direct inoculation
into blood or aerosolization can cause infection, all
specimens should be handled with care and marked
clearly as biohazards. Avoid needle sticks, contact
with cuts in the skin, and aerosolization of rickettsemic blood.
It is important for veterinarians to communicate
with owners and physicians that infection in a dog
may precede tick‐transmitted infection to owners or
neighbors. Instruct clients to remove ticks properly
and avoid crushing to prevent exposure to infected
hemolymph. Refer to www.cdc.gov/ticks/removing_a_
tick.html. Educating owners with regard to the importance of tick control and prevention for both people
and pets and the environment is critical. In cases
where Rh. sanguineus is the vector, environmental
control is particularly important. The veterinarian
should keep in mind that novel and well‐characterized
species of SFG Rickettsia are important causes of
emerging infectious disease. Furthermore, R rickettsii
is considered a potential bioterrorist agent. Because
dogs are sentinels for infection, veterinarians can play
an important role in detecting, defining, and preventing illness in their canine patients and their human
companions.

­Further Reading
Biggs HM, Behravesh CB, Bradley KK, et al. Diagnosis and
management of tickborne rickettsial diseases: Rocky
mountain spotted fever diagnosis and other spotted
fever group rickettsioses, ehrlichioses and
anaplasmosis – United States. A practical guide for
health care and public health professionals. MMWR
Recomm Rep 2016; 65(2): 1–44.
Kidd L, Breitschwerdt E. Rocky Mountain spotted fever. In:
Sykes J, ed. Canine and Feline Infectious Disease. St
Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2014, pp. 300–10.
Levin M, Killmaster L, Zemtsova G, Ritter J, Langham G.
Clinical presentation, convalescence, and relapse of
Rocky Mountain spotted fever in dogs experimentally
infected via tick bite. PLoS One 2014; 9(12): e115105.

Nicholson W, Allen K, McQuiston J, Breitschwerdt E,
Little S. The increasing recognition of rickettsial
pathogens in dogs and people. Trends Parasitol 2010;
26(4): 205–12.
Parola P, Paddock C, Socolovschi C, et al. Update on
tick‐borne rickettsioses around the world: a
geographic approach. Clin Microbiol Rev 2013;
26(4): 657–702.
Segura F, Pons I, Miret J, Pla J, Ortuno A, Nogueras M. The
role of cats in the eco‐epidemiology of spotted fever
group diseases. Vectors Parasites 2014; 7: 353.
www.cdc.gov/lyme/resources/TickborneDiseases.pdf
www.cdc.gov/rmsf

VetBooks.ir

941

100
Lyme Borreliosis
Meryl P. Littman, VMD, DACVIM (SAIM)
University of Pennsylvania, School of Veterinary Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Lyme borreliosis is caused by gram‐negative spirochetes of
the Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato complex, including 21
species and at least 30 strains of B. burgdorferi sensu stricto
in North America and Europe, and B. afzelii, garinii, and
others in Europe. At least 52 Borrelia spp. exist; some 29
cause relapsing fever or rash in people, mimicking Lyme dis­
ease (e.g., B. andersonii, B. hermsii, B. lonestari, B. miyamotoi, B. parkeri, B. recurrentis, B. turicatae). Fever, lameness,
anterior uveitis, splenomegaly, thrombocytopenia, and
spirochetemia were associated with B. turicatae in dogs
in Florida and Texas; B. hermsii was isolated in a febrile
spirochetemic pancytopenic dog in Washington.
Lyme spirochetes are mainly transmitted via Ixodes tick
bites after two days of host attachment, as outer surface
protein A (ospA, the organisms’s attachment to tick
midgut) is downregulated and other antigens (e.g., ospC)
become expressed. The organisms live extracellularly,
associated with fibroblasts and collagen. Disease signs are
due to immune‐mediated reactions, not bacterial toxins or
cellular damage by the organisms. Although many exposed
people develop acute signs of illness (rash, flu‐like signs)
and later possible arthritis, neurologic, and/or cardiac man­
ifestations, most exposed dogs and cats seroconvert with­
out illness. The experimental model in 6–12‐week‐old
beagle puppies showed no illness until 2–5 months after
infected tick exposure. Carrier status and antigenic varia­
tion account for recurrent self‐limiting episodes of ano­
rexia, fever, and lameness. Only <5% of seropositive dogs in
the field show Lyme arthritis. In some endemic areas,
70–90% of healthy dogs are seropositive. Canine Lyme
nephritis is rare (<2% of those exposed), even among sero­
positive retrievers (predisposed breeds). Other manifesta­
tions in dogs are not well documented. Lyme arthritis is rare
in seropositive cats; signs may be due to co‐infection with
Anaplasma phagocytophilum.

Lyme nephritis in dogs is not due to spirochetal renal
invasion but rather Lyme‐specific antigen–antibody
complex deposition and immune‐mediated glomerulo­
nephritis, with secondary changes of tubular necrosis/
regeneration and interstitial nephritis. There is no exper­
imental model of Lyme nephritis, but genetic predisposi­
tion appears to play a role.

­Epidemiology
Ixodes ticks are the main vector of B. burgdorferi. The
main reservoirs are mice, small mammals, and birds. In
the US, 95% of human cases are seen in the Northeast,
MidAtlantic, and Midwest states. Bird migration and cli­
mate changes are extending the habitat of infected ticks
to adjacent areas.

­Signalment
Most affected dogs are middle‐aged, large‐breed dogs
with outdoor lifestyles exposing them to field ticks
questing in leaf litter, hedges, bushes, and tall grasses.
Lyme nephritis can occur in any breed, but Labrador and
golden retrievers appear predisposed.

­History and Clinical Signs
Lyme Arthritis
The experimental tick exposure model shows that dogs
seroconvert and become nonclinical carriers of spiro­
chetes for many years, based on positive spirochetal cul­
tures and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests of skin
and subcutis biopsies from tick bite sites. Very young
(6–12 weeks old) puppies showed signs of illness 2–5

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

942

Section 9 Infectious Disease

months after infected tick exposure, starting with a four‐
day episode of self‐limiting anorexia, fever, lameness,
and local lymphadenopathy in the leg closest to tick
attachment, followed sometimes by several additional
short episodes in the same or different leg(s) every two
weeks, resolving without treatment. Older exposed pup­
pies (13–26 weeks old) showed fewer signs and episodes,
and adult dogs (>26 weeks old) seroconverted without
illness. Antibiotic therapy cleared 85–90% (but not all)
experimental dogs, based on skin biopsy culture and
PCR test results.
In clinical cases in the field, dogs with suspected Lyme
arthritis may show lameness in one leg with a hot swol­
len painful joint and joint effusion. Dogs with polyar­
thropathy (e.g., hocks/carpi) may have co‐infections,
immune‐mediated arthritis or perhaps had multiple tick
attachment sites affecting multiple limbs/joints. Dogs
with Lyme arthritis typically respond quickly (within 1–2
days) to antibiotics, and if they do not, other causes of
signs should be sought. Response to treatment may be
coincidental, due to responsive co‐infections (e.g., ana­
plasmosis), or due to the antiarthritic, antiinflammatory
properties of doxycycline.
Lyme Nephritis
There is no experimental model for Lyme nephritis so
the incubation, progression, best treatment, or whether
Lyme vaccine prevents or promotes aggravates the ill­
ness are unknown. It is suspected to be a chronic mani­
festation, since it is associated with seropositivity and
circulating immune complexes at presentation. Retriever
dogs are predisposed, so an underlying genetic immuno­
dysregulation and/or podocytopathy may exist. Dogs
with early or mild glomerulonephritis may have occult
proteinuria; more severely affected dogs present with
signs of protein‐losing nephropathy (PLN), such as
edema/effusions, thromboembolic events (e.g., pulmo­
nary, saddle, portal, neurovascular), hypertensive dam­
age (e.g., blindness, epistaxis, neurovascular events), and
eventually renal failure (e.g., anorexia, weight loss, eme­
sis, polyuria/polydipsia, and potentially oliguria/anuria).

­Diagnosis
Serology
The organism migrates interstitially (exception: B. mayonii,
a cause of Lyme borreliosis in humans, may travel hematog­
enously) and is difficult to find by cytology with special
stains, culture, or PCR testing, so serologic testing is used for
antibodies directed against natural exposure antigens. Older
tests such as whole‐cell enzyme‐linked i­mmunosorbent

assay (ELISA), indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA),
immunoglobulin (Ig) G, IgM, and western immunoblot
show cross‐reactivity with antibodies from vaccines and
other infections, and are no longer preferred.
The C6 peptide antibody test is sensitive and specific
for natural exposure antibodies against part of the VlsE
antigen, which is only expressed by the spirochete after
infecting the host and is not in Lyme vaccines. Antibodies
against the C6 peptide rise 3–5 weeks after infection and
persist in carriers. Qualitative in‐house C6 peptide
­testing is combined with tests for heartworm antigen
and antibodies against multiple Anaplasma and
Ehrlichia spp. (e.g., SNAP‐4Dx Plus, IDEXX Reference
Laboratories). Quantitative C6 peptide antibodies (Lyme
Quant C6, IDEXX) usually wane 50% by six months post
treatment. The new baseline result is useful for com­
parisons should future signs of illness suggest relapse or
reinfection. The AccuPlex®4 test (Antech Diagnostics
Reference Laboratories) tests for heartworm antigen
and antibodies against Anaplasma phagocytophilum
and Ehrlichia canis; its qualitative Lyme antibody test
uses an algorithm comparing the magnitude and
responses to five markers, including those usually found
in vaccinates (ospA) vs after natural exposure (ospC,
VlsE, ospF), and for recent exposure (ospC antibody
rises 2–3 weeks post exposure and wanes within 3–5
months) vs past/chronic infection (ospF antibody rises
6–8 weeks post exposure and persists). The Multiplex
test (Cornell University) quantitates ospA, ospC, and
ospF antibodies. The in‐house Abaxis/Zoetis qualitative
tests for only Lyme (VetScan) or for Lyme/A.
phagocytophilum/E. canis/heartworm (FLEX4) tests for
Lyme antibodies directed against proprietary antigens
mimicking VlsE, ospC, and p41 (flagellin).
Compromised interpretation of the Lyme test results
above may be due to ospA antibodies possibly present in
nonvaccinates after natural exposure (acutely or in carri­
ers), ospC antibodies induced by new Lyme vaccines
(bacterins and chimeric recombinant), and cross‐react­
ing flagellin antibodies from other infections/vaccines.
The magnitude of any natural exposure Lyme antibody
titer does not predict illness, but may validate exposure.
Lyme Arthritis
Many causes for lameness or inability to rise need to be
considered. Overdiagnosis is a problem; one study
showed that 40% of Lyme arthritis cases were misdiag­
nosed and signs were due to other causes – for example,
Lyme seropositivity was coincidental. Blood tests
­(complete blood count [CBC]/biochemical profile) are
not abnormal but other tick‐borne or other illnesses may
cause changes such as cytopenias, hypoalbuminemia,
hyperglobulinemia, azotemia, etc. All seropositive dogs

VetBooks.ir

100 Lyme Borreliosis

should be checked for proteinuria. Joint tap cytology
shows a neutrophilic inflammatory response without
bacteria, but morulae may be seen due to co‐infections.
Lyme Nephritis
Abnormalities may include elevated blood pressure
measurement, proteinuria/cylindruria, ± glucosuria, ±
decreased concentrating ability, hypoalbuminemia,
hypercholesterolemia, azotemia, hyperphosphatemia,
anemia, thrombocytopenia, and abnormal (hypercoag­
ulable) thromboelastography. Diagnostic work‐up
of PLN also includes screening for other infectious,
inflammatory, genetic, and neoplastic diseases that
cause proteinuria (e.g., serologic testing, urine culture,
chest radiographs, abdominal ultrasonogram). Renal
imaging is usually unremarkable. Renal biopsy by
­experienced personnel with thin section light micros­
copy, special stains, immunofluorescence, immunohis­
tochemistry, and transmission electron microscopy
shows immune‐complex glomerulonephritis (staining
techniques for Lyme‐specific complexes are not vali­
dated), and possible secondary tubular necrosis/regen­
eration and interstitial nephritis.

­Therapy
Therapy for nonclinical nonproteinuric dogs is not war­
ranted. For Lyme arthritis signs, doxycycline (10–20 mg/
kg/day for 30 days) or minocycyline is recommended
because of possible responsive co‐infections. Other
antispirochetal antibiotics include amoxicillin, erythro­
mycin, azithromycin, cefovecin, and ceftriaxone. Mana­
gement for Lyme nephritis includes longer antibiotic
regimes (perhaps until the Quant C6 result has waned), a
modified low‐protein diet, renin‐angiotenin‐aldosterone
system inhibitors (e.g., angiotensin‐converting inhibitors
and/or angiotensin receptor blockers), omega‐3 fatty
acids, antithrombotics, antihypertensives, drugs for renal
failure (e.g., antiulcer medications, phosphate binders),
and possibly immunosuppressives if renal biopsy shows
glomerular immune‐complex deposition or, in rapidly
progressive cases, even without biopsy confirmation
(compassionate care). The best protocol is unknown but
may include single or combined mycophenolate, cyclo­
phosphamide, steroids, chlorambucil, cyclosporin, and/
or azathioprine.

­Prognosis
The prognosis for Lyme arthritis is excellent as the
course is self‐limiting or responsive to antibiotics within

1–2 days. If unresponsive, consider other causes. The
prognosis for Lyme nephritis is guarded to poor if the
dog presents in renal failure, but may be better in earlier
stages. Monitoring abnormalities frequently with treat­
ment adaptation is essential.

­Prevention
Tick control year round (ticks are active when tem­
perature is >40 °F or 4 °C) is most important, since
ticks in Lyme‐endemic areas may transmit borreliosis
as well as anaplasmosis, babesiosis, ehrlichiosis,
mycoplasmosis, and Rocky Mountain spotted fever,
and possibly bartonellosis. Some of these are trans­
mitted within the first day of tick attachment so prod­
ucts which ­prevent tick attachment (e.g., permethrins
or amitraz) or kill ticks fast after attachment (e.g.,
isoxazolines) are preferred.
There are five Lyme vaccines available: three killed
adjuvanted bivalent bacterins (LymeVax, Zoetis;
Duramune Lyme, E
­ lanco; Nobivac Lyme, Merck Animal
Health) including ospA and ospC, a nonadjuvanted
recombinant subunit ospA vaccine (Recombitek Lyme,
Merial), and a chimeric recombinant adjuvanted vac­
cine which includes ospA plus ospC from seven strains
(Vanguard crLyme, Zoetis). Even in endemic areas,
Lyme vaccination is controversial because:
tick control is important to protect dogs from other
tick‐borne diseases in these areas
●● most exposed dogs do not become ill or they respond
quickly to commonly used antibiotics
●● Lyme vaccines may interfere with some diagnostic
tests
●● Lyme vaccines are costly, have inconsistent efficacy,
produce weaker/shorter duration of immunity
that may require six-month boostering, and cause
more postvaccinal adverse events than other canine
vaccines.
●● the most serious forms of Lyme disease have an immune‐
mediated pathogenesis, so theoretically it may not be a
good idea to introduce Lyme antigens to genetically
predisposed dogs, lest sensitization or aggravation
of immune‐complex deposition in glomeruli or joints
may occur.
●●

These last possibilities may not appear temporally asso­
ciated with vaccination and are difficult to study without
an experimental model of Lyme nephritis. Most con­
cerns are anecdotal and theoretical, and because owner
compliance to using adequate tick control may be prob­
lematic, many veterinarians recommend Lyme vaccina­
tions in addition to tick control.

943

VetBooks.ir

944

Section 9 Infectious Disease

­Public Health Implications
A seropositive dog has exposure to wildlife, may be a car­
rier for infection with other tick‐borne diseases or lepto­
spirosis, and is a sentinel for Lyme exposure in the environs.

Educate owners about landscaping, tick prevention on
their pets and themselves, and that physicians in Lyme‐
endemic areas may prescribe humans a single day’s pre­
ventive dose of doxycycline to be taken within 72 hours of
removing an engorged Ixodes tick.

­Further Reading
Goldstein RE, Brovida C, Fernandez‐del Palacio MJ, et al.
Consensus recommendations for treatment for dogs
with serology positive glomerular disease. J Vet Intern
Med 2013; 27: S60–S66.
Littman MP. A matter of opinion: should we treat
asymptomatic, nonproteinuric Lyme‐seropositive dogs
with antibiotics? Clinic Brief 2011; 9: 13–16.
Littman MP. State‐of‐the‐art review: Lyme nephritis. J Vet
Emerg Crit Care 2013; 23: 163–73.
Littman MP, Goldstein RE. Vaccinating dogs against Lyme
disease: two points of view. Today’s Vet Pract 2014; 4(1):
62–5.

Littman MP, Goldstein RE, Labato MA, et al. ACVIM
small animal consensus statement on Lyme disease in
dogs: diagnosis, treatment, and prevention. J Vet Intern
Med 2006; 20: 422–34.
Littman MP, Gerber B, Goldstein RE, et al. ACVIM
consensus update on Lyme borreliosis in dogs and cats.
J Vet Intern Med 2018; 32: 887–903.
Moroff S, Woodruff C, Woodring T, et al. Multiple antigen
target approach using the AccuPlex®4 BioCD system to
detect Borrelia burgdorferi antibodies in experimentally
infected and vaccinated dogs. J Vet Diagn Invest 2015;
27: 581–8.

VetBooks.ir

945

101
Leptospirosis
Katharine F. Lunn, BVMS, MS, PhD, MRCVS, DACVIM (SAIM)
College of Veterinary Medicine, NC State, Raleigh, NC, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology

­Epidemiology

Leptospirosis is a zoonotic bacterial disease affecting the
health of animals and humans throughout the world. In
small animals, clinical leptospirosis is a significant problem
in dogs, but the role of leptospires in feline disease is still
poorly understood. Leptospiral organisms are typically
divided into serovars, based on antibody responses to surface proteins. Serovars are further classified into antigenically related serogroups. Canine leptospirosis is caused by
several serovars of the pathogenic species Leptospira
interrogans sensu latu. Examples of serovars that have
been implicated in canine disease include Grippotyphosa
(serogroup Grippotyphosa), Pomona (serogroup Pomona),
and Bratislava (serogroup Australis).
Leptospiral organisms enter the host through intact
mucosal surfaces or damaged skin. During the first week of
infection, organisms multiply and spread throughout the
vascular space, leading to vascular damage and invasion of
many organs and tissues. During this initial leptospiremic
phase, organisms can be isolated from the blood. The
immune phase of infection begins in the second week, with
the appearance of serum antibodies. This leads to clearing
of leptospires from the blood and many organs; however,
organisms may be protected from the systemic antibody
response in sites such as the renal tubules and the eye.
Leptospiruria develops in the second week after infection
and can persist for days to months, depending on the species of the mammalian host and the infecting serovar.
Pathologic changes associated with leptospirosis
include vasculitis and endothelial cell damage. The precise mechanisms by which leptospires cause tissue damage and disease are not well understood, but several
toxins and enzymes produced by the organisms likely
contribute to disease pathogenesis. The pathogenicity of
leptospires may also be related to their motility and their
ability to adhere to, and penetrate, cells.

Pathogenic leptospires are maintained in the environment
through the shedding of organisms in the urine of a wide
variety of endemically infected mammalian reservoir
hosts. These reservoir hosts usually do not develop clinical
disease, but serve as a source infection for incidental hosts,
such as dogs and humans. In some locations, there appears
to be an increased incidence of leptospirosis in late summer and fall, perhaps associated with weather conditions
and wildlife behavior. Leptospires survive, but do not replicate, in warm and wet environments, whereas freezing,
ultraviolet radiation, and dehydration all reduce survival.
Transmission to incidental hosts is usually indirect, through
exposure to contaminated water, soil, food or bedding,
although direct contact through ingestion, bite wounds, or
direct contact with urine is possible.
Reservoir hosts that likely contribute to environmental
contamination include the raccoon, opossum, fox, skunk,
mouse, rat, vole, squirrel, and deer. Clinicians should note
that many of these reservoirs co‐exist with humans in
urban, suburban, and periurban environments, thus leptospirosis is not confined to large‐breed, working, predominantly outdoor dogs or rural dogs. Many clinicians
routinely diagnose leptospirosis in small‐breed indoor
dogs. Indeed, two different recent studies have demonstrated that dogs in some urban areas are at increased risk
for leptospirosis, and that small dogs (<15 lb) were more
likely to be diagnosed with the disease. Case reports and
serologic surveys have demonstrated both clinical leptospirosis and subclinical exposure to the organisms in dogs
from many locations in the US and Canada, and it is likely
that only desert regions are truly free of the disease.
Unfortunately, it is difficult to determine which serovars
predominate in different geographic regions, as diagnosis
is usually based on antibody titers, and these cannot identify the infecting serovar. Further studies are needed to

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

946

Section 9 Infectious Disease

isolate and genetically type the organisms in order to better understand the epidemiology of leptospirosis in different hosts and regions of the world.

­Signalment
Any age, breed, and sex of dog is susceptible to leptospirosis, and the diagnosis should not be ruled out on the
basis of signalment. A recent study of the Veterinary
Medical Database demonstrated signalment changes in
canine leptospirosis from 1970 to 2009. In the most
recent decade studied, the highest prevalence of disease
was in the 7–9.9 year age group, and in dogs <15 lb. The
terrier group had the highest prevalence in this decade,
and Yorkshire terriers had the highest prevalence among
small breeds. Other sources have suggested an increased
susceptibility in German shepherd dogs, although this
has not been rigorously evaluated.
There are few reports of clinical leptospirosis in cats,
but it has been shown that cats can seroconvert to leptospiral organisms, and there is some evidence that cats
may shed leptospires in the urine. However, it has not
been clearly demonstrated that leptospirosis is a significant clinical problem in domestic cats.

­History and Clinical Signs
The manifestations of leptospirosis in dogs range from
peracute disease to subclinical infection, and include
sudden death, acute kidney injury (AKI), liver disease,
vasculitis, and uveitis. Because this is a zoonotic disease,
it is essential that veterinarians maintain a high index of
suspicion for this infection, particularly in cases with
atypical clinical signs.
Typical clinical signs in acute or subacute leptospirosis
include lethargy, anorexia, fever, muscle pain, abdominal
pain, signs of shock, dehydration, vomiting, diarrhea,
bleeding, jaundice, polyuria, oliguria, and anuria. While
AKI has been the most common presentation for canine
leptospirosis in recent years, affected patients may also
present with a combination of renal and hepatic disease,
or hepatic disease alone.
Acute kidney injury in leptospirosis may be anuric,
oliguric, or polyuric. Dogs that survive AKI due to
­leptospirosis may progress to chronic kidney disease
(CKD). Acute kidney injury may be undetected in subclinically infected animals, and those patients may eventually be diagnosed with CKD of unknown cause.
Leptospirosis should also be considered in any dog with
previously diagnosed CKD that develops unexplained
“acute‐on‐chronic” kidney disease. Other manifestations

of renal disease in canine patients with leptospirosis
include glucosuria in the absence of hyperglycemia,
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, and renal tubular acidosis. Liver disease associated with leptospirosis is predominantly cholestatic in nature, with minimal histopatho­logic
changes.
Clinicians should be aware that patients with leptospirosis may present with unusual signs, including respiratory distress, bleeding disorders, effusions, and uveitis.
Pulmonary disease in dogs with leptospirosis is probably
more common than previously suspected, and has been
attributed to pulmonary hemorrhage, a known serious
complication of leptospirosis in people. Bleeding disorders may manifest as petechiae, epistaxis or gastrointestinal bleeding, and are most likely due to vasculitis,
although the mechanisms are poorly understood.

­Diagnosis
Common but nonspecific laboratory findings in dogs
with leptospirosis include azotemia, hyperphosphatemia,
metabolic acidosis, hyper‐ or hypokalemia, hyperbilirubinemia, increased serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
activity, and increased serum alanine aminotransferase
(ALT) activity; the latter is usually less markedly
increased than ALP activity. Mild to moderate thrombocytopenia is relatively common, although the platelet
count is seldom low enough to directly cause spontaneous bleeding. Urine specific gravity can be hyposthenuric in patients with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus; it may
also be isosthenuric or concentrated, depending on the
extent of renal involvement. Urinalysis may reveal hematuria, cylindruria, proteinuria, or glucosuria.
Imaging findings are also nonspecific, and may include
reticulonodular pulmonary interstitial or alveolar opacities on radiographs, and ground‐glass nodules or diffuse
opacity and peribronchovascular interstitial thickening
on thoracic computed tomography (CT). Abdominal
ultrasound examination has been reported to reveal
renal and hepatic changes, perirenal and peritoneal effusions, intestinal wall thickening, and lymphadenopathy.
Diagnostic tests for leptospirosis rely on detection of
the organism, or detection of an antibody response in the
infected patient. It is recommended that both types of
tests be utilized to maximize the chance of diagnosing
this zoonotic disease. It is essential that the results of any
diagnostic test be interpreted in light of the patient’s
clinical signs, clinicopathologic findings, and vaccination
history.
The microscopic agglutination test (MAT) is still the
most widely used antibody detection test for the diagnosis of leptospirosis. Advantages of this test are that it is
widely available and provides a numerical titer that allows

VetBooks.ir

101 Leptospirosis

comparison of paired acute and convalescent titers. Most
authors recommend that an initial titer of ≥1:800 is consistent with a diagnosis of leptospirosis in an unvaccinated dog. If initial titers are low, or the patient has an
unknown vaccine history, convalescent titers can provide
further information. Although a 2–4‐week period
between acute and convalescent titers is often recommended, it is not always necessary to wait that long.
When performing paired acute and convalescent titers, a
fourfold change (usually an increase) in titer supports the
diagnosis of leptospirosis. Most laboratories that perform
the MAT will test patient sera against multiple serovars
(representative of serogroups) and often report seropositivity to more than one serogroup, due to significant
cross‐reactivity. For this and other reasons, it should be
noted that MAT results cannot identify the infecting
leptospiral serovar in an individual patient. However, for
most clinicians this is of little importance, as there is currently no evidence that clinical signs, treatment, or prognosis are serovar or serogroup specific. When paired
titers are performed, the MAT is a highly sensitive and
specific test for leptospirosis.
More recently available serologic tests for the diagnosis of canine leptospirosis include an enzyme‐linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test that detects antibodies to the lipoprotein LipL32 found on the surface of
pathogenic leptospires, available both at a reference laboratory and as a point‐of‐care test (SNAP® Lepto Test,
IDEXX), and a patient‐side lateral flow device test that
detects IgM antibodies to a whole‐cell antigen from
Grippotyphosa and Bratislava serovars (WITNESS®
Lepto, Zoetis). These tests give qualitative positive or
negative antibody results, with proposed advantages
including lower cost and shorter turn‐around time, compared to the MAT. In one study, SNAP Lepto demonstrated similar performance to the MAT for the detection
of antibodies to Leptospira spp., with agreement being
greater in MAT‐positive samples with higher titers. In a
more recent study comparing MAT, SNAP Lepto, and
WITNESS Lepto in experimentally infected dogs, the
WITNESS test detected seroconversion to common
leptospiral serovars in all 32 dogs by day 10 after infection, the MAT detected seroconversion in 30 of 32 dogs
by day 14, and the SNAP test detected antibodies in only
three of 32 dogs in the 14‐day follow‐up period. However,
it is important to note that the challenge infection in
these dogs did not result in clinical illness, and the comparative performance of these tests may be different in a
clinical setting in which patients are sick and potentially
presented later in the course of infection.
Advantages of the point‐of‐care tests include that they
potentially allow earlier diagnosis of leptospirosis, thus
facilitating early institution of safe patient handling protocols and appropriate medical therapy. However, these

tests cannot reliably distinguish vaccinal titers from natural infection, and they do not provide numerical titers
to allow comparison of acute and convalescent titers.
These disadvantages are particularly important in dogs
with low initial titers, vaccinated dogs, or dogs with an
unknown vaccination history.
If a negative result is obtained on either point‐of‐care
test, additional serum samples should be obtained for
acute and convalescent MAT titers (or the point‐of‐care
test can be repeated in 1–2 weeks), polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) testing should also be performed (see
later), and leptospirosis should not be ruled out unless an
alternate diagnosis is confirmed, or acute and convalescent serologic tests are negative. If a positive result is
obtained on a point‐of‐care test and the patient is vaccinated, or has an unknown vaccine history, acute and
convalescent MAT titers should be performed to distinguish between vaccinal titers and natural infection.
Bacterial culture of pathogenic leptospires is very
rarely used as a diagnostic test in dogs, because it is technically demanding, of limited availability, and requires
several months of incubation. Dark‐field microscopy and
fluorescent antibody tests have been used to demonstrate the presence of organisms in urine samples but
sensitivity is poor, and these tests have largely been
replaced by PCR‐based assays. Blood or urine samples
from canine patients can be tested by PCR for the presence of DNA from pathogenic leptospires.
A variety of different PCR tests are available, with
quantitative tests such as real‐time PCR likely to be more
sensitive. Despite the wide availability and frequent use
of PCR‐based assays, there are relatively few published
studies that evaluate their sensitivity and specificity.
Potential causes of false‐negative results include low
leptospire numbers in the sample collected, intermittent
shedding of organisms in the urine, or the presence of
PCR inhibitors in the sample. False‐positive results on
the PCR assay may be due to sampling from a subclinically affected carrier, the presence of dead organisms, or
contamination of the sample during collection, handling,
or processing in the laboratory. If leptospirosis is suspected, obtaining both blood and urine samples for PCR
testing may increase the chances of detecting the organism. Positive or negative results from the PCR should be
further followed up with acute and convalescent MAT
titers, and should always be interpreted in light of the
patient’s clinical signs.

­Therapy
There are no prospective studies that provide data
regarding the best antibiotic protocols for treatment of
leptospirosis in dogs. There are many studies that address

947

VetBooks.ir

948

Section 9 Infectious Disease

antibiotic therapy in other species, including experimental models of leptospirosis, and large animals such as pigs
and cows. Antibiotics used to treat leptospirosis should
terminate leptospiremia and eliminate the carrier state.
Doxycycline is often used as it is generally believed to
achieve both of these goals. Doxycycline is also used prophylactically in humans who have a high risk of exposure
to leptospirosis. Penicillins are often used to clear leptospiremia, which should also reduce the risk of organ
damage. Penicillin, ampicillin, and amoxicillin all appear
to be effective.
The choice of antibiotic to be used in the acute phase
of the disease is generally dictated by the clinical status of
the patient. In general, injectable antibiotics are used in
acutely ill patients that are vomiting or not eating.
Patients that tolerate oral medications may be started on
amoxicillin and then changed to oral doxycycline, or oral
doxycycline may be used as the sole therapy if the patient
tolerates it. Again, there are no published data that
address the duration of antibiotic therapy in dogs with
leptospirosis. Most clinicians treat with a penicillin for
1–2 weeks, followed by doxycycline for two weeks, or
treat with doxycycline alone for 2–3 weeks.
For dogs with AKI due to leptospirosis, supportive
care is essential for a successful outcome. Patients with
leptospirosis that remain oliguric or anuric are candidates for extracorporeal therapies such as hemodialysis.

­Prognosis
The prognosis for dogs with leptospirosis likely depends
on which body systems are affected, and the extent and
severity of organ damage. If suspected or diagnosed
promptly, and appropriate specific and supportive therapy is initiated, the majority of dogs with leptospirosis
will recover from the disease. The prognosis is expected
to be guarded for patients with oliguric or anuric AKI,
unless renal replacement therapy is initiated. Patients
with less severe AKI may progress to CKD or return to
normal. In a recent German study of 99 dogs with leptospirosis, dogs that did not survive were more likely to
have severe dyspnea, oliguria, azotemia, hyperbilirubinemia, and severe radiographic pulmonary changes,
with the latter being specifically associated with high
mortality.

­Vaccination
Most of the canine leptospirosis vaccines currently used
in the US include the serovars Icterohaemorrhagiae,
Canicola, Pomona, and Grippotyphosa. It is not known

whether these vaccines protect against additional serovars. Contemporary vaccines are purified by subunit
technology or microfiltration processes, and they appear
to be associated with fewer vaccine reactions compared
to the whole‐cell cultures that were commonly used in
the past.
Vaccination against canine leptospirosis continues to
be an area of controversy, despite a growing body of work
regarding vaccine efficacy in dogs. In particular, it has
been convincingly shown in several studies that vaccination against leptospirosis confers protection against
challenge for at least one year, and also confers significant protection against urine shedding. It should be
noted that there is little correlation between protection
against clinical disease and antibody titers in vaccinated
dogs. Postvaccination MAT titers generally fall by four
months after vaccination, and rarely persist for one year.
This should be kept in mind when interpreting MAT
titers in vaccinated dogs. It has been shown that vaccination does not cause false‐positive results in a PCR‐based
assay for canine leptospirosis.
As noted above, leptospirosis is not a disease that is
confined to large‐breed, outdoor, rural, or working dogs.
This author recommends that the risks and benefits of
vaccination against leptospirosis be discussed with every
dog owner. It is important to bear in mind that leptospirosis is one of the most commonly diagnosed causes of
canine AKI, and that the disease can be seen in dogs of
any age, breed, sex, or lifestyle. It is also important to
bear in mind that currently available vaccines appear to
be both safe and efficacious.

­Public Health Implications
Leptospirosis is a zoonotic disease. It is essential that veterinary personnel understand how the organism is spread
and that infection can occur through damaged skin or
intact mucus membranes. In this author’s opinion, all
dogs with unexplained acute azotemia (including acute‐
on‐chronic) should be treated as leptospirosis suspects
until an alternate diagnosis is obtained. It is not necessary to place these dogs in isolation, but it is essential to
avoid human and animal contact with the urine of suspects. Direct contact with blood should also be avoided.
Leptospirosis suspects should have a urinary catheter
placed, or should only urinate in a dedicated area that
can be cleaned and disinfected. Dogs that urinate in their
cages should have a urinary catheter placed with a closed
collection system. This is also often a valuable procedure
in the management of AKI patients. If placement of a urinary catheter is not possible, for example in a small dog,
absorbent pads can be used in the cage to collect urine.
These can also be weighed to monitor urine output.

VetBooks.ir

101 Leptospirosis

All personnel nursing a dog with leptospirosis should
wear gowns, gloves, and shoe covers while handling the
patient. Immunosuppressed individuals should not handle leptospirosis suspects. Facemasks and eye protection should be worn when cleaning cages or runs, or
handling wet bedding. Laboratory personnel should
wear gloves and a mask when handling body fluids from
a leptospirosis suspect. Gloves should always be worn
when handling canine urine, as dogs can be asymptomatic carriers of leptospirosis. Fortunately, leptospires

are sensitive to most detergents and disinfectants, and
are also killed by drying and sunlight. Owners of dogs
with leptospirosis should be advised to avoid contact
with the dog’s urine. If the dog urinates in the house,
they should wear gloves and use household detergents
or disinfectants to clean up the urine. How long these
dogs will shed leptospires is unknown, but appropriate
antibiotic therapy should reduce the risk. Owners should
contact their own physician with questions about human
leptospirosis.

­Further Reading
Knöpfler S, Mayer‐Scholl A, Luge E, et al. Evaluation of
clinical, laboratory, imaging findings and outcome in 99
dogs with leptospirosis. J Small Anim Pract 2017; 58:
582–8.
Lee HS, Guptill L, Johnson AJ, Moore GE. Signalment
changes in canine leptospirosis between 1970 and 2009.
J Vet Intern Med 2014; 28: 294–9.
Lizer J, Velinemi S, Weber A, Krecic M, Meeus P.
Evaluation of 3 serological tests for early detection of

Leptospira‐specific antibodies in experimentally infected
dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2018; 32: 201–7.
Schuller S, Francey T, Hartmann K, et al. European
consensus statement on leptospirosis in dogs and cats.
J Small Anim Pract 2015; 56: 159–79.
Sykes JE, Hartmann K, Lunn KF, et al. 2010 ACVIM small
animal consensus statement on leptospirosis: diagnosis,
epidemiology, treatment, and prevention. J Vet Intern
Med 2011; 25: 1–13.

949

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

951

102
Yersiniosis
Maria Grazia Pennisi, DVM, PhD
University of Messina, Messina, Italy

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Yersinia pestis is the agent of a rare, highly contagious,
and often fatal zoonosis. Known since ancient times as
plague or “black death,” Y. pestis devastated medieval
Europe with widespread epizootics. Today, Y. pestis is
enzootic in some foci in the Americas, Africa, the Middle
East, and Asia.
Yersinia pestis is a gram‐negative, facultatively anaero­
bic coccobacillus that belongs to the family Enterobacte­
riaceae. The bacterium can survive for weeks in the
environment as it is resistant to low temperatures and
freezing. However, it is sensitive to high temperatures and
desiccation. Yersinia pestis is a vector‐borne pathogen
transmitted by many flea species. Xenopsylla cheopis
(Oriental rat flea) and some other flea species such as
Oropsylla montana (the ground squirrel flea) are very effi­
cient vectors whereas others, such as the dog and cat fleas
(Ctenoceph­alides spp.), are much less efficient. Fleas
acquire the organism from bacteremic mammals. Yersinia
pestis can infect a wide range of mammals, including
humans. Host species have variable susceptibility to devel­
opment of the disease due to various factors. Less suscep­
tible hosts such as mice, rats, squirrels, and prairie dogs
usually develop prolonged bacteremia and therefore act as
natural reservoirs. Due to high flea infestation rates and a
communal lifestyle, burrowing mammals facilitate trans­
mission of the organism by fleas to a high number of hosts.
Within the flea midgut, the bacterium replicates.
Aggregates of the organism block the digestive tract,
which causes the flea to suck blood with increased effort
and regurgitate organisms into the bite wound it inflicts
on subsequent hosts. Cats and dogs can acquire the
infection from fleas but they may also become infected
by ingesting infected prey. Although less common, trans­
mission through aerosolization or contact with mucous
membranes or skin wounds also occurs.

In susceptible mammalian hosts like the cat, Y. pestis is
able to evade host innate immune defenses. It can infect
macrophages wherein it abundantly multiplies inside
phagolysosomes, causing cell lysis. In more resistant
hosts such as dogs, Y. pestis is susceptible to macrophage
killing inside phagolysosomes. When transmitted by a
flea bite, the bacterium is carried by mononuclear cells to
regional lymph nodes where it causes a suppurative lym­
phadenitis with a marked lymph node swelling (the
bubo). Fistulae drain thick purulent exudate from the
affected lymph nodes. When transmission occurs via
ingestion of infected prey, mandibular and retropharyn­
geal lymph nodes are involved. Clinical disease charac­
terized by lymphadenitis is called bubonic plague.
Dissemination via lymphatic vessels or the bloodstream
can follow lymphadenitis. After bacteremia, other lymph
nodes, the lungs, and many other organs and t­ issues can
be affected. Abscesses, hemorrhagic and necrotic lesions
may occur in many organs. Sepsis may also occur.
Bacteremia and multiple organ involvement is referred to
as septicemic plague. Dissemination occurs more quickly
after ingestion of infected prey or inhalation of the organ­
ism from contaminated aerosol droplets. The pulmonary
form, known as pneumonic plague, can occur in cats due
to hematogenous spread or inhalation of organisms.
It has been established that cats are the domestic spe­
cies most susceptible to plague. Reinfection is possible
and seropositive cats are not protected from bacteremia
or death but may have a more prolonged course of the
disease.
Similar to the presentation in cats, three different clin­
ical forms of plague are described in humans: bubonic,
pneumonic, and septicemic. Bubonic plague is the con­
sequence of flea transmission while pneumonic plague
develops after inhalation of the bacterium or hematoge­
nous spread. Septicemic plague may arise from the other
two forms.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

952

Section 9 Infectious Disease

­Epidemiology
One of the oldest diseases known to man, plague is still
endemic in many natural foci in the Americas (western
USA, Peru, Brazil, Argentina, Ecuador), Africa (Algeria,
Libya, Congo, Madagascar, Malawi, Mozambique,
Uganda, Tanzania, South Africa) and Asia (China,
Mongolia, Vietnam, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Iran).
Recent outbreaks have occurred in previously endemic
areas after prolonged periods of absence. Countries
belonging to the World Health Organization are obliged
to notify officials when plague is diagnosed in humans,
but underreporting likely occurs.
Each endemic focus is linked to the presence of a spe­
cific mammalian reservoir and flea vector. Variability in
annual incidence is linked to climatic variability, specifi­
cally to rainfall because humidity favors both flea repro­
duction and increased food availability for rodent hosts.
Enzootic hosts of Y. pestis are resistant to the develop­
ment of disease and have prolonged bacteremia, thereby
maintaining the flea–host–flea cycle in the wild. In
endemic areas, outbreaks of recurrent or sporadic plague
epizootics rapidly involve individuals of a particularly
susceptible (epizootic) host species. These animals are
easily infected when a highly competent flea vector spe­
cies is more abundant.
Most cases of human plague result from exposure to
fleas or activities that result in contact with reservoir
hosts, such as skinning rabbits. Exposure to domestic
cats accounts for approximately 10% of human plague
cases. Veterinary staff and owners of free‐roaming cats
are at increased risk for Y. pestis infection in endemic
areas. In some cases, human patients reported being bit­
ten or scratched by infected cats but sometimes just han­
dling or caring for a sick cat was the only contact
reported. In one human case, the infecting scratch was
obtained by a healthy cat which had fought with a cat
suffering from bubonic plague. Importantly, human
infection from cats commonly results in the pulmonary
form of the disease (pneumonic plague) which is associ­
ated with rapid progression and a higher fatality rate.
Dogs rarely develop clinical signs. Infection results in
people primarily due to contact with the Yersinia‐
infected fleas they carry. Dogs and other carnivores may
serve as sentinels for Y. pestis because infection results in
the transient production of antibody, peaking 3–4 weeks
post exposure and lasting 4–8 months.

­Signalment
Yersiniosis is diagnosed in dogs much less frequently
than in cats. The disease is reported in cats (3 months to
15 years old) and dogs (1–14 years) of any age, but it

seems to be more frequent in adults. No gender or breed
predilection is known.

­History and Clinical Signs
Free roaming in rural areas and hunting activity are the
main risk factors for dogs and cats in endemic areas. In
experimental infections, the incubation period lasts
24–48 hours but after natural exposure it may be up to a
few days.
Fever, lethargy, and anorexia occur in cats associated
with the development of the “bubo,” a swollen painful
lymph node. This swelling can be confused with abscesses
that commonly arise from cat fights. Buboes may involve
any superficial lymph node but mandibular and ret­
ropharyngeal nodes are more frequently affected because
infection is commonly acquired by the oral route as a
result of predation. Ulcerative or necrotic lesions may be
observed on lips or oral mucosa. The white blood cell
count is usually elevated with increased neutrophils and
bands. In benign cases, drainage of the primary bubo is
followed by resolution of fever and progressive recovery.
In other cases, fatal septicemia rapidly occurs and may
evolve to distributive shock and multiple organ dysfunc­
tion syndrome (MODS). MODS associated with Y. pestis
is manifested by persistently high fever, depression,
hypotension, rapid capillary refill time (CRT), bradycar­
dia, hypodynamic peripheral pulses, hypoalbuminemia,
hypoglycemia, and increased bilirubin, liver enzymes,
blood urea nitrogen (BUN), and creatinine. Oliguria and
metabolic acidosis are also observed. Disseminated
intravascular coagulation (DIC) may also occur and is
responsible for a hemorrhagic diathesis. Suspicion of
DIC is increased in patients with thrombocytopenia,
prolongation in activated partial thromboplastin time
(APTT) and prothrombin time (PT), increased fibrin
degradation products (FDPs) and/or D‐dimer, and
decreased antithrombin. In some septicemic cases a pri­
mary bubo is not found.
Primary pneumonic plague is not a typical presenta­
tion in cats because infection is rarely caused by
­inhalation. Pulmonary involvement is usually due to dis­
semination from a bubonic primary lesion. Cough and
dyspnea represent the clinical manifestation of a pulmo­
nary disease and thoracic radiographs may show the
presence of poorly defined focal patchy and coalescing
opacities due to pulmonary abscessation. Pleural effu­
sion may also be found.
Few case reports of plague in dogs have been docu­
mented. Clinical signs include mild to severe hyperther­
mia, lethargy, anorexia, stomatitis, painful enlargement
of the superficial lymph nodes (mandibular, retropharyn­
geal, superficial cervical or inguinal), vomiting, diarrhea,

VetBooks.ir

102 Yersiniosis

respiratory signs, and abscesses. Leukocytosis and neu­
trophilia are often recorded.

­Diagnosis
In endemic areas, bubo‐like lesions and hyperthermia
should immediately prompt consideration of Y. pestis in
free‐roaming or hunting cats and dogs. Public health
officials should be notified immediately. Standard oper­
ating procedures for handling potentially infectious ani­
mals or materials should always be followed. Such
procedures include isolation of the patient, and wearing
surgical masks, gloves, and eye protection when per­
forming physical examination and any clinical or labora­
tory procedures. Laboratories should be contacted for
proper collection and submission protocols prior to col­
lecting and submitting samples from an animal sus­
pected of being infected.
Cytologic evaluation on both Gram‐ and Giemsa‐
stained smears from draining lesions may quickly show
the presence of a large number of monomorphic Gram‐
negative (Gram staining) organisms with a bipolar safety
pin shape (Giemsa staining). The diagnosis is confirmed
by culture, direct fluorescent antibody test (DFA) or pol­
ymerase chain reaction (PCR). The DFA is performed by
approved laboratories on tissue imprints on slides,
smears of lymph node aspirate, or samples from draining
pharyngeal or cutaneous lesions. Isolates can be made
from cultures of oral swabs, blood or swollen lymph
nodes if samples are obtained before starting antibiotic
therapy. However culture can be insensitive, and takes
several weeks. It should be noted that culture of Y. pestis
can only be performed at approved laboratories due to
its zoonotic potential, and public health authorities
should be contacted to obtain information on collection
and submission guidelines. Molecular diagnostic meth­
ods from clinical samples are also available from select
laboratories. Negative immunofluorescence assay (IFA),
culture or PCR does not rule out infection.
Diagnosis can also be confirmed by serologic methods.
Antibodies against the organism’s F1 capsular antigen
can be detected many days after the onset of clinical
signs and last many months after the infection. Dogs and
cats may test seronegative at presentation, as illness may
occur prior to seroconversion. A fourfold or more rise in
antibody titer against F1 antigen (15 days minimum
apart) or a single titer of 1:32 or more by hemagglutina­
tion in a cat or dog with signs suggestive of plague is
diagnostic. ELISA tests or semiquantitative rapid lateral
flow immunochromatographic tests using recombinant
antigens have also been developed for humans and mam­
mal reservoirs. Tests for antigen detection in mammals,
fleas, and environmental samples are also available.

­Therapy
Rapid appropriate therapy should be started as soon as
possible without waiting for the confirmatory test result
when infection is suspected. Strict isolation measures
and personal protection measures should be followed
and antiflea treatment applied. Public health authorities
should be contacted immediately for notification and
guidelines. Treated cats and dogs are considered nonin­
fectious after three days of therapy when fever wanes and
clinical recovery occurs but a minimum of three weeks of
therapy is required. Many antibiotics have in vitro effi­
cacy or are effective in experimental mouse studies.
Gentamicin is a first‐choice antibiotic for dogs and cats
at a dose of 6–8 mg/kg q24h IM, SC or IV. Doxycycline is
a second choice for less severe cases. Oral administration
of this antibiotic poses a higher risk for caretakers and
should be avoided in the initial treatment period.
Draining of buboes is recommended (adopting the
appropriate operating procedures for avoiding infection
as explained earlier). Chlorhexidine is used for flushing
fistulae.

­Prognosis
In an experimental trial which reproduced oral transmis­
sion, 37% of 16 infected cats died. A minority of cats
(19%) experienced a subclinical infection and 44% recov­
ered after a clinical disease. Poor prognosis was associ­
ated with persistently high fever ( ≥40 °C, 105 °F). None of
the cats in this experimental trial were treated with anti­
biotics or other measures and in natural disease a fatal
course is observed in about half of feline clinical cases.
Most cats promptly treated with antimicrobial drugs
survive and drainage of cutaneous abscesses improves
prognosis. Conversely, abscess development in the lung
is considered a negative prognostic factor in cats.
Experimental studies show that dogs have only a mild
febrile syndrome and a benign course with no fatality,
and this appears to be the case in naturally infected dogs
as well. Co‐infection with other agents such as Ehrlichia
canis may result in more severe clinical manifestations.
In treated dogs, clinical cure is obtained in 1–21 days.

­Prevention
Several types of vaccines have been produced for use in
people at risk who are exposed to Y. pestis due to profes­
sional activities. However, these vaccines are no longer
available in the US. Under experimental conditions, vac­
cination with a killed vaccine did not protect cats from

953

VetBooks.ir

954

Section 9 Infectious Disease

infection or death. This is consistent with the fact that
after infection, seropositive cats are not protected from
bacteremia or death.
Doxycycline (10 mg/kg SID PO for seven days) is
administered to exposed animals to prevent develop­
ment of disease.

­Public Health Implications
Humans can acquire Y. pestis from cats through bites,
scratches or aerosolization of respiratory secretions.
Fleas on pets also expose humans to the disease.
Personnel working in veterinary practices where plague
is enzootic should be aware that plague occurs in cats
and dogs. Veterinary staff handling potentially infectious

animals or materials should be adequately protected
from Y. pestis infection by wearing a well‐fitted surgical
mask, gloves, and eye protection. Exudates should be
considered infectious, and any material used for treating
suspect cats should be disinfected, autoclaved, or
incinerated.
In plague‐affected areas, owners should be advised to
prevent their cats and dogs from roaming freely and to
strictly follow flea control programs. Other general
advice includes avoiding sleeping with pets, avoiding
handling sick or dead animals without adequate protec­
tion, and preventing rodent infestations by eliminating
food sources and available shelter. Owners of an animal
diagnosed with plague should be instructed to contact
their physician immediately for prophylactic antibiotics
and other treatment as indicated.

­Further Reading
Chomel, Bruno B. Plague. In: Greene C, ed. Infectious
Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 4th edn. St Louis, MO:
Elsevier, 2012, pp. 469–76.
Nichols MC, Ettestad PJ, Vinhatton ES, et al. Yersinia pestis
infection in dogs: 62 cases (2003–2011). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2014: 244(10): 1176–80.

Pennisi MG, Egberink G, Hartmann K, et al. Yersinia
pestis infection in cats: ABCD guidelines for
prevention and management. J Feline Med Surg
2013; 15(6): 582–4.

VetBooks.ir

955

103
Tularemia
Linda Kidd, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
College of Veterinary Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Tularemia is a rare but severe zoonotic illness caused by
Francisella tularensis, a small gram‐negative non-sporeforming, aerobic coccobacillis bacterium. The organism
infects a number of mammals although some, such
as rabbits and hares, rodents, cats and sheep, appear
to be particularly susceptible to disease. The organism
is ­classified into subspecies (also referred to as types),
with F. tularensis tularensis (type A) and F. tularensis
­ olarctica (type B) causing most disease in cats and
h
­people. Disease caused by type A appears to be more
severe and is diagnosed more commonly in cats and
­people than that caused by type B.
Francisella tularensis is very stable in the environment
and is transmitted to people and other mammals by a number of mechanisms. These include through biting flies,
mosquitoes, fomites, aerosols, and water. Aquatic protozoa
may also play a role in transmission. Fleas are considered
potential but inefficient mechanical vectors. Several tick
species also transmit F. tularensis. Transstadial and transovarial transmission have been documented in ticks so they
are true biologic rather than mechanical vectors.
Francisella tularensis readily infects macrophages and
cells of the reticuloendothelial system. It can also infect
hepatocytes and other cells. In macrophages, it survives by
inhibiting phagolysosomal fusion and the respiratory burst.
After replicating, it induces a form of apoptosis known as
pyroptosis. This releases the bacterium and allows it to be
taken up by other phagocytic cells. Severe inflammatory
responses in the host can cause serious morbidity.
After cutaneous infection, the bacteria may replicate
locally and then migrate to local lymph nodes. Further
dissemination and septicemia can follow. Lesions in the
lungs, spleen, liver, lymph nodes, and skin may result.
Systemic infection may also occur without prior localized

infection. Pulmonary infection may also result directly
from aerosolization. Infection may also be introduced by
the oral or gastrointestinal route.
Immunity is T cell mediated, and natural killer cell
secretion of interferon‐gamma and subsequent activation of macrophages appears important in immunity.

­Epidemiology
Type A occurs in North America, whereas type B occurs
throughout the northern hemisphere. Types A and B
cause disease in both cats and people. Type A is subdivided into types I and II, which appear to have relatively
distinct geographic distributions and differences in
­pathogenicity, with type I causing more severe disease.
F. tularensis is a reportable disease in the US, occurring
in every state except Hawaii. The prevalence of the disease in people is highest in the south central US, the
Pacific Northwest, and Massachusetts (Figure 103.1).
The incidence of tularemia has been decreasing overall
in the US in recent years.
In people, tularemia has classically been referred to as
rabbit fever, because many reports of the disease have
been associated with contact with rabbits. These include
an outbreak associated with aerosolization of the organism while skinning rabbits after a hunt, and running over
a rabbit nest with a lawn mower, among others. Recently,
however, the importance of cats as a source of human
infection has been illustrated. Due to predation on rabbits and rodents, and exposure to environmental sources
such as water and ticks, free‐roaming cats are believed to
be at particular risk for exposure. In one serosurvey in
the US, 12–24% of cats were seropositive. Alarmingly,
it was recently reported that 48% of human cases in
Nebraska were cat associated.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 9 Infectious Disease

VetBooks.ir

956

1 dot placed randomly within county of residence for each reported case

Figure 103.1 Reported tularemia cases in the United States, 2016. Source: www.cdc.gov/tularemia/statistics/map.html.

Because of its pathogenicity, the potential for aerosol
transmission and other factors, F. tularensis is considered
a Tier 1 bioterrorism agent. This is important for veterinarians to consider, as cats and possibly dogs could
potentially serve as sentinels if such an attack were to
occur.

­Signalment
Infection in young adult cats and dogs has been reported
most frequently, with natural infection in cats reported
much more commonly than in dogs.

­History and Clinical Signs
Clinical signs can range from minimal to severe disease
and death. Severity of illness is likely determined by type
and subtype of the organism and host immunity.
Different clinical categories of disease, including ulceroglandular, glandular, pneumonia, and tonsillitis or pharangitis with cervical lymphadenopathy, are described in
people. These disease manifestations are determined in
part by route of inoculation.
Manifestations in cats appear to be similar to those found
in people. In cats, clinical findings may include a more

localized form that includes chronic subcutaneous draining
abscesses, or generalized severe disease. In the severe form
of the disease, fever, depression, lethargy, jaundice, splenomegaly, lymphadenomegaly, and hepatomegaly occur. Oral
and lingual ulcerations may be present and might indicate
ingestion as a route of infection. Embolic pneumonia associated with oral or gastrointestinal exposure has been
described. Fever, lethargy, anorexia, lymphandenopathy,
ocular changes, and tonsillitis have been described in dogs.

­Diagnosis
Tularemia should be a differential diagnosis in cats with
fever of unknown origin, chronic draining lesions/
abscesses, lymph node enlargement and hepatosplenomegaly and oral ulcerations. Free roaming and hunting
behaviors, especially predation of rabbits or rodents,
should increase the index of suspicion for infection.
Plague is an important differential diagnosis for tularemia.
Guidelines have been established by the European
Advisory Board on Cat Diseases (www.abcdcatsvets.
org/) for tularemia in cats. They state:
When handling animals with suppurative or draining skin or lymph node lesions in endemic areas,
gloves and goggles should be worn. Gloves should

VetBooks.ir

103 Tularemia

also be worn when there is any direct contact with
the oral mucosa. Handling of diagnostic samples by
laboratory staff should follow biosafety procedures.
In addition to taking in‐clinic precautions, laboratories
and couriers should be warned that tularemia is a differential diagnosis before diagnostic specimens are submitted and appropriate precautions taken. Veterinarians
should notify and consult public health authorities for
guidance when tularemia is suspected.
Complete blood count may reveal thrombocytopenia,
leukocytosis or leukopenia. Toxic change may be present
in neutrophils. Serum chemistry may reveal elevations in
alanine aminotransferase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase
(ALP), and bilirubin. Lymph node aspiration may show
reactive changes, pyogranulomatous inflammation or
neutrophilic inflammation.
Pathologic findings include multiple foci of necrosis in
lymph nodes, spleen, liver, and lung. Fibrinosuppurative
to granulomatous inflammation may be present in many
organs. It is difficult to demonstrate the organism in tissues with routine staining.
A fourfold increase in titer demonstrates acute infection, although it is important to note that animals may be
seronegative early in the course of disease. Therefore, a
negative titer does not rule out infection. Because antibody can be long‐lived, a single positive titer is not diagnostic for active infection.
Antibodies may be used to directly demonstrate the
presence of the organism in lymph node aspirates and
tissue samples using direct immunofluorescent antibody
assays. PCR verifies active infection. Culture is also a
diagnostic method that demonstrates the presence of the
organism. The laboratory must be notified that tularemia
is a differential to protect laboratory workers and because
the organism is fastidious and requires special media to
grow. A negative result for immunofluorescent antibody
assays, PCR or culture does not rule out infection.

­Therapy
Aminoglycosides are the treatment of choice. Doxycycline
and fluoroquinolones are also effective treatments but
may be associated with relapse, which may be ameliorated with a longer course of treatment (three rather than
two weeks).

­Prognosis
Specific information about prognosis in dogs and cats
has not been published.

­Public Health Implications
Public health authorities should be notified immediately when tularemia is suspected. Infected cats may
transmit tularemia by bites, scratches or contact with
or aerosolization of fluids or tissue specimens or
potentially fur. Veterinary and laboratory personnel
should take appropriate precautions as detailed earlier.
To prevent tularemia, owners should be advised to
keep cats from roaming and hunting, provide appropriate ectoparasite control and to seek medical care if
they feel ill or if they have been scratched or bitten by
a cat with suspected infection.
According to the US government, “an urban cluster of
tularemia cases among persons with a common natural
exposure could be the first sign of a bioterrorist attack.”
Cats may serve as sentinels for such an attack due to
their apparent disease susceptibility and exposure to
environmental sources of the organism. Veterinarians
should be vigilant in considering tularemia as a differential diagnosis in cats or dogs with compatible clinical
signs.

­Further Reading
Berman‐Booty L, Cui J, Horvath S, Premanandan C. Pathology
in practice. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010; 247(2): 163–5.
Foley J, Nieto N. Tularemia. Vet Microbiol 2010; 140: 332–8.
Larson M, Fey P, Hinrichs S, Iwen P. Francisella tularensis
bacteria associated with feline tularemia in the United
States. Emerg Infect Dis 2014; 20(12): 2068–70.

Pennisi M, Egberink H, Hartmann K, et al. Francisella
tularensis infection in cats. ABCD guidelines in
prevention and management. J Feline Med Surg 2013;
15: 585–7.

957

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

959

104
Q Fever
Linda Kidd, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
College of Veterinary Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Q fever is caused by the gram‐negative bacterium
Coxiella burnetii. Coxiella burnetii is a gamma‐proteobacteria currently classified in the order Legionellales.
The organism exists in two forms: a large‐cell variant
that is the metabolically active form, and a small‐cell
variant which is spore‐like. The small‐cell variant is
released into the environment where it is very resistant
to destruction by chemicals, light, and desiccation, and
can survive for long periods of time. The target cell of
this obligately intracellular organism is the macrophage.
Host factors may contribute to its ability to survive
intracellularly as interleukin (IL)‐10, an antiinflammatory cytokine, appears to inhibit phagosome maturation, while intracellular killing appears to be facilitated
by interferon (IFN)‐gamma. Cell‐mediated immunity
is important in controlling infection. Granulomatous
inflammation occurs in infected hosts. In animals, the
uterus and mammary glands are the most common sites
of infection. The organism concentrates in the placenta
during parturition, and large numbers of the organism
are aerosolized from these membranes and also carried
by dust and other environmental sources once contamination has occurred.

­Epidemiology
Coxiella burnetii has a worldwide distribution. Many
species of mammals, birds, and arthropods, including
ticks, can be infected. Infection of mammalian hosts may
occur through aerosolization, oral (ingestion) or tick
transmission. In mammals, the organisms concentrate in
placenta and are excreted in milk, urine, saliva, and feces.

Cattle, sheep, and goats are the most important reservoirs for the organism. Serosurveys suggest free‐roaming
rural cats and dogs are at increased risk. Exposure to raw
meat, particularly raw kangaroo meat, has been implicated as a possible risk factor in cats. Recently, infections
have been identified in United States soldiers returning
from Iraq where Q fever is endemic. In a recent serosurvey, 5% of wild canines in Iraq were seropositive, while
no military working dogs (MWDs) in the region were
seropositive. Diligent use of flea and tick control, and the
fact that the MWDs in this study did not have access
to local farm animals or food were hypothesized to
­contribute to the discrepancy. Serosurveys have shown
that exposure in cats is common in many areas of the
world, ranging from 2% to 61%. Interestingly, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) failed to amplify DNA from the
organism from the vaginas of 50 intact female Colorado
shelter cats while 4/47 uterine biopsy samples from client‐owned cats were positive. A follow‐up study showed
a similar PCR‐positive prevalence rate of 8.1% in the
uterine tissues of cats with and without reproductive
abnormalities.
Coxiella burnetii is primarily of importance in small
animal medicine due to its zoonotic potential. Clinical
disease in dogs and cats is not commonly recognized.
Multiple reports of infection in people after exposure to
periparturient cats and dogs have been described.
Despite these reports, a study on pet ownership was not
associated with increased risk of antibody formation in
people. Cats and neonatal kittens have been reported as
a source of infection in people more often than dogs.
A recent report of an outbreak in a small animal veterinary hospital was associated with a female cat undergoing C‐section; 8/9 infected personnel working at the
veterinary hospital worked the day of the C‐section while
the ninth person cleaned equipment the morning after.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

960

Section 9 Infectious Disease

­Signalment
Because infection is usually asyptomatic, a study on signalment of naturally infected cats and dogs has not been
described. Most cases in the literature describe intact
female dogs and cats undergoing parturition as a source
of exposure. MWDs deployed in Iraq may be at increased
risk for infection especially if they have exposure to farm
animals.

­History and Clinical Signs
Disease is usually subclinical in dog and cats. Fever, anorexia, and lethargy have been described in experimental
infection. Abortion or neonatal death has been associated with infection but the organism’s role in causing
reproductive abnormalities in dogs and cats is not fully
elucidated. In one report, lesions in affected kittens
included granulomatous myocarditis, hepatitis, nephritis, and pneumonia.

­Diagnosis
Serology has been used to document exposure, while
isolation, histopathology, immunohistochemistry, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and PCR can
­document infection. Public health authorities should
be contacted for guidance on sample submission for
suspected cases. Animals may be seronegative in the
acute phase of disease prior to seroconversion.
Sensitivity also varies depending on the serologic
assay, and assays are species specific. The inability to
demonstrate the organism using PCR, culture, FISH,
and histologic methods does not rule out infection.
Because the organism is highly infectious to people
and stable in the environment, taking precautions to
prevent infection in clinical and laboratory workers
and owners is important.

­Therapy
Studies investigating efficacy of treatment in cats
and dogs have not been reported. Doxycycline is the

treatment of choice in people with acute infections.
Doxycycline in combination with hydroxychloroquine
is recommended for chronic infections in people.
Doxycycline and chloramphenicol are suggested for
treating cats by the European Advisory Board on Cat
Diseases (www.abcdcatsvets.org/coxiellosis‐q‐fever/).

­Prognosis
Because naturally infected dogs and cats are asymptomatic, prognosis for survival in these species is thought
to be good. The possibility of chronic asymptomatic
infection and reservoir potential should be considered.

­Public Health Implications
Q fever is a reportable disease in the United States.
Humans are very susceptible to Q fever. Farm workers,
laboratory workers, and veterinarians are at increased
risk. Acute and chronic infections occur in people and
are associated with significant morbidity and mortality.
Exposure to parturient cattle, sheep, and goats, and aerosolization of the organism from environmental contamination by their fluids and tissues has historically been the
primary route of infection in people, although exposure
to periparturient cats has been the primary risk in some
studies. Human infection associated with exposure to
cats and dogs is usually in the context of aerosolization of
high concentrations of organisms in placental tissues
during parturition.
Guidelines for prevention and management of C. burnetii in cats have been established by the European
Advisory Board on Cat Diseases (www.abcdcatsvets.org/
coxiellosis‐q‐fever/). Wearing gloves and masks during
parturition of ALL cats and dogs, diligent use of tick control and preventing cats and dogs from roaming have
been recommended. Direct mouth‐to‐mouth resuscitation of kittens and puppies after C‐section should be
avoided. More extensive guidelines to prevent infection
in people, which include additional recommendations
such as avoiding the consumption of raw milk or raw
milk products, are available from the United States
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (www.cdc.
gov/qfever/).

­Further Reading
Angelakis E, Raoult D. Q fever. Vet Microbiol 2010; 160:
297–309.
Anderson A Bijlmer H, Fournier P, et al. Diagnosis and
management of Q fever – US 2013 recommendations
from CDC and the Q fever working group. MMWR
2013; 62(RR03): 1–23.

Cairns K, Brewer M, Lappin MR. Prevalence of Coxiella
burnetii DNA in vaginal and uterine samples from
healthy cats of north‐central Colorado. J Feline Med Surg
2007; 9(3): 196–201.
Egberink H, Addie D, Belak S, et al. Q fever in cats: ABCD
guidelines. J Feline Med Surg 2013; 15: 573–5.

VetBooks.ir

104 Q Fever

Fujishiro MA, Scorza AV, Gookin JL, Lappin MR.
Evaluation of associations among Coxiella burnetii and
reproductive abnormalities in cats. J Feline Med Surg
2016; 18(4): 344–7.
Havas K, Burkman K A. Comparison of the
seroprevalence of Coxiella burnetii between military
working dogs and feral canines in Iraq. Military Med
2011; 176(10): 1101.

Kopecny L, Bosward K, Shapiro A, Norris J. Investigation
of Coxiella burnetii infection in a breeding cattery at the
centre of a Q fever outbreak. J Feline Med Surg 2013;
15(12): 1037–45.
Shapiro AJ, Norris JM, Bosward KL, Heller J. Q fever
(Coxiella burnetii) knowledge and attitudes of
Australian cat breeders and their husbandry practices.
Zoonoses Public Health 2017; 64(4): 252–61.

961

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

963

105
Brucellosis
Erin E. Runcan, DVM, DACVT and Marco A. Coutinho da Silva, DVM, MS, PhD, DACT
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology

­Epidemiology

Canine brucellosis is caused by the aerobic, gram‐negative, coccobacillus species Brucella. The most clinically
relevant infection in dogs is caused by Brucella canis,
although reports exist of infection with B. abortus,
B. melitensis, and B. suis in individual animals. The bacterium is highly contagious, and often spreads rapidly in
breeding kennels. Transmission is also possible via frozen semen and artificial insemination as the bacterium is
resistant to cryopreservation.
The organism is best known for being venereally
transmitted via vaginal and seminal secretions in sexually mature animals. Transmission also occurs in utero,
at parturition, or during abortion through oronasal,
­conjunctival, or transdermal contact of aborted fetal tissues, placental tissues, urine, milk, or vulvar discharge.
Aborted tissues are highly infectious, containing high
numbers of organisms, and abortion often results in persistent vaginal discharge that can last for 4–6 weeks.
Infection can also occur via artificial insemination with
infected semen, and via fomites such as contaminated
food and water bowls, equipment, and clothing. The
bacterium is highly stable and can survive for months in
moist soil in the environment.
Following contact, invading bacteria are able to survive
phagocytosis and are taken up by lymphatic and genital
organs where they rapidly reproduce. Bacteremia occurs
1–4 weeks post infection and can persist for up to six
months. Bacteria can be intermittently detected in tissues and secretions for up to 64 months post infection.
While the bacteria reproduce best in reproductive
­tissues, a variety of clinical signs can manifest as a result
of hematogenous transmission to the eye, kidneys, and
vertebrae.

Canine brucellosis is widespread in domestic and feral
dog populations throughout the southern United States,
in Central and Southern America, and Asia. It is unclear
how important wild canids or stray dog populations
are in disease transmission. Sporadic cases have been
reported in Europe. Recently, the disease has become
more prevalent in breeding kennels due to their growing
number, ease of buying/selling and trading infected dogs,
and increased international semen shipment.

­Signalment
There are no current recognized breed or age predispositions. As venereal transmission is most significant, sexually
intact, reproductively mature dogs are most likely to become
infected, but the disease has been readily identified in both
neutered and intact individuals. There has been a case report
of a child becoming infected as a result of contact with an
infected 8‐week‐old puppy and thus, the disease is zoonotic,
especially in immunocompromised individuals.

­History and Clinical Signs
The majority of individuals infected with B. canis are
asymptomatic. Fever is uncommon and there are no clinical signs that are pathognomonic. The classic clinical
sign is late‐term abortion in bitches, with abortion
occurring at 45–55 days gestation. Deceased pups are
often autolysed, and surviving pups are often weak,
have peripheral lymphadenopathy, and may die months
later as a result of bacteremia. A greenish‐gray vulvar

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

964

Section 9 Infectious Disease

discharge may persist in aborting bitches for up to six
weeks. Some bitches may have perceived infertility due
to early embryonic loss.
Males develop a characteristic epididymitis approximately five weeks after infection. Increased presence of
neutrophils and teratozoospermia with sperm agglutination is often seen 18 weeks post infection. Over 90% of
sperm are morphologically abnormal by week 20 post
infection. The enlarged epididymis is often painful and
scrotal dermatitis may also be seen due to increased
­licking of the scrotum because of discomfort. Chronic
infection often leads to testicular atrophy. Concurrent
prostatitis is common.
Dogs with systemic infection may also present with
clinical signs outside the reproductive tract, depending
on the site of infection. Discospondylitis, lymphadenitis,
lameness, ataxia, recurrent anterior uveitis, and low‐
grade meningitis have all been reported in B. canis‐
infected animals.

­Diagnosis
Direct detection of the organism in culture remains the
only definitive diagnostic method available; however, the
slow growth rate, intracellular location, and previous
antibiotic therapy may affect the results. Therefore, a
negative culture does not rule out disease. Positive blood
cultures may occur starting at 2–4 weeks post infection
up to several years following infection due to intermittent shedding of the organism. Placenta, fetus, lymph
nodes, bone marrow, prostate, spleen, urine, vaginal
­discharge, and semen may all be potential sites for culture of organisms.
Due to the difficulty in growing the organism in
­culture, serology can be a helpful screening tool for the
disease. Antibodies can be detected 3–4 weeks post
infection and serology is most accurate as a screening
test 8–12 weeks post infection. Serologic testing is highly
sensitive, but has low specificity due to cross‐reactivity
with other bacterial species. Serologic tests include the
rapid slide agglutination test (RSAT), which is available
as a commercial, cage‐side screening test, with or without the addition of 2‐mercaptoethanol (2‐ME). If a sample tests positive with the RSAT test, 2‐ME should be
added to prevent cross‐reactivity with IgM antibodies to
other bacteria species and increase the specificity of the
test. A second serologic test, the tube agglutination test
(TAT), is similar but is quantitative. Titers less than
1:200 should be retested approximately two weeks later.
Any positive agglutination test should be validated with

ancillary testing before the animal is considered to be
truly positive.
Agar gel immunodiffusion (AGID) assays are frequently used as the confirmatory test of choice for other
serologic assays, although positive cross‐reactions are
common. Enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assays
(ELISAs) detect antibodies to the organism and may be
more rapid and specific than agglutination or AGID
assays. Positive dogs can be detected within 30 days of
infection using this test, but current availability of this
test is limited commercially.
Most recently, real‐time polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) testing has become available as a rapid, sensitive,
and specific assay for Brucella species. It also has the
benefit of being able to directly detect Brucella canis
DNA in blood and tissues. It is likely that PCR will be the
diagnostic test of choice in the future as it becomes more
widely available.

­Therapy
Due to the intracellular location of Brucella bacteria,
antimicrobial treatments are challenging. There is no
vaccine currently available. While it is possible for aborting females to subsequently carry and produce litters
without treatment, infection is likely to be transmitted to
offspring and infected dogs remain a risk to other dogs
and humans.
Infected animals should be quarantined and removed
from the breeding population via surgical sterilization. In
kennel situations where infected animals are i­dentified,
euthanasia may be recommended to prevent transmission of disease and resident animals should be tested
monthly. New animals introduced to the kennel should be
isolated until two negative screening tests are obtained at
least 30 days apart. Breeding animals should be screened
serologically every six months prior to breeding.
No single antimicrobial protocol has been shown to consistently eliminate the disease long term. Many believe
that permanent cures may not be possible even with
surgical sterilization and antimicrobial treatment.
­
Combination protocols with aminoglycosides and tetracyclines (gentamicin 5 mg/kg SC q24h for seven days,
repeated every three weeks for three months, and doxycycline 10 mg/kg orally q12h), or tetracyclines and streptomycin (tetracycline 30 mg/kg orally q12h for 28 days and
streptomycin 20 mg/kg IV q24h for 14 days) show the
most success, but even with treatment, titers may reappear much later after infection, especially d
­ uring times
of stress. A protocol using twice‐daily oral e­ nrofloxacin

VetBooks.ir

105 Brucellosis

(5 mg/kg q12h for 30 days) has been described as successful in preserving fertility in a kennel outbreak situation,
although some dogs had persistently elevated antibodies
and subsequent treatments were required.

­Prognosis
As infected dogs rarely show clinical signs, prognosis for
survival is excellent. However, since infected dogs remain
a potential source for infection for other dogs and immunocompromised humans, they should be kept in isolation from these individuals. Infected dogs should not be
used for breeding and infection may be devastating to a
breeding kennel due to its rapid spread.

­Public Health Implications
Due to zoonotic concern, B. canis is a reportable disease
in most states. Human case reports are often limited to
laboratory workers and immunocompromised individuals. Most infections in people are mild although serious
illness can occur. The disease may be underreported in
humans due to varying clinical symptoms, which may
mimic other diseases. Krueger and workers showed in a
2014 study that based on serologic testing, kennel
employees and dog breeders are most likely to be exposed
and many may have experienced Brucella‐associated illness without diagnosis. Fortunately, humans respond
well to antibiotic therapy and the disease is cleared when
treated appropriately long term.

­Further Reading
Boeri EJ, Wanke MM, Madariaga MJ, et al. Comparison of
four polymerase chain reaction assays for the detection
of Brucella spp. in clinical samples from dogs. Vet World
2018; 11(2): 201–8.
Dentinger CM, Jacob K, Lee LV, et al. Human
Brucella canis infection and subsequent
laboratory exposures associated with a puppy,
New York City, 2012. Zoonoses Public Health
2014; 62(5): 407–14.
Graham EM, Taylor DJ. Bacterial reproductive pathogens
of dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2012; 42: 561–82.

Hensel ME, Negron M, Arenas‐Gamboa AM. Brucellosis
in dogs and public health risk. Emerg Infect Dis 2018;
24(8): 1401–6.
Krueger WS, Lucero NE, Brower A, et al. Evidence for
unapparent Brucella canis infections among adults with
occupational exposure to dogs. Zoonoses Public Health
2014; 61(7): 509–18.
Makloski CL. Canine brucellosis management. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2011; 41: 1209–19.
Wanke MM, Delpino MV, Baldi PC. Use of enrofloxacin in
the treatment of canine brucellosis in a dog kennel
(clinical trial). Theriogenology 2006; 66(6‐7): 1573–8.

965

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

967

106
Tetanus and Botulism
Andrea Fischer, DVM‚ Dipl. ECVN, Dipl. ACVIM (Neurology)
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, Ludwig‐Maximilians University, Munich, Germany

­Tetanus
Etiology and Pathophysiology
Tetanus results from the effects of tetanus toxin (tetanospasmin) which is released by the anaerobic bacillus
Clostridium tetani. Spores of C. tetani are ubiquitous,
survive in soil, and can contaminate and infect wounds.
Thus, tetanus is a true toxicoinfection in which the toxin
is produced and released within the infected wound.
Following binding to peripheral nerve surface ganglioside
receptors, the toxin (L‐chain of tetanospasmin) is
internalized into the peripheral nerve terminals.
­
Tetanospasmin undergoes retrograde axonal transport to
the spinal cord or brainstem, where it migrates transsynaptically to its site of action, inhibitory interneurons
which utilize glycine or gamma‐aminobutyric acid
(GABA) as neurotransmitters. Tetanospasmin acts as a
metalloproteinase which cleaves and inactivates a vesicle‐associated membrane protein (VAMP) called synaptobrevin. Synaptobrevin mediates fusion of vesicles
with the neuronal membrane and release of neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft. Interference with the release
of glycine from inhibitory neurons in the spinal cord and
brainstem results in stimulus‐sensitive muscle rigidity
and spasticity worsened by touching, stretching or noise.
Tetanus can be localized or generalized. With localized tetanus, the toxin migrates only to the inhibitory
interneurons in the spinal cord segments which are closest to the injury site and there is no hematogenous spread
to distant synapses or further transsynaptic migration as
in generalized tetanus.
Epidemiology
Tetanus occurs in a worldwide distribution. Dogs
are less sensitive to the effects of tetanus toxin than
horses or humans, and cats are more resistant than

dogs. Consequently, localized tetanus is more frequently
reported in cats than in dogs.
Signalment
Any dog or cat of any breed or age can be affected, but
younger animals appear to be more susceptible.
History
Many patients have a history of an infected wound within
the previous 10 days (up to three weeks). Draining
wounds, tracts or wounds of the feet are frequent causes.
Rarely, tetanus may occur following non-sterile surgical
procedures, intraabdominal (female reproductive tract)
or dental infections. Occasionally, the initial site of infection may not be detectable. Previous paw wounds may be
diifucult to detect and only mild swelling may be evident
despite ongoing infection. Radiographs of the paws are
often indicated to identify foreign bodies and ongoing
osteomyelitis which may require surgical management.
Clinical Signs
Localized tetanus presents with rigidity or stiffness,
often resulting in rigid extension of one or both limbs,
usually the ones next to the infection site or injury.
Generalized tetanus causes signs of generalized muscle
stiffness and rigidity, which are exacerbated by excitement, touch, or noise. Generalized tetanus is always
associated with characteristic head muscle spasms
resulting in trismus, erect ears, which are drawn together,
excessive wrinkling of the forehead‚ drawn‐back muzzle
(risus sardonicus), and episodic prolapse of the third
eyelid. Initially, only salivation, miosis, enopththalmos,
risus sardonicus, erect ears or trismus may be present
(severity class I), but these may progress to severe tris­ysphagia, and generalized extensor rigidity
mus, d

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

968

Section 9 Infectious Disease

­presenting as a stiff gait and sawhorse stance (severity
class II), or recumbency with rigid extension of all limbs,
muscle f­ asciculations, spasms, seizures, and opisthotonus
(severity class III). Severity class IV involves autonomic
dysregulation of heart rate and blood pressure. Mental
status is usually normal unless severe hyperthermia or a
seizure develops. Trismus, pharyngeal and laryngeal
muscle spasms impair food and water intake and increase
the risk for aspiration pneuomonia. Complications in
severely affected animals are respiratory distress and
aspiration pneumonia, hyperthermia, gastrointestinal
ulceration, multiple organ failure, and autonomic failure.
Hiatal hernia, megaesophagus, and urethral sphincter
spasms may occur. Autonomic failure results in bradyarrhythmias and blood pressure variability.
Diagnosis
Tetanus is one of the rare diseases in which diagnosis is
solely based on a combination of characteristic clinical
signs and history. Attempts to culture C. tetani from the
wound are often not successful and do not prove toxin
production. Real‐time polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
for detection of the neurotoxin gene fragments of C. tetani
has been used to support the diagnosis in humans.
Continuous motor unit activity in antagonistic flexor and
extensor muscles and repetitive discharges following
peripheral nerve stimulation during electromyography
may suggest tetanus but these findings are not specific.
Therapy
Routine first line management consists of application of
tetanus antitoxin, metronidazole TID, sedatives and
thorough investigation for an infected wound, especially
on the paws. Equine tetanus antitoxin (median dosage
100–300 U/kg IV, range up to 1000 U/kg, higher dose
given to smaller patients, not to exceed 20 000 units)
should be given once immediately upon hospital admission slowly over 5–10 minutes and also prior to any
wound management. Tetanus antitoxin will neutralize
any free unbound toxin in the circulation but is not effective against the toxin once it has been internalized.
Intravenous administration of equine tetanus antitoxin is
preferred to intramuscular application of human tetanus
immunoglobulin. Intravenous administration achieves a
rapid increase in circulating antitoxin, but is associated
with risk of anaphylaxis. An intradermal or subcutaneous test dose is routinely recommended but its predictive
value is poor. The antihistamine diphenhydramine may
be given prior to tetanus antitoxin administration.
Tetanus antitoxin (500–1000 units) should also be
injected locally proximal and around the wound and
prior to any surgical exploration. Intrathecal injection
into the subarachnoid space (1000 units preservative‐
free antitoxin) has been beneficial in human patients.

Metronidazole 10 mg/kg TID IV is the preferred drug
for treatment of clostridial infection. Penicillin G is also
an appropriate choice, although the fact that it is a GABA
antagonist should be considered. Antimicrobial treatment should be continued for 7–10 days. Surgical wound
debridement may be necessary.
It is of the utmost importance to keep the animals in a
quiet noise‐protected environment and to avoid any
unnecessary manipulations. Ear plugs should be considered. Diazepam, acepromazine (0.005 - 0.02 mg/kg/h
CRI or repeated injections as needed), chlorpromazine
or methocarbamol (5 - 10 mg/kg/h CRI or 30 - 60 mg/kg
QID IV) alone or in combination may achieve sufficient
muscle relaxation and sedation in milder affected cases
(class I). Dexmedetomidine CRI (25 µg/m2/h) is very
effective to provide a continuous state of sedation.
Diazepam or midazolam constant rate infusion (CRI)
and phenobarbital CRI, or even general anesthesia may
be necessary to achieve muscle relaxation in severe generalized tetanus. Propofol or pentobarbital CRI may also
be used. Magnesium sulfate CRI has been beneficial as
an adjunctive treatment. Pain should be addressed
aggressively. Opioids are preferred to non-steroidal analgesics e. g. butorphanol (0.1 - 0.2 mg/kg/h CRI) or fentanyl CRI. Rescue therapy in humans consists of intrathecal
baclofen, anesthesia with neuromuscular blockade, and
positive pressure ventilation.
Management of severe generalized tetanus requires
intensive supportive care in the intensive care unit for up
to three weeks. This is an essential part of the management
of generalized tetanus and needs to be communicated to
the clients. Parenteral nutrition or an esophagostomy tube
may be necessary to address caloric needs and keep the
animal hydrated if trismus develops. Urinary catheterization may be necessary. Patients need to be closely monitored for signs of autonomic failure (heart rate, blood
pressure regulation) including life‐threatening bradyarrhythmias and signs of aspiration pneumonia.
Glucocorticoids are contraindicated in the management of tetanus.
Prognosis
Patients can completely recover within 4–6 weeks.
Published survival rates are from 50% to 80%. Prognosis
varies with tetanus severity classification. Sleep disturbances are reported following recovery from tetanus.
Public Health Implications
Body fluids and tissues, urine, and feces should be
handled with care and appropriately labeled before
­
­submitting to the laboratory as they may contain toxin.
Animals with tetanus have the potential to cause bite
wounds as well.

VetBooks.ir

106 Tetanus and Botulism

­Botulism
Etiology and Pathophysiology
Botulism results from ingestion of spoiled food or dead
carcases which have been contaminated with bacteria of
the species Clostridium botulinum. Clinical signs of botulism are due to the effects of C. botulinum neurotoxins
which are already present in the food. Unlike tetanus,
botulism is a true intoxication, in which the preformed
toxin is ingested with the food, rather than an infection.
Up to now, seven types of neurotoxin have been identified (botulinum toxins A–G). In people, types A and B
are identified in most intoxications, while type C remains
the most commonly reported toxin in dogs and also in
one case series describing occurrence of botulism in
cats. Toxicoinfection, in which the toxin forms secondary to bacterial growth in the gut or a wound, is recognized in people (wound botulism in drug abusers) but
has not been described in dogs.
Once the ingested toxin passes the gastrointestinal (GI)
barrier and gains access to the systemic blood circulation,
it binds to surface ganglioside receptors on the peripheral
nerve endings of motor nerves, which utilize acetylcholine
as the neurotransmitter. Following internalization, the L‐
chain of botulinum neurotoxin remains in the presynaptic
motor nerve terminals. Unlike tetanospasmin, botulinum
neurotoxin does not undergo retrograde axonal transport.
Each type of botulinum toxin (L‐chain) targets specific
proteins of the SNARE protein family, which mediate neurotransmitter release in the synaptic cleft. Thus, all types
of botulinum toxins result in a similar functional deficit,
namely impaired release of acetylcholine into the synaptic
cleft in response to arriving action potentials and influx of
calcium. Functionally, botulism represents a presynaptic
neuromuscular transmission disorder.
Epidemiology
Botulism can occur worldwide. Groups of animals may
be affected if they share feeding habits, such as several
dogs eating from a large animal carcase or when spoiled
contaminated food is fed to several dogs. Outbreaks may
also occur around polluted lakes when dogs ingest dead
waterfowl harboring C. botulinum in their guts.
Nevertheless, isolated cases of botulism may also occur
Signalment
Any dog of any age can be affected. There is only one
report of botulism in cats.
History and Clinical Signs
A thorough dietary history is essential. Botulism is considered if ingestion of dead fish, dead waterfowl, other

animal carcases or rotten meat is reported. Feeding a raw
food and bones diet should be considered a risk factor.
Botulism has a rapid onset of action. Intoxicated animals present with acute onset of generalized lower motor
neuron paresis or paralysis. In many cases, peak paralysis
will be reached within a day. Uncommonly, a more
­protracted onset over several days has been reported.
Neurologic examination shows normal mentation, flaccid generalized lower motor neuron paresis or paralysis
with absent spinal reflexes of all limbs. Additional cranial
nerve signs such as mydriasis, facial nerve paralysis, and/
or tongue paralysis may occur in more severely affected
dogs. Respiratory movements may be impaired due to
diaphragmatic or intercostal muscle paralysis. Laryngeal
paralysis may co‐exist. There is no evident hyperesthesia
on palpation of the spine or muscles. In people, prolonged autonomic impairment following recovery from
botulism is a concern but has not been described in dogs.
Diagnosis
Clinical suspicion of botulism is based on the neurologic
signs of acute lower motor neuron paresis or paralysis
and a history suggestive of possible toxin uptake in the
absence of other causes such as polyradiculoneuritis,
raccoon bites, tick paralysis, myasthenia gravis (crisis),
coral snake poisoning, and ionophore toxicity.
Confirmation is obtained by the detection of botulinum
neurotoxin (direct evidence) or botulinum toxin producing Clostridia (indirect evidence) in the serum or feces
by mouse bioassay. Toxin‐specific enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) or PCR are increasingly available for toxin detection, but their sensitivity may be
lower than the mouse bioassay. Serum antibodies against
botulinum neurotoxins may appear during the recovery
phase. Unless seroconversion or a significant rise in titers
is demonstrated, they can only be considered as a rather
nonspecific indicator of exposure because antibody may
also be present in normal dogs. Notably, results of confirmatory tests (toxin assays, toxin‐specific antibodies)
are usually obtained with a significant time delay for up
to seven days or more, and thus offer little help for the
initial emergency management of the patient.
Electrodiagnostic examinations may facilitate diagnosis , because they offer a readily available bedside test.
When performed within the first days after onset, EMG
will be remarkably unremarkable. Distal peripheral nerve
stimulation results in a compound action potential of
normal morphology but with a reduced amplitude and
area. Nerve conduction is commonly normal. In contrast
to polyradiculoneuritis there is no temporal dispersion.
Repetitive stimulation may show a decrement or increment or be normal. Consequently, high‐frequency repetitive stimulation has been recommended. However,
examination in normal dogs showed variable results,

969

VetBooks.ir

970

Section 9 Infectious Disease

limiting the value of this test due to a lack of specificity.
Botulism may result in mild spontaneous electric activity
from denervation in the second week after onset and also
a mild decrease in nerve conduction velocity, but electrodiagnostic examination is rarely performed at that
time due to the early disease peak followed by gradual
recovery starting at day 5–7 after onset.
Therapy
The focus of therapy is to provide supportive care to the
patient. Clinicians should not be reluctant to provide
ventilator support if there is obvious respiratory impairment. Especially during the first two days after onset, the
dog’s respiration needs to be carefully monitored.
The use of botulinum antitoxin is controversial. First,
botulinum antitoxin needs to be directed against the specific toxin type, which suggests that antitoxin CD should
probably be used in dogs. There is a risk for anaphylaxis
but this appears to be low. A subcutaneous test dose may
be applied 30–45 minutes prior to IV application and pretreatment with diphenhydramine considered. Botulinum
antitoxin will only be able to neutralize the free unbound
fraction of toxin in the systemic circulation but not the
bound and internalized toxin which is responsible for the
observed clinical signs. Consequently, the goal behind the
application of toxin type‐specific botulinum antitoxin is
to prevent further progression of the paralysis and specifically to avoid respiratory paralysis and the need for
ventilatory support in cases with large amounts of circulating unbound toxin or ongoing GI absorption.

Supportive care should include adequate bedding,
­frequent turning, and intravenous fluids. Nutritional
support is also needed if the dogs are unable to eat or
drink on their own. Application of an eye lubricant is
indicated if facial movements and lid closure are
impaired. Any dog with botulism needs to assessed
carefully for the presence of megaesophagus.
Prolonged autonomic dysfunction as a consequence of
botulism is a concern in humans, thus bladder emptying and GI motility should be closely monitored. Drugs
that can impair neuromuscular transmission (clindamycin, aminoglycosides, neuromuscular blocking
agents) and glucocorticoids should be avoided. In
severely affected animals with respiratory distress,
early intubation and ventilation should be considered
as a life‐saving tool.
Prognosis
Most dogs recover from botulism within 2–3 weeks if
they do not die from respiratory arrest at the peak of the
paralysis.
Public Health Implications
Botulism cannot be transmitted directly from dogs and
cats to people but body fluids and tissues, urine, and
feces should be handled with care and appropriately
labeled before submitting to the laboratory as they may
contain toxin.

­Further Reading
Tetanus

Botulism

Bandt C, Rozanski EA, Steinberg T, Shaw SP. Retrospective
study of tetanus in 20 dogs: 1988–2004. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 2007; 43: 143–8.
Bianchi E, Biserni R, Gallucci A, Pisoni L, Menchetti M,
Gandini G. Changes in electromyography and F wave
responses in two cats with presumed local tetanus:
implications for diagnosis and prognosis. J Feline Med
Surg 2013; 15: 927–31.
Burkitt JM, Sturges BK, Jandrey KE, Kass PH. Risk
factors associated with outcome in dogs with tetanus:
38 cases (1987–2005). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007; 230(1):
76–83.
Simmonds EE, Alwood AJ, Costello MF. Magnesium
sulfate as an adjunct therapy in the management of
severe generalized tetanus in a dog. J Vet Emerg
Crit Care 2011; 21: 542–6.

Bruchim Y, Steinman A, Markovitz M, Baneth G, Elad D,
Shpigel NY. Toxicological, bacteriological and
serological diagnosis of botulism in a dog. Vet Rec 2006;
158: 768–9.
Rutter CR, Rozanski EA, Sharp CR, Powell LL, Kent M.
Outcome and medical management in dogs with lower
motor neuron disease undergoing mechanical
ventilation: 14 cases (2003–2009). J Vet Emerg Crit Care
2011; 21: 531–41.
Uriarte A, Thibaud JL, Blot S. Botulism in 2 urban dogs.
Can Vet J 2010; 51: 1139–42.
Woudstra C, Skarin H, Anniballi F, et al. Validation of a
real‐time PCR based method for detection of
Clostridium botulinum types C, D and their mosaic
variants C‐D and D‐C in a multicenter collaborative
trial. Anaerobe 2013; 22: 31–7.

VetBooks.ir

971

107
Anthrax
Wayne E. Wingfield, MS, DVM, DACVS, DACVECC1 and Jerry J. Upp, DVM2
1
2

Department of Clinical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA
Midtown Animal Hospital, Gering, NE, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Anthrax is a life‐threatening infectious disease that normally affects animals, especially ruminants (such as goats,
cattle, sheep, and horses). Both the dog and cat appear to
be relatively resistant to the inhalational and cutaneous
forms of anthrax, but clinical disease associated with
ingestion of contaminated carcases is reported. Because
dogs and cats may theoretically act as sentinels for infection in people during bioterrorist attacks, familiarity with
the disease is important for the small animal clinician.
The agent of anthrax is a bacterium called Bacillus
anthracis and it possesses three known virulence factors:
an antiphagocytic capsule and two protein exotoxins,
called the lethal and the edema toxins. The role of the
capsule in pathogenesis was demonstrated in the early
1900s, when anthrax strains lacking a capsule were
shown to be avirulent. The capsule is composed of a polymer of poly‐D‐glutamic acid, which confers resistance
to phagocytosis and may contribute to the resistance of
anthrax through lysis by serum cationic proteins.The
anthrax toxins, like many bacterial and plant toxins, possess two components: a cell‐binding, or B, domain necessary for entry into the host cell, and an enzymatically
active, or A, domain that has the toxic and, usually, the
enzymatic activity. The two toxins are unusual in that the
B protein, called protective antigen (molecular weight
[MW] 83 000), is shared by both toxins. Thus, the lethal
toxin is composed of the protective antigen combined
with a second protein, which is known as the lethal factor
(MW 90 000). The lethal toxin is lethal for experimental
animals and also has been shown to possess similar
structure and activity to metalloproteases, although no
direct enzymatic activity has yet been discovered.
The edema toxin, consisting of the same protective
antigen together with a third protein, edema factor (MW

89 000), causes edema when injected into the skin of
experimental animals. The edema factor is a calmodulin‐
dependent adenylate cyclase, which elevates intracellular
cyclic adenosine monophosphate, and which is likely to
be responsible for the marked edema often present at the
site of bacterial replication.
Each of the three toxin proteins – the B protein and
both A proteins – individually is without biologic activity.
The critical role of the toxins in pathogenesis was established when it was shown that deletion of the toxin‐
encoding plasmid or the protective antigen gene alone
attenuates the organism. The lethal toxin also appears to
be more important for virulence in a mouse model than
the edema toxin.
Anthrax can infect humans in three ways. The most common is infection through the skin, which causes an ugly sore
that usually goes away without treatment. Humans and animals can ingest anthrax from carcases of dead animals or
contaminated soil/plant materials that have been contaminated with anthrax. Ingestion of anthrax can cause serious,
sometimes fatal disease. The most deadly form is inhalation
anthrax. If the spores of anthrax are inhaled, they migrate to
lymph nodes in the chest where they proliferate, spread,
and produce toxins that often cause death. Interestingly, the
dog is quite resistant to inhalational anthrax. Experimental
studies have shown it required over 150 times the dosage in
dogs as compared to humans. Likely it is the long nose of
the dog which serves as an effective filtration system in preventing the usual fatal inhalational form of anthrax.
Infection is initiated with the introduction of the spore
through a break in the skin (cutaneous anthrax), through
entry through the mucosa (gastrointestinal anthrax), or
inhalation of spores 1–2 μm in diameter. After ingestion
by macrophages at the site of entry, germination to the
vegetative form occurs, followed by extracellular multiplication and capsule and toxin production. In the lungs, the

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

972

Section 9 Infectious Disease

be on the clothes of a person exposed to an anthrax aerosol. Affected clothing should either be destroyed or can
be washed using a 0.5% hypochlorite solution. Wounded
or discharged victims will create a possible vector if they
are not properly decontaminated. Anthrax does not
readily transfer from one person to another unless the
spores are in the clothing/shoes and there is some
method of moving the spores to another person. Once a
rescuer walks in the anthrax, then the threat of “movement” to other areas is very real.
Bodies that are not immediately recoverable pose little
threat. Anthrax doesn’t “jump up and bite you or me”! As
long as the bodies are not disturbed and/or wind movement is low, the anthrax will stay inside the bodies or in
the clothing.

anthrax spores are deposited in alveolar spaces and from
there are transported by lymphatics to regional lymph
nodes where germination occurs up to 60 days later.

­Signalment
Anthrax occurs throughout the world. B. anthracis exists
in the soil as a spore. The question remains unsettled as
to whether its persistence in the soil is due to significant
multiplication of the organism in the soil or if it is due
solely to cycles of bacterial amplification in infected animals whose carcases then recontaminate the soil. The
form of the organism in infected animals is the bacillus.
Only when the organism in the carcass is exposed to oxygen does sporulation occur.
Anthrax is most common in agricultural regions where
it occurs in animals. It is primarily a disease of herbivores
(Table 107.1); carnivores and humans are incidental
hosts. Animals, domestic or wild, become infected when
they ingest spores while grazing on contaminated land or
eating contaminated feed. Environmental conditions
such as drought, which may promote trauma in the oral
cavity during grazing, are thought to increase the chances
of acquiring anthrax. It is spread from animal to animal
by mechanical means and biting flies. Spread from one
environmental site to another appears to occur via
nonbiting flies, rodents, and carrion‐eating birds. Free
anthrax spores can also be spread by water and wind.
Human anthrax victims can also theoretically spread
anthrax spores that landed on their clothing and external
body surfaces. Therefore, each victim should be decontaminated and issued new clothes before leaving the
scene. Estimates have shown that ~90% of anthrax will

­History and Clinical Signs
Anthrax in veterinary species may be peracute, acute or
subacute, or chronic. The peracute form most frequently
affects cattle, sheep, and goats. The acute or subacute
form is common in cattle, sheep, and horses. Chronic
anthrax is most often seen in less susceptible species
such as swine but may also be seen in cattle, horses, dogs,
and cats. Suspicions of anthrax are raised when livestock
are found dead, bloated, and without rigor mortis. Blood
is usually evident at body orifices.
Dogs and Cats
Both the dog and cat appear to be relatively resistant to
anthrax. Dogs are supposedly 500–1000 times more
resistant to anthrax infection than humans. The gastro-

Table 107.1 Anthrax severity in potentially affected species

Dogs

Horses

Cattle

Sheep

Goats

Pigs

Cats

Birds

D

S

S

S

S

D

D

Resistant

Source: Wingfield et al. (2009). Reproduced with permission of John Wiley & Sons.
D, moderate; S, severe.

Other
animals

S
Wild herbivores and carnivores camels,
antelope, guinea pigs

VetBooks.ir

107 Anthrax

intestinal form is most common. In most cases, consumption of tissue from infected livestock is considered
the source of the infection. Inhalational and cutaneous
anthrax have not been reported in dogs and cats. Their
longer noses and dense hair coats are possible reasons
for this.
Clinical signs of anthrax include respiratory distress
and dysphagia resulting from swelling of the neck secondary to regional lymphadenopathy, hemorrhagic and
ulcerative inflammation of the oral cavity and pharynx,
hemoptysis, lingual swelling, enteritis, and enlargement
of the kidneys, spleen, and liver. Sudden death with few
premonitory signs has also been reported. The incubation period in naturally infected carnivores is often difficult to determine, but it is believed to be approximately
3–7 days with a range of 1–14 days.
Pets exposed to anthrax will likely be subject to the
gastrointestinal problems listed above but may complicate matters for their owners/rescuers with their thick
fur harboring B. anthracis spores. When petted or handled, these spores can be aerosolized and expose the pet
owner or rescuer. Additionally, dogs and cats “wash”
their feet/bodies with their tongue, which transfers the
anthrax directly into the pet (possibly initiating either
pharyngeal or gastrointestinal anthrax). These facts
would seem to favor early decontamination and quarantine of exposed animals.
Birds
Birds are usually highly resistant to anthrax. Buzzards,
vultures, and other carrion‐eating birds may transmit
the spores on their talons and beaks.

that samples are highly infectious! Extreme caution
should be taken in collecting, preparing for shipment, or
transporting any material suspected of being contaminated with this bacterial agent. Contact your state public
health service for specific instructions. The spores are
oval and occur centrally or paracentrally. They are very
resistant and may survive in the environment for decades in certain soil conditions. Bacterial identification is
confirmed by gram stain and culture techniques, immunofluorescence assays (IFA), enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA), or polymerase chain reaction
(PCR). Each of these tests has limitations, with the
standard still being the direct identification of the
organism.

­Therapy
Anthrax is a reportable disease. That means that local or
state health agencies must be notified if a case of anthrax
is diagnosed in dogs, cats, and other veterinary species.
Treatment for anthrax in small animals is undocumented at this time. Natural strains of B. anthracis are
usually susceptible to several antibiotics; most but not
all natural strains are susceptible to penicillin (dogs:
penicillin G potassium 20 000 U/kg IV, IM, SC q4h).
Some strains, particularly those used in bioterrorist
attacks, may be resistant to penicillin. For this reason, the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends other antibiotics (Table 107.2) as the initial treatment, particularly for systemic disease, until antibiotic

Table 107.2 In vitro antimicrobial susceptibility of B. anthracis

Humans
Susceptible

Resistant

Ciprofloxacin

Cefuroxime

Ofloxacin

Cefotaxime

­Diagnosis

Levofloxacin

Ceftazidime

Tetracyclines

Aztreonam

Bacillus anthracis is a large, gram‐positive, encapsulated, spore‐forming, nonmotile bacillus (1–1.5 μm ×
3–10 μm), grows readily on sheep blood agar aerobically,
and is nonhemolytic under these conditions. The colonies are large, rough, and grayish‐white, with irregular,
curving marginal outgrowths. Both in vitro in the presence of bicarbonate and carbon dioxide, and in tissue in
vivo, B. anthracis forms a prominent capsule. In tissue,
the encapsulated bacterium occurs singly or in chains of
two or three bacilli. The organism does not form spores
in living tissue; sporulation occurs only after the infected
body has been opened and exposed to oxygen. Remember

Chloramphenicol

Trimethoprim

Macrolides

Sulfamethoxazole

People are infected with anthrax in three ways: cutaneous, gastrointestinal, and inhalational.

Doxycycline
Aminoglycosides
Clindamycin
Imipenem
Rifampin
Vancomycin
Cefazolin
Other first‐generation cephalosporins

973

VetBooks.ir

974

Section 9 Infectious Disease

susceptibility has been determined. Antibiotics are
effective only against the vegetative stage of B. anthracis,
and not against spores. Treatment is continued for at
least 60 days in people with inhalational anthrax, as
spores may remain dormant in the lungs and germinate
during that time.
The pulmonary form of anthrax in people is a medical
emergency. Early and continuous intravenous therapy
with antibiotics may be life‐saving and ventilator support
is often required. In a bioterrorism attack, humans
exposed to anthrax will be given antibiotics before they
become sick. A vaccine exists but is not yet available to
the general public. Most experts think that the vaccine
will also be given to exposed individuals who are victims
of a bioterrorist attack. Supportive therapy may also be
necessary, particularly for the inhalational and gastrointestinal forms.
Effective treatment depends on early recognition of
the symptoms. Treatment for cutaneous anthrax is usually effective, but the inhalational and gastrointestinal
forms are difficult to recognize early and the mortality
rates are higher.

­Public Health Implications
Anthrax in humans is associated with agricultural, horticultural, or industrial exposure to infected animals or
contaminated animal products, and as a weapon of mass
destruction disseminated by terrorists. In less developed
countries, primarily in Africa, Asia, and the Middle East,
anthrax occurs from contact with infected domesticated
animals or contaminated animal products. This includes
handling contaminated carcases, hides, wool, hair, and
bones, and ingesting contaminated meat. Cases associated with industrial exposure are rarely seen today but
may occur in workers processing contaminated hair,
wool, hides, and bones. Direct contact with contaminated material leads to cutaneous disease, while ingestion of infected meat gives rise to oropharyngeal or
gastrointestinal forms of anthrax. Inhalation of a sufficient quantity of spores, usually seen only during generation of aerosols in an enclosed space, is associated with
processing contaminated wool or hair, or opening
anthrax‐laced letters, giving rise to inhalational anthrax.
In mail‐handling sites, B. anthracis spores may be aerosolized during the operation and maintenance of high‐
speed mail‐sorting machines, potentially exposing
workers and other mail. In addition, these spores could
get into heating, ventilating, or air‐conditioning systems.
Unreliable reporting makes it difficult to estimate with
accuracy the true incidence of human anthrax. It was estimated in 1958 that worldwide between 20 000 and 100 000
cases occurred annually. In more recent years, anthrax in

animals has been reported from 82 countries, and human
cases continue to be reported from Africa, Asia, Europe,
and the Americas. In the United States, the annual incidence of human anthrax had steadily declined, from about
127 cases in the early years of this century to about one
per year over the past 10 years. The vast majority of cases
were cutaneous. Under natural conditions, inhalational
anthrax is exceedingly rare, with only 18 cases having
been reported in the United States in the 20th century.
Outbreaks of Weaponized Anthrax
Weaponized anthrax has caused two outbreaks of disease (key points from each are outlined in the sections
below).
Sverdlovsk Outbreak – 1979

This outbreak in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
resulted from accidental release of anthrax spores from a
military microbiologic facility where weaponized
anthrax was being produced.
Seventy‐seven human cases were reported and 66 of
the patients died, for a case–fatality rate of 86%; 75 cases
were inhalational and two were cutaneous (one on the
back of the neck and one on the shoulder). A recent statistical analysis of available data suggests that 250 cases
with 100 fatalities may actually have occurred. The mean
patient age for males was 42 and for females was 55 years,
and interestingly no cases were reported in children.
United States – 2001

This outbreak predominantly involved direct exposure
to mail that was deliberately contaminated with anthrax
spores. Several contaminated letters were sent and one
was reported to contain 2 g of powder, with 100 billion to
1 trillion anthrax spores per gram.
Twenty‐two cases (11 inhalational and 11 cutaneous)
were identified. Five of the patients with inhalational
anthrax died, for a case–fatality rate of 45% among that
group. The outbreak demonstrated several important
points about weaponized anthrax: mail can be an effective vehicle for disseminating anthrax spores; cross‐contamination of mail likely can occur within postal facilities;
and persons who handle or process unopened contaminated mail are at risk of acquiring anthrax. Substantial
environmental contamination can occur in facilities handling contaminated mail or in offices where contaminated mail is opened.

­Prevention
Public health measures to prevent contact with infected
animals are invaluable. There is a vaccine available for

VetBooks.ir

107 Anthrax

people at high risk (such as veterinarians, laboratory
technicians, employees of textile mills processing
imported goat hair, and members of the armed forces).
The Department of Defense and the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention are working hard to prevent a
bioterrorist attack and to be prepared to deal with the

consequences if one occurs. For anthrax, vaccines
with greater efficacy and fewer side‐effects are under
development. Currently, most vaccines are given by
injection. Early studies in experimental animals are
showing promise for an oral vaccine for anthrax.

­Further Reading
www.cdc.gov/anthrax/index.html – CDC website with
the most current information on anthrax (accessed
June 26, 2019).
www.cfsph.iastate.edu/Factsheets/pdfs/anthrax.pdf –
Good review of anthrax from the Center of Food
Security and Public Health at Iowa State University
(accessed June 26, 2019).
www.who.int/csr/disease/Anthrax/en/ ‐‐ World Health
Organization website maintained to provide worldwide
occurrences of anthrax (accessed June 26, 2019).

www.aphis.usda.gov/animal_health/emergingissues/
downloads/anthrax.pdf – Epizootiology and ecology of
anthrax (accessed June 26, 2019).
Wingfield WE, Nash SL, Palmer SB, Upp JJ. Veterinary
Disaster Medicine: Working Animals. Ames, IA: Wiley‐
Blackwell, 2009.

975

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

977

108
Actinomycosis, Nocardiosis, and Mycobacterial Infections
Joanna Whitney, BSc, BVSc, PhD, MVetStud, MACVS (SMAnimMed, ECC)1 and Vanessa R. Barrs, BVSc (Hons),
MVetClinStud, MACVSc (Small Animal), FACVSc (Feline), GradDertEd (Higher Ed)2
1

Small Animal Specialist Hospital, North Ryde, NSW, Australia
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia

2

­Actinomycosis

Actinomyces form histopathologic lesions characterized
by pyogranulomatous inflammation with areas of central
necrosis surrounded by macrophages, neutrophils, and
plasma cells. Subacute and chronic infections result in
granulation tissue formation, extensive fibrosis, and sinus
tracts. Exudates and effusions are often malodorous.
Actinomyces may form bacterial colonies in infected body
fluids, commonly referred to as “sulphur granules,” that
grossly appear tan or white.

Etiology/Pathophysiology and Epidemiology

Signalment

Actinomyces spp. are facultatively anaerobic or microaerophilic, Gram‐positive, nonacid‐fast, nonsporulating, and
nonmotile bacilli. These opportunistic pathogens are commensals of the mucous membranes, especially the oral cavity
but also the gastrointestinal and genitourinary tracts.
Actinomyces are often involved in polymicrobial infections
that enhance their pathogenicity. A. viscosus, A. hordeovuln­
eris, A. bowdenii, A. canis, A. catuli, A. turicensis, A. weissii,
and A. odontolyticus have been isolated from canine infections. A. viscosus, A. meyeri, A. odontolyticus, A. hordeovuln­
eris, and A. bowdenii have been isolated from infections in
cats. Actinomyces pyogenes was recently reclassified based
on 16S rRNA gene sequencing to be included in the genus
Arcanobacterium. This organism has been reported to produce actinomycosis‐like infections in both dogs and cats.
Actinomyces cause disease following inoculation of
body tissues, frequently in conjunction with other bacteria. Portals of entry include oral mucosa damaged by
chronic gingivitis and periodontal disease, foreign body
migration, subcutaneous inoculation via bite wounds or
plant material, and aspiration of oropharyngeal material
or grass awns. Infections occur primarily in immunocompetent individuals.

Young, male, large‐breed outdoor dogs are overrepresented. Hunting and working animals are often affected,
particularly with soft tissue abscesses or pyothorax associated with plant material foreign bodies. Young, male
cats are also at increased risk from aggressive interactions involving scratches and bite wounds resulting in
inoculation of oral bacteria.

Actinomyces, Nocardia, and Mycobacteria belong to the
order Actinomycetales. All are bacilli that form branching
filaments and cause pyogranulomatous infections. However,
differences in antimicrobial susceptibility patterns, zoonotic
implications, and prognoses make an understanding of
how the organisms are differentiated clinically important.

History and Clinical Signs
In both dogs and cats actinomycosis is most commonly
associated with subcutaneous and soft tissue abscesses
and intrathoracic disease. Clinical findings may include
pneumonia, lymphadenopathy, intra‐ or extrapulmonary
masses or pyothorax. Central nervous system (CNS),
periodontal, ocular, peritoneal, urinary bladder, cardiac,
and orthopedic infections have also been reported in
dogs. In cats, less common presentations include abdominal granulomas, intracranial/spinal empyema, and
cholecystitis.
Cervicofacial actinomycosis occurs in both cats and
dogs associated with extension of oral bacteria into the
soft tissues of the head and neck secondary to periodontal

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

978

Section 9 Infectious Disease

disease, oral trauma, and bite wounds. Lesions most commonly develop around the jaw and neck.
Cutaneous and subcutaneous actinomycosis manifests
as flocculent to firm masses often with draining sinus
tracts typically on the thoracic wall, flanks or limbs.
These lesions in dogs are often secondary to migrating
grass awns. In cats, they are associated with bite wounds.
Thoracic actinomycosis can present as pneumonia, lymphadenopathy, intra‐ or extrapulmonary masses or pyothorax. Thoracic actinomycosis in cats occurs secondary
to aspiration of oral flora whereas canine infections are
secondary to inhalation and migration of grass awns.
Clinical signs may be nonspecific, such as lethargy and
weight loss, or can include tachypnea, dyspnea, and coughing. Foreign bodies in dogs can migrate further into the
retroperitoneum, resulting in abscessation in this area.
Abdominal, visceral, and central nervous system infections can develop from extension of subcutaneous infections, foreign body migration or hematogenous spread.
Osseous infections can result from extension from other
locations or contamination of orthopedic implants.
Diagnosis
A provisional diagnosis of actinomycosis is based on the
identification of Gram‐positive, nonacid‐fast filamentous
organisms on cytologic examination of fluid or tissues
from suspicious lesions using a modified Ziehl–Neelson
(Kinyuon) method. A definitive diagnosis requires either
isolation and phenotypic identification of the causative
agent using biochemical methods, chemotaxonomy, and
serology or identification using molecular methods.
Molecular methods, most commonly 16S rRNA gene

sequencing, are now the diagnostic techniques of choice
for identifying the infecting species as they provide accurate and rapid results. It is important to note that culture
and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) can be negative in
some cases. Furthermore, culture or detecting organisms
using PCR without compatible clinical signs may not be
clinically significant since Actinomyces are commensals.
Therapy
The combination of surgery and antimicrobial treatment
is generally superior to antimicrobial treatment alone in
resolving Actinomyces infections in which a foreign body
is suspected. Thoracotomy and debridement are recommended in dogs with pyothorax, while cats generally
require only tube thoracostomy in addition to medical
therapy. This likely reflects the difference in etiologies in
which canine infections generally result from foreign body
migration and feline infections are caused by aspiration of
oral flora. Prolonged antimicrobial therapy for several
months is often required to resolve infection. Actinomyces
spp. are susceptible to high doses of penicillins as well as
other antibiotics (Table 108.1). As actinomycosis often
occurs as a component of a mixed bacterial infection,
identification, susceptibility testing, and treatment of the
co‐infectious agents are also imperative for resolution.
Prognosis
The prognosis for dogs and cats with subcutaneous and
soft tissue actinomycosis and for cats with pyothorax is
generally good when treated for sufficient time. However,
reported survival rates in dogs with thoracic disease are
variable and CNS actinomycosis is invariably fatal.

Table 108.1 Antimicrobials used to treat Actinomyces and Nocardia infections
Canine

Actinomyces spp.

Nocardia spp.

Penicillins
●● Ampicillin (10–20 mg/kg IV/IM/SC q6–8h)
●● Amoxicillin (10–30 mg/kg IM/SC/PO q12h)
Macrolides/Lincosamides
●● Clindamycin (5 mg/kg IV/IM/SC/PO q12h)
●● Erythromycin (10 mg/kg PO q8h)
Chloramphenicol* (50 mg/kg IV/IM/SC/PO q8h)
Sulfonamides
Trimethoprim‐sulfonamide* (30 mg/kg PO q12h)
Amikacin (10–30 mg/kg IV/IM/SC q24h)*
Imipenem‐cilastatin (3-10 mg/kg slow IV q8h)
Cefotaxime (25–50 mg/kg IV/IM/SC q6h)

●●

Feline

Penicillins
Ampicillin (10–20 mg/kg IV/IM/SC q6–8h)
●● Amoxicillin (10–30 mg/kg IM/SC/PO q12h)
Macrolides/Lincosamides
●● Clindamycin (5 mg/kg IV/IM/SC/PO q12h)
●● Erythromycin (10 mg/kg PO q8h)
Chloramphenicol* (50 mg IV/IM/SC/PO/cat q12h)
●●

Sulfonamides
Trimethoprim‐sulfonamide* (30 mg/kg PO q12h)
Amikacin (10–15 mg/kg IV/IM/SC q24h)
Imipenem‐cilastatin (3-10 mg/kg slow IV q8h)
Cefotaxime (22 mg/kg IV/IM/SC q6–8h)

●●

* Potential severe adverse drug effects.
For all medications please consult comprehensive formularies for potential adverse drug effects, interactions, and contraindications.
Please see text for further information regarding treatment protocols.
IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; PO, by mouth (per os); SC, subcutaneous.

VetBooks.ir

108 Actinomycosis, Nocardiosis, and Mycobacterial Infections

Public Health Implications
Humans bitten by dogs or cats can develop actinomycosis. However, there have been no reports of transmission
from infected animals to humans.

­Nocardiosis
Etiology/Pathophysiology and Epidemiology
The genus Nocardia consists of filamentous, branching,
Gram‐positive, variably acid‐fast, catalase‐positive,
nonmotile aerobic bacilli. Unlike commensal Actino­
myces, Nocardia species are ubiquitous soil saprophytes,
involved in plant decomposition. Pathogenic species
have been isolated from house dust, garden soil, beach
sand, swimming pools, and tap water in different geographic regions. Pathogenic Nocardia species in dogs
include N. caviae, N. asteroides, N. abscessus, N. otitidis‐
caviarum, N. brasiliensis, N. cyriacigeorgica, and N. vet­
erana, while those in cats include N. tenerifensis,
N. africana, N. nova, N. farcinica, N. cyriacigeorgica,
N.brasiliensis, and N. elegans. The virulence of Nocardia
spp. varies with the phase of growth associated with
changes in composition of the cell wall.
Infection with Nocardia species occurs after inhalation of aerosolized environmental organisms or inoculation via puncture wounds. The host T cell response is
essential in limiting dissemination of nocardial infection
following inoculation, but it is also responsible for the
development of the characteristic suppurative to granulomatous lesions of nocardiosis.
Nocardiosis is less common than actinomycosis and in
contrast to Actinomyces, Nocardia infections are most
common in immunosuppressed patients.
Signalment
Localized infections, particularly abscesses of the subcutaneous tissues, are most frequently seen in young outdoor dogs secondary to foreign body migration and
inoculation during puncture wounds. Similarly, cats of
any age with outdoor access more commonly develop
superficial lesions.
Disseminated or systemic nocardiosis develops in young
and immunosuppressed dogs and cats. The increasing use
of immunosuppressive medications in veterinary patients
has resulted in an increase in the incidence of such
infections.
History and Clinical Signs
Nocardiosis is typically classified as subcutaneous,
pulmonary and systemic, or disseminated. In
­

immunocompetent companion animals, especially cats,
­
disease most commonly manifests as cutaneous and pulmonary lesions. Disseminated disease, often involving
the CNS, has been reported more commonly in young
and immunosuppressed dogs. Nocardia spp. have been
isolated sporadically from cases of hepatitis and cystitis.
Cutaneous nocardiosis is the most common manifestation of disease in cats, associated with inoculation
via scratches from cat fights and punctures from plant
material.
Dogs and cats with disseminated or systemic disease
typically have a history of immunosuppressive disease or
administration of immunomodulating drugs. In particular, nocardiosis has been shown to occur currently with
canine distemper virus infection in endemic areas.
Pulmonary nocardiosis may occur in isolation associated with wound inoculation or foreign body migration,
or as a component of disseminated disease. In dogs, the
most common clinical signs of pneumonia include dyspnea, nasal discharge, fever, weight loss, and anorexia.
Diagnosis
A presumptive diagnosis of nocardiosis may be made
based upon macroscopic and microscopic examination
of clinical specimens. Organisms on Gram‐stained slides
will appear as Gram‐positive, thin filamentous organisms
within a background of lymphocytes and macrophages.
Acid‐fast stains may be used to demonstrate acid‐fastness in samples that have revealed filamentous organisms
with Gram staining. However, this reaction is unreliable
in direct clinical samples and may be dependent on the
growth media used and age of culture samples. Species
identification has traditionally been performed based on
biochemical methods, chemotaxonomy, and serology.
Molecular methods, most commonly 16S rRNA gene
sequencing, are now used preferentially for bacterial
identification as these provide accurate and rapid results.
Due to the ubiquitous nature of Nocardia spp., the significance of isolation of these organisms from clinical
samples should be assessed in light of the clinical findings. Identification of the sample organism in multiple
samples also aids in determining significance.
Therapy
Treatment of nocardiosis relies upon debridement and
drainage of the lesion and prolonged antimicrobial therapy.
Most Nocardia spp. are susceptible to sulfonamide antimicrobials and these often form the basis of medical
therapy. However, species differences in susceptibility
have been reported and in vivo response to treatment
does not always reflect in vitro results. In humans, a
range of other antimicrobials (see Table 108.1) are efficacious

979

VetBooks.ir

980

Section 9 Infectious Disease

with protocols based on established species‐specific susceptibility patterns advocated for treatment of persistent
or disseminated infections. Six to 12 months of antimicrobial therapy is required in most cases for optimal
results. Alternatives to sulfonamides should be considered for prolonged treatment of nocardiosis to minimize
the risk of adverse drug reactions.
Prognosis
While cases of superficial nocardiosis may show initial
response to treatment, most patients are euthanized due
to deterioration or disease recurrence. Disseminated
nocardiosis, especially with CNS involvement, has a
grave prognosis. The poor outcome for these patients is
likely associated with the underlying immunosuppressive disease.
Public Health Implications
There have been no cases of acquired infection from
infected animals, but cat scratches have caused cutaneous nocardiosis in people. Immunocompromised individuals should take special precautions when interacting
with infected dogs or cats.

­Mycobacteriosis
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Members of the genus Mycobacterium are intracellular,
aerobic, acid‐fast, nonspore‐forming, environmentally
resistant bacilli. Mycobacteria spp. are generally saprophytic and nonpathogenic, but several are primary
or opportunistic pathogens in dogs cats, and humans.
Infecting bacteria are phagocytosed by host macrophages
within which the organism replicates. Infected macrophages produce proinflammatory mediators and
attract monocytes and other inflammatory cells to the
site of infection, resulting in focal or disseminated granulomatous to pyogranulomatous disease.
Mycobacterial infections are recognized increasingly
in companion animals because of improved diagnostic
techniques and increased use of immunosuppressive
medications. Recent evidence suggests that the prevalence of mycobacteriosis in companion animals, particularly in the United Kingdom, is underestimated due to
nonspecific signs, a low index of suspicion, and difficult
antemortem diagnosis.
The mycobacteria that cause companion animal infections are generally divided into tuberculous, saprophytic
or opportunistic, and lepromatous groups. Generally,
the tuberculous group includes members of the

Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) complex, the saprophytic group includes members of the M. avium complex (MAC) and other nontuberculous bacteria, and
the lepromatous group includes bacteria that cause
feline leprosy and canine leproid granuloma syndromes
(Table 108.2). However, there is much overlap in these
categories since different organisms cause similar clinical lesions and there is disagreement in the grouping of
organisms. Organisms from all groups can cause cutaneous lesions whereas systemic or disseminated disease
results from infection with tuberculous or saprophytic/
opportunistic agents.
Epidemiology
Tuberculosis is caused by infection with members of the
MTB complex, all of which are obligate pathogens (see
Table 108.2). The prevalence of disease within a region
and the causative agent are dependent on the presence of
the primary host species. Humans are the reservoir host
for M. tuberculosis so the incidence of M. tuberculosis
infection in dogs follows the distribution reported for
people, and includes areas of the US, Africa, France, and
Switzerland. M. bovis infections in people occur in Great
Britain and New Zealand and consequently most feline
infections are also reported in these regions.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection typically results
from close contact with infected humans. Disease transmission occurs via inoculation, ingestion or inhalation.
Organisms in sputum and respiratory secretions are aerosolized and inhaled or ingested by in‐contact pets.
However, due to the chronicity of disease and potential
for hematogenous dissemination, the route of infection
may not be identifiable at the time of diagnosis. Although
there are minimal reports of transmission of M. tubercu­
losis from pets to their owners the zoonotic potential of
infected animals is of major concern, particularly for
immunocompromised owners.
The primary reservoir of M. bovis is domestic cattle,
with transmission to dogs and cats thought to be due to
ingestion of contaminated meat or milk. Cats and dogs
are considered to be potential amplifier hosts of M. bovis
in endemic areas, meaning that they may act as a source
of infection for other animals and people. Rodents, feral
pigs, wild deer, badgers, and opossums are established
reservoir hosts for M. bovis and/or microti.
The occurrence of peripheral primary cutaneous
lesions in cats suggests that some infections may develop
following inoculation of organisms via bite wounds.
Hunting and catching small rodents are risk factors for
M. microti infection in cats.
The saprophytic mycobacteria are the most common
causes of mycobacteriosis in cats and dogs. This group
includes the rapid‐growing mycobacteria (RGM) and

VetBooks.ir

108 Actinomycosis, Nocardiosis, and Mycobacterial Infections

slow‐growing mycobacteria (SGM) groups, including
the M. avium‐intracellulare complex (see Table 108.2).
The saprophytic mycobacteria are widely distributed in
the environment. They have variable geographic prevalence likely associated with environmental factors such
as warmer temperatures that support their growth.
Infection with RGM usually follows cutaneous, pulmonary or gastrointestinal inoculation. Disseminated disease may develop in immunosuppressed animals.
Canine and feline leproid syndromes are characterized
by discrete cutaneous lesions. The causative agents are
fastidious and cannot be cultured readily. Feline leprosy
results from infection with one of a number of saprophytic species (see Table 108.2). M. lepraemurium infection is thought to be transmitted to cats by rodent bites.
Insect vector transmission has also been proposed but is
unverified.
It is not clear whether canine leproid granuloma syndrome results from infection with one or more species.
Partial characterization using gene sequencing has
shown that genetically identical organisms have been
associated with the disease worldwide; however, the
causative species remains incompletely defined due to
inability to culture it in the laboratory. Transmission of

the canine agent via insect vectors seems likely. Case
clusters of disease in related foxhounds suggest additional environmental or genetic factors may be involved.
Signalment
Younger animals tend to be more commonly affected by
mycobacteriosis, particularly cutaneous forms of the disease. This may be associated with increased exposure to
environmental organisms and precipitating injuries that
allow infection. Patients that develop disseminated disease are often suspected to be immunocompromised
although supportive evidence for this may not be apparent. Tuberculosis is most commonly observed in animals
with prolonged close contact with an infected primary
host. Adult nonpedigree cats with outdoor access are
most commonly affected, although Siamese cats are also
overrepresented. Feline leprosy is most common in
young cats and in older cats that are immunosuppressed.
Canine leproid granuloma syndrome is most common in
large‐breed, short‐haired dogs, especially boxers. Bassett
hounds, schnauzers, and Abyssinian cats are overrepresented in disseminated saprophytic mycobacteriosis,
suggesting genetic immunodeficiencies in these breeds.

Table 108.2 Mycobacteria spp. and their manifestations in dogs and cats
Canine

Feline

M. bovisDCP
M. tuberculosisDCL
M. microtiD

M. bovisCD
M. microtiCDL
M. tuberculosisCD

Rapid growing

M. fortuitumLC
M. goodiiCP
M. smegmatisCP
M. chelonae‐abscessusL

Slow growing

M. avium complexD
M. ulceransC
M. kansasiiL

M. fortuitumPCL
M. smegmatisPD
M. chelonae‐abscessusPC
M. alveiP
M. goodiiD
M. thermoresistibilePL
M. phleiP
M. mucogenicumC
M. massilenceC
M. avium complexCDL
M. ulceransC
M. terraeC
M. xenopiPD
M. simiaeD
M. celatumD
M. malomenseC
M. heckeshornenseD
M. kansasiiD

Tuberculous

Saprophytic

Leproid syndromes

Unclassified speciesC

C, cutaneous lesions; D, disseminated disease; L, pulmonary disease; P, panniculitis.

M. lepraemuriumC
M. visibileC
Canditatus ‘M. tarwinense’ C
Canditatus ‘M. lepraefelis’ C,D
Unclassified speciesC

981

VetBooks.ir

982

Section 9 Infectious Disease

History and Clinical Signs
Cutaneous lesions in mycobacteriosis vary. Leproid
granulomas can be single or multiple nodules with or
without ulceration and frequently occur on the head and
limbs. The most common manifestation of tuberculosis
and saprophytic mycobacterial infections in cats is the
cutaneous form that results in the development of subcutaneous masses, often with draining sinuses and a
regional lymphadenopathy. Skin lesions are usually
mobile, firm, raised, moist, and without odor. The saprophytic mycobacterial agents have a predilection for
adipose tissue and often cause a panniculitis of the ventral abdomen and inguinal area in cats (Figure 108.1).
Ocular lesions are frequently reported in cats with the
leproid syndrome. Pulmonary, gastrointestinal or
disseminated granulomatous lesions can result from
­
infection with tuberculous and saprophytic group organisms. Abdominal and pleural effusions often develop
with progressive disease.
Diagnosis
Clinical pathologica results are generally nonspecific, and
may include a neutrophilia with a left shift, nonregenerative anemia, decreased albumin:globulin ratio, and hypercalcemia. Where there is systemic involvement, diagnostic
imaging findings are consistent with nonspecific infiltrative disease of the abdominal and/or thoracic cavities
with possible organ and lymph node mineralization.
Tuberculin intradermal testing in dogs and cats is generally unrewarding. However, immunodiagnostic assays for
diagnosis of M. bovis in cats, including semiquantitative
interferon‐gamma production and point‐of‐care qualitative antibody detection tests, have shown positive results,
although further evaluation is required.

Figure 108.2 Acid‐fast bacilli in a sample from a cat with feline
leprosy.

Suspicion of mycobacteriosis should be raised in
­animals with consistent presenting signs whenever pyogranulomatous inflammation is identified on cytologic or
histopathologic examination. Provisional diagnosis is
based on the identification of acid‐fast bacilli within tissue samples, exudates or blood smears (Figure 108.2).
Definitive diagnosis requires organism identification and
is imperative in mycobacterial infections in connection to
their treatment and zoonotic potential. Like acid‐fast
staining, culture for mycobacteria must be specifically
requested from the laboratory.
While RGM are often difficult to identify cytologically
due to the scant number of organisms seen, they can
generally be cultured within seven days. Conversely,
SGM may be abundant on tissue cytology but cannot be
cultured readily, if at all. Molecular techniques, particularly
16S rRNA sequencing, provide rapid and accurate identification of mycobacteria which is of particular importance in potential zoonotic infections. However, bacterial
culture and susceptibility testing should still be attempted
to determine appropriate antimicrobial therapy.
Therapy and Prognosis

Figure 108.1 Inguinal panniculitis in a cat.

The zoonotic potential and implications of treating
infected animals must be considered before treatment
(see later). Recommendations for treatment of tuberculous and saprophytic infections include triple agent antimicrobial therapy (a fluoroquinolone, a macrolide, and
rifampicin) for three months followed by continued
administration of two of these agents for an additional
six months (see Table 108.3). Other antimicrobials,
including doxycycline, aminoglycocides, third‐generation
cephalosporins, and chloramphenicol, have been
reported to have been used in combination protocols or

VetBooks.ir

108 Actinomycosis, Nocardiosis, and Mycobacterial Infections

Table 108.3 Antimicrobials used to treat mycobacterial infections

Tuberculous
mycobacteriosis

Saprophytic
mycobacteriosis

Feline

Rifampicin* (10–15 mg/kg, max 600 mg/day,
PO q24h)
Enrofloxacin (5-10 mg/kg IV/IM/SC/PO q24h)
Macrolides
●● Clarithromycin (5–15 mg/kg PO q12h)
●● Azithromycin (5–15 mg/kg PO q24h)
Isoniazid* (10 mg/kg, max 300 mg/day, PO q24h)
Pyrazinamide* (15–40 mg/kg PO q24h)

Rifampicin* (10–20 mg/kg PO q24h)
Fluoroquinolones
●● Marbofloxacin (2 mg/kg PO q24h)
●● Moxifloxacin (10 mg/kg PO q24h)
Macrolides
●● Clindamycin (125 mg/cat PO q24h)
●● Azithromycin (5–15 mg/kg PO q24h)
Isoniazid* (10–20 mg/kg PO q24h)
Pyrazinamide* (15–40 mg/kg PO q24h)

Rapid growing Enrofloxacin (5-10 mg/kg IV/IM/SC/PO q24h)
Rifampicin* (10–15 mg/kg, max 600 mg/day, PO
q24h)
Clarithromycin (5–15 mg/kg PO q12h)
Doxycycline (5–10 mg/kg PO q12–24h)
Amikacin* (10–15 mg/kg IV/IM/SC q24h)
Cefotaxime (25–50 mg/kg IV/IM/SC q6h)

Slow growing

Leproid syndromes

Canine

Clarithromycin (5–15 mg/kg PO q12h)
Clofazamine (4–12 mg/kg PO q24h)
Rifampicin* (10–15 mg/kg, max 600 mg/day, PO
q24h)
Doxycycline (5–10 mg/kg PO q12–24h)
Rifampicin* (10–15 mg/kg PO q24h)
Clarithromycin (5–15 mg/kg PO q12h)
Clofazamine (4–8 mg/kg PO q24h)
Doxycycline (5–10 mg/kg PO q12–24h)

Gentamicin* (peri‐op.) (5–8 mg/kg IV/IM/
SC q24h)
Amikacin* (peri‐op.) (10–15 mg/kg IV/IM/
SC q24h)
Fluoroquinolones
●● Marbofloxacin (2 mg/kg PO q24h)
●● Moxifloxacin (10 mg/kg PO q24h)
●● Pradofloxacin (5 mg/kg PO q24h)
Doxycycline (5–10 mg/kg PO q12–24h)
Clarithromycin (62.5 mg PO q12h)
Cefotaxime (22 mg/kg IV/IM/SC q6–8h)
Clarithromycin (62.5 mg PO q12h)
Moxifloxacin (10 mg/kg PO q24h)
Clofazamine (8 mg/kg, max 25 mg)
PO q24h)
Rifampicin* (10–20 mg/kg PO q24h)
Doxycycline (5–10 mg/kg PO q12–24h)
Rifampicin* (10–15 mg/kg PO q24h)
Clarithromycin (62.5 mg PO q12h)
Clofazamine (8 mg/kg, max 25 mg) PO
q24h)
Doxycycline (5–10 mg/kg PO q12–24h)
Fluoroquinolones
●● Marbofloxacin (2 mg/kg PO q24h)
●● Moxifloxacin (10 mg/kg PO q24h)
Amikacin (10–15 mg/kg IV/IM/SC q24h)

* Potential severe adverse drug effects.
Please see text for further information regarding treatment protocols and drug combinations.
For all medications please consult comprehensive formularies for potential adverse drug effects, interactions, and contraindications.
IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; PO, by mouth (per os); SC, subcutaneous.

have been shown to have in vitro efficacy. However, these
are not recommended as first‐line therapies. Similarly,
protocols including isoniazid and pyrazinamide have
been reported for treatment of resistant infections but
should be used with care due to potential toxicities. It is
important to note that M. bovis has natural resistance to
pyrazinamide. While superficial infections hold a
guarded prognosis for long‐term resolution, the prognosis for systemic infections is grave.
Treatment of the leproid syndromes is not always
required as spontaneous remission has been reported,
especially in dogs. Refractory lesions should be treated

with surgical resection with prolonged, dual or triple antimicrobial therapy comprising a combination of rifampicin,
clarithromycin, and/or clofazamine (Table 108.3).
Public Health Implications
Although the risk of transmission from dogs and cats to
humans is low, members of the tuberculosis complex and
MAC have zoonotic potential. Infected animals may
excrete organisms in sputum and respiratory secretions
that are aerosolized and can be inhaled or ingested by humans
in close contact. Euthanasia or aggressive treatment of

983

VetBooks.ir

984

Section 9 Infectious Disease

dogs and cats infected with these organisms is imperative
to eliminate the risk of zoonotic transmission.
Infection of veterinary personnel with M. tuberculosis
has been reported following necropsy of infected dogs.
In one case, the organism may have been aerosolized during use of an electric saw. Cutaneous inoculation of
mycobacterial bacilli has also been reported associated
with needle sticks contaminated by laboratory and
patient samples. Care should be taken in specimen handling

and appropriate personal protective equipment must be
worn to avoid aerosolization, inhalation, and inoculation
of organisms.
Tuberculosis is reportable or notifiable in a number of
countries. Regional and national health authorities
should be consulted when tuberculous infections are
suspected or diagnosed in dogs and cats to allow thorough
epidemiologic investigation.

­Further Reading
Gunn‐Moore DA, McFarland S, Brewer J, et al.
Mycobacterial disease in cats in Great Britain:
I. Geographical distribution and clinical
presentation in 339 cases. J Feline Med Surg
2011; 13(12): 934–44.
Gunn‐Moore DA, McFarland S, Schock A, et al.
Mycobacterial disease in a population of 339 cats in
Great Britain: II. Histopathology of 225 cases, and
treatment and outcome in 184 cases. J Feline Med Surg
2011; 13(12): 945–52.

Gunn‐Moore D, Gaunt C, Shaw D. Incidence of
mycobacterial infections in cats in Great Britain: estimate
from feline tissue samples submitted to diagnostic
laboratories. Transbound Emerg Dis 2013; 60(4): 338–44.
Posthaus H, Bodmer T, Alves L, et al. Accidental infection of
veterinary personnel with Mycobacterium tuberculosis at
necropsy: a case study. Vet Microbiol 2011; 149(3‐4): 374–80.
Rhodes S. Comparative study of IFNγ and antibody tests
for tuberculosis. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 2011;
144(1–2): 129–34.

VetBooks.ir

985

109
Fungal Infections
Jane E. Sykes, BVSc, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM)
Department of Medicine and Epidemiology, University of California‐Davis, Davis, CA, USA

­General Features of Fungal
Infections
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Fungal infections can be classified as superficial (cutane­
ous) mycoses or deep mycoses. Superficial mycoses are
limited to the skin and include dermatophytosis and
Malassezia infections. Deep mycoses can be caused by:
organisms that exist as molds (hyphal forms) in the
environment, the conidia (spores) of which are typi­
cally inhaled by mammalian hosts and then transform
into replicating yeasts in tissues (dimorphic fungi)
●● organisms that exist as spore‐producing molds in the
environment, are inhaled by mammalian hosts and
then continue to grow as molds in tissues, such as
Aspergillus
●● Candida, which is a commensal of mucous mem­
branes and invades opportunistically.
●●

With the exception of Sporothrix, infections caused
by dimorphic fungi and molds are acquired from the
environment, and disease transmission from one affected
animal to another does not occur. Incubation periods
are often several weeks to months in duration, because
of the slow replication rate of many fungi.
Epidemiology and Signalment
In general, dogs and cats of any age, breed, and sex can
develop deep mycoses, but dogs are often young adult,
pure‐bred dogs, suggesting that genetic factors predis­
pose to infection. Most cats with deep fungal infections
test negative for retroviruses, but some animals have
concurrent diseases such as malignancy or a history of
treatment with immunosuppressive drugs, including
chronic low‐dose glucocorticoid therapy. Some dogs

and cats have evidence of concurrent opportunistic
infections such as toxoplasmosis, neosporosis or papil­
lomavirus. Cats housed exclusively indoors can develop
soil‐borne fungal infections such as histoplasmosis or
cryptococcosis.
History and Clinical Signs
Many infections with dimorphic fungi are probably
subclinical. Animals that develop systemic disease
­
are often evaluated for vague signs such as lethargy,
weight loss, inappetence, weakness, and low‐grade fever,
together with signs of respiratory involvement and/or
dissemination to sites that commonly include the skin,
bone, eye, and brain. Findings on routine hematologic
and biochemical testing are also nonspecific and include
nonregenerative anemia, mild leukocytosis, hypoalbu­
minemia, and hyperglobulinemia. In a smaller pro­
portion of dogs with systemic mycoses, hypercalcemia
secondary to granulomatous inflammation may be pre­
sent. Although most infections are acquired through
inhalation, radiographic evidence of pulmonary involve­
ment can be absent in some dogs and cats with dissemi­
nated disease.
Diagnosis
Persistent disease in the face of antibacterial therapy, or
progression in the face of glucocorticoid therapy, should
raise suspicion for a fungal infection. Definitive diagno­
sis is based on clinical suspicion combined with cytology
and/or histopathology, fungal culture, antibody or anti­
gen testing, and/or real‐time polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) assays. Cytology and histopathology have variable
sensitivity and specificity and a limited ability to identify
fungal pathogens. The use of special stains such as peri­
odic acid–Schiff or Gomori’s methenamine silver can

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

986

Section 9 Infectious Disease

highlight fungal elements in tissues. Most fungi grow
within seven days in the laboratory, but occasionally
­several weeks elapse before growth occurs. Some dimor­
phic fungi (Blastomyces, Histoplasma, Coccidioides)
grow as a mycelial form in the laboratory, which repre­
sents a laboratory health hazard. For these pathogens,
culture should only be performed if a diagnosis cannot
be established through other methods, and the labora­
tory should be warned that infection with a dimorphic
fungus may be present, so that appropriate precautions
are taken. Culture also allows antifungal susceptibility
testing, although at this time, the clinical relevance of
susceptibility test results is unclear for many fungi.
Antigen testing can be helpful for diagnosis and
­therapeutic monitoring of histoplasmosis (urine), blasto­
mycosis (serum), cryptococcosis (serum or cerebrospi­
nal fluid [CSF]), and disseminated aspergillosis (serum),
although serologic cross‐reactivity with other fungal
pathogens is common with all assays except those for
cryptococcosis. Serum antibody testing is helpful for
diagnosis of coccidioidomycosis and pythiosis. At the
time of writing, more information is needed on the
­clinical sensitivity and specificity of real‐time PCR assays
that are available for detection of fungal pathogens,
but these may be useful when a fungal pathogen is
­suspected but cannot be detected or identified using
other diagnostic tests.
Therapy
Treatment of fungal infections most often involves the
use of orally administered azole antifungal drugs such as
itraconazole capsules (usually 5 mg/kg PO q24h for
dogs) or fluconazole tablets (5–10 mg/kg PO q24h). In
general, fluconazole is less active than itraconazole, and
itraconazole is preferred as first‐line treatment for most
infections, with the exceptions of Cryptococcus and
­
Candida. Most molds are resistant to fluconazole.
Topical antifungal drug preparations that contain azole
drugs may be sufficient for treatment of the superficial
mycoses. Liver enzyme activities should be monitored
monthly during systemic treatment with azole antifun­
gals in order to monitor for hepatotoxicity. Itraconazole
solution (10 mg/mL) has higher bioavailability than the
capsules and is administered at a lower dose (3 mg/kg
PO q12h) and on an empty stomach. If itraconazole cap­
sules are used, they should be administered with food.
Compounded formulations of itraconazole should be
avoided.
If clinical signs do not improve with azole treatment,
measurement of serum drug concentrations could be
considered. Serious systemic infections may require
treatment with intravenous amphotericin B, with careful
monitoring for evidence of nephrotoxicity before each

infusion. Lipid complex amphotericin B preparations
are not necessarily more effective than deoxycholate
amphotericin B but are less nephrotoxic. Deoxycholate
amphotericin B is administered to dogs at 0.5 mg/kg in
250–1000 mL of 5% dextrose over 4–6 hours on a
Monday‐Wednesday‐Friday basis; the dose for cats is
0.25 mg/kg, which is given in 30 mL of 5% dextrose over
one hour. Administration of 0.9% NaCl at 1.5–2 times
maintenance for one hour prior to and after administra­
tion is recommended. Electrolytes cause amphotericin
to precipitate so the line must be flushed with D5W prior
to administration of the drug. Lipid complexed ampho­
tericin B is administered to dogs at 3 mg/kg and cats at
1 mg/kg over two hours.
Voriconazole or posaconazole could also be consid­
ered for treatment of refractory deep fungal infections if
client finances permit their use. Voriconazole (4–5 mg/
kg PO q12h) has excellent central nervous system (CNS)
penetration and so represents an option for dogs with
fungal meningoencephalomyelitis. However, virtually all
cats do not tolerate voriconazole due to gastrointestinal,
neurologic, and cardiac adverse effects, so until a safe
dose is known, voriconazole should not be administered
to cats.
Other treatments that may be required for dogs or cats
with serious pulmonary infections with or without dis­
semination are supplemental oxygen, nebulization and
coupage, fluid therapy, and, in some cases, mechanical
ventilation. Initially, clinical signs may worsen with
­treatment, possibly as a result of organism death and an
associated inflammatory response. Nonsteroidal antiin­
flammatory drugs such as carprofen could be considered
to control pyrexia, and systemic glucocorticoids may be
required to control brain inflammation and edema in
dogs and cats with CNS infections, although this is con­
troversial. Topical antiinflammatory and antiglaucoma
agents may be indicated if ocular involvement is present.
In animals with endophthalmitis, enucleation may be
necessary to control ocular pain and eliminate infection.
Surgery may also be required for treatment of refractory
fungal osteomyelitis (amputation) or large pulmonary
granulomas (lung lobectomy).
Prognosis
Most fungal infections require several months of treat­
ment at a minimum. Typically, treatment is continued
until there is no evidence of disease remaining based on
serial physical examinations, imaging, and antigen or
antibody testing. Animals with disseminated fungal
infections often require more than a year of treatment, or
lifelong therapy. The prognosis is often poor when severe
immunosuppression and dissemination are present at
the time of diagnosis, but if immunosuppression can be

VetBooks.ir

109 Fungal Infections

reversed and aggressive antifungal drug treatment is
­initiated promptly, complete recovery is possible.
Public Health Implications
Direct inoculation of yeast forms of fungi can potentially
cause infection. The mycelial form of dimorphic fungi
can pose significant zoonotic risk, although these are
typically only present when the organisms are cultured
in the laboratory. Appropriate precautions such as avoid­
ing needle sticks and other traumatic wounds when
working with animals that have deep fungal infections
should be followed. Caution when performing necrop­
sies, and cremating, rather than allowing burial of
deceased patients are also important to prevent zoonosis
from mycelial forms.

­Dermatophytosis
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Dermatophytosis is caused by fungi that belong to the
genera Microsporum, Trichophyton or Epidermophyton.
These organisms secrete proteases that allow them to
invade macerated or traumatized keratinized tissue.
Infectious arthrospores persist in the environment for
more than a year given optimal temperature and humid­
ity, and are transmitted by close contact with other
infected animals or contaminated fomites. The most
common dermatophyte species that infect dogs and cats
are Microsporum canis, Microsporum gypseum, and organ­
isms that belong to the Trichophyton mentagrophytes
­species complex (especially Arthroderma benhamiae).
Microsporum canis and organisms that belong to the
T. mentagrophytes species complex are zoophilic derma­
tophytes (adapted to animal hosts), whereas M. gypseum
is a geophilic dermatophyte (soil saprophyte).
Epidemiology and Signalment
Cats are more susceptible than dogs to dermatophytosis.
The prevalence of infection is highest in regions with
warm, humid climates. The risk of infection is higher
in young animals and animals with concurrent immuno­
suppressive disorders, such as hyperadrenocorticism.
Dogs that burrow in soil may also be at increased risk.
Persian and Himalayan cats and Yorkshire and Jack
Russell terriers appear to be predisposed.
History and Clinical Signs
Classically, dermatophytosis is characterized by one or
more circular lesions of alopecia with an erythematous

Figure 109.1 Fox terrier with dermatophytosis caused by
Trichophyton mentagrophytes species complex organisms. Source:
Image courtesy of the University of California, Davis Veterinary
Dermatology Service.

margin, superficial scale and crusts, and follicular pap­
ules and pustules. In dogs, lesions are most often on the
face, distal limbs, and tail. When the claw is involved,
there may be thickening of the ungual fold and deformity
of the claw. Infection by T. mentagrophytes may result in
widespread lesions with scar formation (Figure 109.1).
Lesions in cats are extremely variable. In long‐haired
cats, dermatophytosis may simply be manifested as a
poor hair coat with excessive shedding.
Other forms of dermatophytosis include nodular inflam­
matory lesions known as kerions, and dermatophytic
mycetomas, which are nodular lesions that ­coalesce and
drain fluid. Persian and Himalayan cats appear to be prone
to dermatophytic mycetomas.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of dermatophytosis is based on clinical suspi­
cion together with Wood’s lamp examination, identifica­
tion of hyphae and spores using skin and hair cytology,
histopathology of skin biopsy specimens, and/or fungal
culture. A positive Wood’s lamp examination occurs
when some strains of M. canis fluoresce within infected
hair shafts. The sensitivity of Wood’s lamp examination
is low and false positives can occur when fluorescence of
keratinized debris is misinterpreted as fungal fluores­
cence. The gold standard for diagnosis of dermatophyto­
sis is fungal culture of hairs plucked from the edge of
lesions, scrapings of crusts, or brushings of the haircoat
(using a new toothbrush). Use of a microbiology labora­
tory is recommended whenever possible in order to
properly distinguish dermatophyte growth from that of
saprophytic molds and to prevent contamination of the
practice environment.

987

VetBooks.ir

988

Section 9 Infectious Disease

Therapy
Dermatophytosis often resolves spontaneously within
three months in otherwise healthy animals. Treatment is
recommended for animals that are immunosuppressed,
those that live in multipet households, and those that
live with immunocompromised owners or children.
Treatment should consist of systemic antifungal drugs
(itraconazole is the drug of choice, but fluconazole, keto­
conazole, griseofulvin or terbinafine also have activity
against dermatophytes), with or without twice‐weekly
topical treatment (preferably a 1:16 dilution of lime
­sulfur) and environmental decontamination. Ideally, all
in‐contact animals should be examined and cultured
using a toothbrush technique. Animals with positive
­cultures (and those with clinical signs) should be treated
both systemically and topically. All unaffected, culture‐
positive animals should be treated topically along with
any in‐contact animals. Long‐haired cats should be
clipped in order to remove contaminated hair and facili­
tate penetration of topical treatments, although this is
controversial because of the potential for contamination
of the environment and for disruption of the skin.
Clippers must be disinfected with 10% bleach afterwards.
Potential fomites (bedding, collars, grooming equip­
ment) should be discarded if possible. Disinfection of
hard surfaces should be performed with a 1:10 dilution
of bleach, 0.2% enilconazole, or an enilconazole fogger
(if available). Carpets and furniture should be thoroughly
vacuumed and then steam cleaned, after which vacuum
cleaners may need to be replaced.
Treatment is usually needed for at least 10–12 weeks.
Animals should be examined and a culture performed
monthly (and no earlier than weekly) during treatment.
Treatment should be continued until lesions resolve and
two successive cultures are negative. For group‐housed
animals, at least three successive negative cultures are
recommended. If serial cultures are not possible because
of financial limitations, treatment should be continued
for 2–4 weeks after clinical signs resolve.
Prognosis
The prognosis for resolution of clinical signs is generally
good, especially in households with one or only a few ani­
mals. Dermatophytic mycetomas may require long treat­
ment durations; in some cats, surgery may be required for
lesion resolution.
Public Health Implications
Dermatophyte species that cause disease in dogs and
cats have the potential to cause disease in people. Young
children and immunocompromised people are most
­susceptible. Protective gloves and clothing should be

worn when handling infected animals. Young children
and immunocompromised people should avoid any
contact.

­Malassezia Infections
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Malassezia spp. are lipophilic yeasts that normally colo­
nize animal and human skin. Malassezia pachydermatis
is the most commonly isolated yeast species from the skin
and ears of healthy dogs and cats, and is most commonly
found in the ear canals, lips, axillae, interdigital spaces,
anal sacs, and occasionally the nose and vagina. Other
species can also colonize the skin of healthy cats.
Malassezia proliferate opportunistically, and com­
monly contribute to chronic dermatitis and otitis externa
in dogs, and to a lesser extent in cats. Underlying
­diseases that predispose to proliferation of Malassezia
spp. include allergic dermatitis, endocrinopathies, inter­
trigo, primary keratinization/cornification disorders, a
history of prolonged treatment with antibacterial drugs
or ­glucocorticoids, and, in cats, underlying neoplasia or
retrovirus infections. In some animals, hypersensitivity
reactions to yeast antigens may contribute to the inflam­
matory response that results.
Epidemiology and Signalment
Predisposed dog breeds include American cocker
­spaniels, West Highland white terriers, basset hounds,
poodles, and Australian silky terriers. Sphynx and Devon
Rex cats have high rates of Malassezia spp. colonization
when compared with domestic short‐hair cats.
History and Clinical Signs
Clinical signs of Malassezia infection include erythema,
pruritus, alopecia, scaling, and a greasy exudate. The
most commonly affected sites are the ear canals, ­skinfolds
(periocular and perioral skin, ventral neck, axillae, ingui­
nal regions, and perineum) and interdigital skin. Chronic
infections can result in hyperpigmentation, lichenifica­
tion, and stenosis of the ear canal, and affected animals
may emit a pungent odor.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of Malassezia infection is usually based on
cytologic examination of tape preparations. The yeasts
stain darkly basophilic and exhibit wide‐based budding,
resembling “footprints.” Mean counts of ≥1 yeast per oil
immersion field (1000× magnification) for dermatitis
and ≥5 organisms per oil immersion field for otitis are

VetBooks.ir

109 Fungal Infections

considered abnormal in dogs. More than 12 yeasts/high
dry field is considered abnormal in feline ear canals.
The ear canals of healthy dogs and cats have mean counts
of ≤ 2 yeasts/high dry field (400× magnification).

conidia that are aerosolized and inhaled by the host,
where they transform into yeasts, trigger a pyogranu­
lomatous inflammatory response, and produce localized
pulmonary or disseminated disease.

Therapy

Epidemiology and Signalment

Therapy of Malassezia spp. infections requires identifi­
cation and treatment of the underlying cause, in addition
to antifungal drug treatment. Topical therapy is adequate
for many infections. Topical otic preparations for treat­
ment of Malassezia otitis are used twice daily until there
is cytologic resolution of infection, typically 2–4 weeks.
These contain antifungals such as clotrimazole, micona­
zole or posaconazole, which are usually combined with a
glucocorticoid and an antibacterial compound. Some
antiseptic ear cleaners, such as Epi‐Otic, also have activ­
ity against Malassezia and should be considered as an
alternative to reduce unnecessary use of antibacterials.
Cleaning is performed on a 12‐ or 24‐hour basis for
5–7 days, and then every second or third day until
­clinical signs resolve. Subsequently, weekly maintenance
cleaning may reduce the risk of recurrence. Malassezia
dermatitis can be successfully treated with twice‐weekly
shampooing with a 2% miconazole/2% chlorhexidine
shampoo for three weeks, which also serves to prevent
recurrence. Systemic antifungal drugs such as ketocona­
zole, itraconazole, fluconazole or terbinafine (30–40 mg/
kg PO q24h) may be needed to treat more severe
­infections or infections of the claw bed.
Treatment should be monitored through serial derma­
tologic examinations and cytologic evaluation of tape
preparations, and at least three weeks of treatment is
usually required.

Blastomyces dermatitidis prefers warm, moist, sandy soil
that is rich in organic debris such as decaying vegetation.
The fungus is primarily found in North America around
the Great Lakes, along the Ohio and Mississippi river
valleys, and in the southeastern states. A smaller focus of
endemicity exists in the northeast that extends into
Ontario, Canada. Occasionally disease appears in
­nontraveled dogs that reside in nonendemic parts of the
United States.
Young adult, large‐breed (>15 kg) dogs are predis­
posed. Most affected dogs are apparently immunocom­
petent. Overrepresented breeds include coonhounds,
pointers, Weimaraners, retrievers, and Doberman pin­
schers. Residence close to water sources and exposure to
sites of soil disturbance also increase the risk of infec­
tion. Blastomycosis is rare in cats.
History and Clinical Signs

­Blastomycosis

Infection with Blastomyces may result in disease that is
localized to the lungs and associated lymph nodes, or
signs that are severe and progressive with dissemination
to extrapulmonary sites, which include the skin, eye,
bone, prostate, and testes, and the CNS. Infection has
also been reported in the mammary glands, nasal or oral
cavities, cardiac tissues, and very rarely in the kidneys,
liver, spleen, peritoneum, gastrointestinal tract, and
­urinary bladder. Neurologic involvement secondary to
extension of intranasal Blastomyces granulomas through
the calvarium has also been described.
In addition to nonspecific signs of illness, affected dogs
may show signs that include cough, exercise intolerance
and tachypnea, peripheral lymphadenopathy, ocular
manifestations such as uveitis, chorioretinitis or pano­
phthalmitis, nodular or ulcerated cutaneous or mucocu­
taneous lesions, and lameness due to fungal osteomyelitis
or arthritis. Gastrointestinal signs, polyuria or ­polydipsia,
nasal discharge, sneezing and/or epistaxis, mammary or
testicular masses, facial distortion, cardiac arrhythmias,
and neurologic signs due to meningoencephalitis or
ependymitis are less common. Clinical signs of blasto­
mycosis in cats resemble those in dogs.

Etiology/Pathophysiology

Diagnosis

Blastomycosis is caused by the dimorphic fungus
Blastomyces dermatitidis, which grows as a thick‐walled
budding yeast in tissues. Hyphae within soil produce

Thoracic radiographic findings in dogs with blastomyco­
sis include unstructured, miliary or nodular interstitial
patterns, a bronchointerstitial pattern, alveolar or mixed

Prognosis
If the underlying cause can be resolved and there is
good client compliance, the prognosis for resolution of
Malassezia infections is generally good.
Public Health Implications
Malassezia pachydermatis can occasionally be carried
on human skin. The risk of disease transmission appears
low, although it may occur. Hand washing may theoreti­
cally reduce the risk.

989

VetBooks.ir

990

Section 9 Infectious Disease

alveolar‐interstitial patterns, pulmonary mass lesions,
tracheobronchial lymphadenopathy, and/or single or
multiple pulmonary nodules that resemble pulmonary
neoplasia. Radiographs of affected bone typically show
osteolytic lesions, often accompanied by periosteal
­proliferation and soft tissue swelling.
A diagnosis of blastomycosis is often confirmed
through cytologic examination of affected tissues, lung
washes or body fluids. The yeasts are 8–15 μm in ­diameter,
have a thick, refractile cell wall, and exhibit broad‐based
budding, although occasionally organisms are not visual­
ized. The organisms are usually accompanied by pyo­
granulomatous inflammation (Figure 109.2).
Other methods of diagnosis include histopathology
(e.g., of bone or tissue biopsies), fungal culture, antigen
testing, and molecular diagnosis with PCR‐based assays.
Serologic tests for blastomycosis that detect antibody
currently have poor sensitivity and specificity, and so the
use of these tests is not recommended for routine diag­
nosis. When performed on urine, assays for Blastomyces
cell wall galactomannan antigen (MiraVista Diagnostics,
Indianapolis, IN) have high sensitivity (93.5%) and speci­
ficity (98%) for diagnosis of canine blastomycosis, but
due to serologic cross‐reactivity, results may also be
­positive in dogs with other fungal infections, especially
histoplasmosis.
Therapy
The most widely used specific therapy for blastomycosis
in dogs is itraconazole or fluconazole. The duration of
treatment should be based on serial monitoring of
­clinical signs, radiographic lesions, and urine antigen
titers (i.e., every 4–8 weeks). For dogs with pulmonary

involvement, radiographic lesions and clinical signs may
initially worsen with treatment. Initial worsening of radi­
ographic lesions does not appear to affect survival. Urine
antigen concentration declines with effective treatment.
Although a positive residual urine antigen titer at the
time treatment is discontinued does not necessarily pre­
dict that relapse will occur, a negative urine antigen test
is recommended before treatment is discontinued. Most
dogs require at least 4–6 months of treatment, and some
dogs may require treatment for more than one year,
especially those with osteoarticular infections or wide­
spread dissemination. Treatment with amphotericin B
could be considered for dogs with severe disease with
widespread dissemination, followed by azole therapy
after there has been a satisfactory clinical response to the
amphotericin B.
Prognosis
Cure rates of 50–75% have been reported in dogs with
blastomycosis; an additional 20–25% of dogs experience
disease recurrence after treatment is discontinued,
which can occur as long as a year later. The most com­
mon radiographic sequelae to pulmonary blastomycosis
are pulmonary bullae and persistent focal interstitial pat­
terns, presumably as a result of pulmonary fibrosis.
Involvement of the CNS, severe lung disease, and a high
band neutrophil count are negative prognostic factors.
Public Health Implications
Blastomyces dermatitidis causes disease in people. Direct
transmission between mammalian hosts does not occur,
with the exception of inoculation of yeast via bite wound
or needle sticks. Laboratory personnel are at risk if
­samples are cultured and should be warned that blasto­
mycosis is suspected prior to submission. Bodies of
deceased pets should be cremated rather than buried.
Dogs are sentinels for human exposure.

­Histoplasmosis
Etiology/Pathophysiology

10 μm

Figure 109.2 Cytology of a fine needle aspirate of a skin lesion
from a dog showing a budding Blastomyces organism with
associated pyogranulomatous inflammation. Source: Image
courtesy of Dr Jed Overmann, University of Minnesota.

Histoplasma capsulatum is a dimorphic, soil‐borne
­fungus. Microconidia produced by the fungus are inhaled
by mammalian hosts, and within the lungs transition to
the yeast phase, which replicates by budding within
­alveolar macrophages. Some animals control the initial
infection but remain latently infected with small num­
bers of yeasts. Subsequent immune suppression can lead
to reactivation years later. Replication of H. capsulatum
leads to a granulomatous inflammatory response, which

VetBooks.ir

109 Fungal Infections

is sometimes accompanied by fibrosis. When a cell‐
mediated immune response is defective, yeast forms
migrate to local lymph nodes (such as the tracheobron­
chial lymph nodes) and other tissues that contain mono­
nuclear cells, such as the liver and spleen. Other common
sites of dissemination include the bone marrow, small
and/or large intestinal tract, pancreas, the skin, bones,
central nervous system, and eyes.
Epidemiology and Signalment
Histoplasma capsulatum is found worldwide, but espe­
cially along the Mississippi, Missouri, Tennessee, and
Ohio river valleys of the United States as well as in Latin
America. H. capsulatum can be found in the intestinal
tract and guano of bats, which constitute the primary
reservoir of the organism and disseminate it geographi­
cally. H. capsulatum can also be found in high concentra­
tions in decaying avian guano, but it is not shed in the
feces of birds.
Cats are as susceptible, or slightly more susceptible,
to histoplasmosis as dogs. Affected dogs and cats can be
as young as several months of age, but most are middle
aged, and geriatric animals can also be affected.
History and Clinical Signs
Approximately 40% of cats with histoplasmosis show res­
piratory signs such as dyspnea and tachypnea, and to a
lesser extent cough and nasal discharge. Ocular signs
such as chorioretinitis and/or uveitis occur in approxi­
mately one‐quarter of cats, and around 20% of cats have
evidence of osteomyelitis. Nodular or ulcerated and
draining skin lesions, peripheral lymphadenopathy, vom­
iting, diarrhea, oral ulceration, and myelopathy have also
been described.
Dogs appear to be particularly predisposed to
­gastrointestinal tract histoplasmosis. Involvement of the
small and large intestines may result in malabsorption,
diarrhea, dramatic weight loss, melena, dyschezia,
tenesmus, and hematochezia. Profuse diarrhea may be
chronic and persist for several months. Tracheobronchial
lymphadenopathy is common and may contribute to
­
cough through airway compression. Other signs include
respiratory difficulty, icterus, vomiting, hepatomegaly,
­lymphadenomegaly, nasal discharge, ocular signs, ­polyuria
and polydipsia, lameness due to osteomyelitis, ­cutaneous
nodules, and neurologic signs such as ­seizures or paraly­
sis/paresis.
Diagnosis
As with other deep mycoses, findings on routine labora­
tory testing are typically nonspecific and suggestive of

inflammation. Dogs with acute progressive disseminated
histoplasmosis may have increased band neutrophils,
lymphopenia, monocytopenia, and thrombocytopenia.
Increased liver enzyme activities, hyperbilirubinemia,
and evidence of coagulopathies may be present in ani­
mals with hepatic involvement. In cats, plain thoracic
radiographs can reveal diffuse, linear, nodular or miliary
interstitial patterns. Alveolar, interstitial, and/or bron­
chial patterns, tracheobronchial lymphadenopathy, lung
lobe consolidation, and/or rarely pleural effusion can be
seen in dogs. Lesions in dogs can sometimes calcify.
Abdominal imaging may show hepatomegaly, spleno­
megaly, abdominal lymphadenopathy or ascites. A thick­
ened intestinal wall with architectural disruption of the
bowel wall may be identified on ultrasound examination.
Colonoscopic findings in dogs with colonic histoplasmo­
sis include irregularity, ulceration, increased granularity,
and friability of the colonic wall.
Cytologic examination of affected tissues or body ­fluids
reveals pyogranulomatous or granulomatous inflamma­
tion. H. capsulatum yeasts are usually seen extracellularly
and within mononuclear phagocytes, although they may
not be identified within chronic, fibrosing lesions. The
yeasts are 2–4 μm in diameter, oval, have a basophilic
center and are surrounded by a clear halo due to shrink­
age artifact (Figure 109.3).
Antibody assays for H. capsulatum have had poor clin­
ical sensitivity and specificity, so are not recommended
for routine diagnosis. An enzyme‐linked immunosorb­
ent assay (ELISA) for H. capsulatum antigen (MiraVista
Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN) is widely used in human
patients for diagnosis of histoplasmosis, and as with
blastomycosis, urine is the preferred specimen for t­ esting

Figure 109.3 Cytology showing multiple intracellular Histoplasma
capsulatum organisms within the cytoplasm of a circulating
monocyte from a dog with disseminated histoplasmosis.

991

VetBooks.ir

992

Section 9 Infectious Disease

(sensitivity 95%). False positives occur as a result of sero­
logic cross‐reactivity in human patients with other dis­
seminated mycoses, especially blastomycosis. Antigen
levels become undetectable with successful treatment.
This assay appears to have a similar performance in cats
and dogs with histoplasmosis, although studies that
­evaluate large numbers of cats and dogs with confirmed
histoplasmosis are required to fully establish the sensi­
tivity and specificity of this assay.
Therapy
In human patients, itraconazole has consistently been
more effective than fluconazole for treatment of histo­
plasmosis. Nevertheless, some animals can be cured
with fluconazole monotherapy, so if funds or patient fac­
tors do not permit itraconazole treatment, fluconazole
can be used. Amphotericin B should be used to treat
dogs or cats with severe acute pulmonary, acute dissemi­
nated, or CNS disease, after which treatment should
be continued with an azole. The decision to discontinue
treatment should be based on lesion resolution and prob­
ably serial monitoring of urine antigen titers, although
this requires further study.
Prognosis
The length of treatment and prognosis for histoplasmo­
sis depend on the severity and chronicity of disease and
the immune status of the host. At least six months of
treatment is generally required. Many animals require
treatment for 12 months or longer, and those with
chronic disease may require treatment for more than
two years.
Public Health Implications
Humans can be infected with H. capsulatum but direct
transmission from cats and dogs has not been reported.
Remains of infected animals should be cremated rather
than buried.

­Cryptococcosis
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Cryptococcosis is caused by dimorphic, basidiomycet­
ous fungi that belong to the genus Cryptococcus. Cry­
ptococcus neoformans and C. gattii cause the vast
majority of infections. A filamentous form that produces
basidiospores is thought to exist in the environment.
Mammalian disease is believed to occur when basidio­
spores are inhaled, typically after an incubation period of

several months, although in some cases, reactivation of
subclinical infections may occur years after exposure. In
animal tissues, the basidiospores are thought to convert
to the yeast form, which is round to oval with a charac­
teristic, variably sized polysaccharide capsule. Within
tissues, Cryptococcus reproduces by narrow‐based bud­
ding. After infection is established within the lung or
nasal cavity, the organism can spread hematogenously to
other sites, particularly the lymph nodes, eye, skin, and
CNS. Cryptococcus has a predilection to invade the
meninges, and typically causes meningitis or menin­
goencephalitis. In animals with nasal cavity involvement,
extension of infection into the brain may also follow
osteomyelitis of the cribriform plate.
Epidemiology and Signalment
Based on molecular methods such as multilocus
sequence typing, cryptococcal strains worldwide have
been divided into eight molecular types: VNI, VNII,
VNIII, and VNIV (C. neoformans) and VGI, VGII, VGIII,
and VGIV (C. gattii). Differences in epidemiology, path­
ogenicity, clinical features, and drug susceptibility have
been associated with each molecular type. The environ­
mental niche for C. neoformans is thought to be weath­
ered bird (especially pigeon) guano, whereas C. gattii has
been associated with Eucalyptus trees in Australia and a
variety of other tree species on the west coast of North
America.
The incidence of cryptococcosis in cats is eightfold
higher than that in dogs. Siamese, Birman, and ragdoll
cats have been predisposed in Australian studies but
were not found to be at risk in the US. Similarly, German
shepherd dogs, Doberman pinschers, and Great Danes
appear to be predisposed in Australia, whereas American
cocker spaniels are predisposed in the US.
History and Clinical Signs
Cryptococcosis is often a chronic infection in cats. Upper
respiratory tract signs due to nasal cavity involvement are
common, sometimes with associated mandibular lym­
phadenopathy. Single or multifocal ulcerated or nonul­
cerated cutaneous or mucocutaneous masses may also be
present. Lower respiratory tract signs are uncommon, but
can occur as a result of pleural effusion or severe medias­
tinal lymphadenomegaly. Neurologic signs vary depend­
ing on the location of lesions in the CNS. Optic neuritis
and chorioretinitis develop in as many as one‐third of
affected cats, and almost always indicate CNS involve­
ment. Other signs include peripheral lymphadenomegaly,
lameness due to osteoarticular infection, and swollen
­digits. Rarely, involvement of the abdominal lymph nodes,
kidneys, spleen, liver, and thyroid can occur in cats.

VetBooks.ir

109 Fungal Infections

In contrast to cats, dogs often develop widespread
­dissemination with neurologic involvement. They may
also present with signs relating to gastrointestinal or
pancreatic involvement. Cryptococcal rhinosinusitis
may be subclinical in dogs or may result in sneezing and
mucopurulent nasal discharge. Cutaneous involvement
is uncommon but, as in the cat, may be a marker for dis­
seminated disease. Other clinical signs that are occasion­
ally present in dogs include peripheral lymphadenomegaly
or lameness (due to osteomyelitis or arthritis).
Diagnosis
Thoracic radiographs in dogs and cats with cryptococ­
cosis are often normal, although interstitial to alveolar
infiltrates or small nodular lesions may be present.
Occasionally, pulmonary nodules, tracheobronchial
lymphadenopathy, mediastinal masses, or pleural effu­
sion are found.
Definitive diagnosis of cryptococcosis is based on eval­
uation of representative tissue specimens or body fluids
(including cerebrospinal fluid) with cytology, culture,
and occasionally histopathology (Figure 109.4), with or
without serologic detection of cryptococcal antigen.
Latex agglutination assays for detection of cryptococ­
cal polysaccharide capsular antigen are widely used in
veterinary patients and are very (>85%) sensitive and
specific, although false‐negative and false‐positive
results can occur. ELISAs are also available. Serum anti­
gen testing provides a rapid diagnosis when organisms
cannot be visualized or cultured, and may prove advan­
tageous when CSF collection is unacceptably risky. Even
a titer as low as 1:2 can indicate cryptococcal infection.

Because false‐positive latex agglutination titers of up to
1:200 have been detected in cats, attempts to confirm
infection using other diagnostic tests are recommended
in animals that have titers <1:200. For dogs and cats sus­
pected to have cryptococcal meningoencephalomyelitis
that have negative serum antigen titers, CSF should be
submitted for cytologic examination, antigen titers, and
fungal culture.
Therapy
Some dogs and cats with cryptococcosis, especially
those with lesions restricted to the skin, can be treated
successfully with azole antifungal drug monotherapy.
Fluconazole is a reasonable initial choice, because of its
good penetration of the brain and eye. Generally, cats
improve within 1–2 weeks of starting therapy. Treatment
should be continued until there is complete lesion
­resolution and the cryptococcal antigen titer becomes
negative. This typically takes 2–12 months, although
longer periods of therapy may be required. For recovered
animals that achieve an antigen titer of 0, the titer can be
monitored every 3–6 months, so that relapse is diag­
nosed early. Some cats (especially those in California
infected with molecular type VGIII) fail to respond com­
pletely to treatment, antigen titers persist at high levels,
and relapse occurs after an initial treatment response. In
some of these cats, prognosis is guarded and treatment
with other azoles or combination therapy with ampho­
tericin B may be necessary.
For cats with CNS cryptococcosis or those that fail
to respond to azole antifungal drugs, a combination
of amphotericin B and 5‐flucytosine (250 mg PO q8h) or
amphotericin B and fluconazole is recommended. Dogs
with disseminated disease or CNS involvement should
be treated initially with amphotericin B and fluconazole,
because those treated with flucytosine often develop
cutaneous necrosis 1–2 weeks after starting therapy.
Treatment with 5‐flucytosine and amphotericin B is con­
tinued for 2–4 weeks or until azotemia develops, after
which treatment is continued with an azole. Anecdotally,
administration of terbinafine to some dogs and cats that
have failed azole or amphotericin B treatment has led to
clinical improvement.
Prognosis

Figure 109.4 Histopathology showing large numbers of
Cryptococcus organisms within the meninges of a 3‐year‐old
domestic short‐hair that died of disseminated cryptococcosis.

In studies from Australia, approximately 75% of cats with
cryptococcosis were treated successfully. In one study,
the median survival time of cats with CNS cryptococco­
sis was only 13 days (0–4050 days), but outcomes were
more favorable if cats survived at least three days after
diagnosis. The prognosis is guarded for dogs, with suc­
cess rates that range from 30% to 55%. The median survival

993

VetBooks.ir

994

Section 9 Infectious Disease

time for dogs with CNS cryptococcosis in North America
was seven days (0–3680 days).
Public Health Implications
Humans can develop cryptococcosis through environ­
mental exposure. Notably, it is an important infection in
people with AIDS. Direct transmission from animals to
people has not been reported, but contaminated needle‐
stick injuries may transmit the organism. Cryptococcus
grows on routine fungal laboratory media as a yeast, so is
less likely to represent a hazard to laboratory personnel
than dimorphic fungi that grow as molds.

­Coccidioidomycosis
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Coccidioides spp. (Coccidioides immitis and C. posa­
dasii) are dimorphic fungi that exist in soil as chains of
barrel‐shaped arthrospores. The arthrospores are aero­
solized and inhaled by animal hosts. This may be fol­
lowed by localized pulmonary disease or dissemination
to the tracheobronchial lymph nodes and then other
anatomic sites in the face of an inadequate immune
response. Infections often follow a pattern of moist con­
ditions (required for growth of Coccidioides spp. in the
soil), a dry period, then soil disruption, such as may
occur with heavy rainfall, dust storms, or construction.
After inhalation, arthrospores are phagocytosed by
alveolar macrophages. They then enlarge into a spherule
(8–100 μm in diameter). Hundreds of endospores
develop within the spherule, which are released when
the spherule ruptures. This is associated with a pyogran­
ulomatous inflammatory response.
Epidemiology and Signalment
In the environment, Coccidioides spp. are distributed in
regions with arid soils, low elevations above sea level, and
hot summers. Infections occur primarily in the south­
western United States, Mexico, and parts of Central and
South America. In southwestern USA, highly endemic
regions include the south‐central valley of California
(“Valley Fever”) and Arizona. Latent i­nfections occur in
dogs and these can reactivate after treatment with immu­
nosuppressive drugs. Coccidioidomycosis is rare in cats.
History and Clinical Signs
Development of clinical signs often follows a subacute to
chronic course. Many dogs continue to otherwise appear
healthy, with occasional periods of inappetence. Clinical
signs of respiratory tract involvement include cough,

tachypnea, and/or exercise intolerance. Rarely, diffuse
pneumonia follows a more fulminant course, as reported
in immunocompromised humans.
A small percentage of infected dogs develop dissemi­
nated infections. Sites of dissemination often include
osteoarticular sites, the CNS, skin, peripheral lymph
nodes, eye, testes, prostate, and pericardium. Rarely,
other sites, such as abdominal organs, are affected. Dogs
with skin involvement may have ulcerated skin lesions
that drain serosanguinous fluid, or subcutaneous mass
lesions. Neurologic signs result from fungal meningoen­
cephalitis and include obtundation, blindness, nystag­
mus, ataxia, placing deficits, circling, cervical pain,
tetraparesis, and seizures. Ocular manifestations include
chorioretinitis, uveitis, optic neuritis, and endophthal­
mitis. Pericarditis may lead to signs of right‐sided cardiac
failure, with development of ascites and pleural effusion.
Diagnosis
Thoracic radiographs in dogs with disseminated coc­
cidioidomycosis are often unremarkable. The most
common radiographic finding in dogs with pulmonary
coccidioidomycosis is tracheobronchial lymphadeno­
megaly. Although this may be the only finding, most
dogs also have mild to moderate interstitial infiltrates.
Nodular interstitial, interstitial‐alveolar, bronchointer­
stitial infiltrates, and/or sternal lymphadenomegaly
may also be present. Dogs with pericarditis may have
cardiomegaly and pleural effusion, with hepatomegaly
and decreased abdominal detail. Echocardiography in
these dogs may reveal thickening and mass lesions of
the ­pericardium, pericardial and pleural effusion, and
­cardiac tamponade.
A diagnosis of coccidioidomycosis is typically con­
firmed using serology for antibodies to Coccidioides spp.,
because of the low sensitivity of cytology and the fact
that culture is hazardous to laboratory personnel and
can have a long turnaround time. Cytologic examination
of specimens from affected tissues or body fluids reveals
granulomatous or pyogranulomatous inflammation.
Occasionally, spherules can be identified as round, baso­
philic, double‐walled, crinkled structures (8–70 μm in
diameter) (Figure 109.5). Sometimes endospores (2–5 μm
in diameter) can be seen in association with ruptured
spherules.
Most diagnostic laboratories detect antibodies to
Coccidioides using gel immunodiffusion. False‐negative
serologic test results are rare in dogs with coccidioido­
mycosis. Antibody titers typically range from 1:2 to
1:256. Dogs with active infection may have titers as
low as 1:2, and healthy dogs in hyperendemic areas
in Arizona have had titers as high as 1:16. As a result,
positive titers of 1:16 or lower should always be
­interpreted in light of clinicopathologic abnormalities

109 Fungal Infections

VetBooks.ir

from inhalation of the mycelial form, which can develop
in tissues if they are stored for long periods after death of
an infected animal. Physicians should be notified imme­
diately in the case of inoculation or possible inhalation of
a mycelial form. Necropsies should be performed with
appropriate precautions and take place soon after death
to prevent mycelial form growth. Bodies of infected
­animals should not be buried but should be cremated
as soon as possible. Laboratories should be warned if
coccidioidomycosis is suspected.

­Aspergillosis
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Figure 109.5 Cytology of a tracheal wash specimen showing a
Coccidioides spherule surrounded by pyogranulomatous
inflammation.

and, in hyperendemic areas, other diagnostic tests (such
as cytology, histopathology or culture) should also be
used to confirm the diagnosis.
Therapy
Dogs with pulmonary coccidioidomycosis often respond
well to azole monotherapy with fluconazole or itracona­
zole. Treatment with amphotericin B is recommended
either alone or in combination with an azole antifungal
for dogs with refractory disease or those with severe
­clinical signs. Successful treatment of Coccidioides peri­
carditis has been reported after subtotal pericardiectomy
and epicardial excision in conjunction with antifungal
drug therapy. Referral to a specialist surgeon with expe­
rience in the technique is strongly recommended.
Prognosis
The prognosis for resolution for coccidioidomycosis
depends on the severity of infection and the extent of
dissemination. The duration of treatment ranges from
six months (localized pulmonary coccidioidomycosis) to
many years, and in some cases, life‐long treatment is
needed. IgG antibody titers decrease with successful
treatment, which in general should be continued until
lesions resolve and the titer is 1:2 or lower.
Public Health Implications
Coccidioidomycosis is an important and serious
­infection in people that is generally acquired from envi­
ronmental exposure. Disease and death may occur from
direct inoculation from needle‐stick injuries and also

Aspergillus are hyaline molds, the conidia of which are
found commonly in soil, water, air, and decaying vegeta­
tion. Aspergillus spores are inhaled, and in the absence of
adequate immune defenses, enlarge and germinate to
form hyphae, subsequently leading to a variety of nonin­
vasive to invasive disorders that include keratomycosis,
fungal otitis externa, sinonasal aspergillosis (SNA),
sinoorbital aspergillosis, bronchopulmonary and dissem­
inated aspergillosis. Keratomycosis, otitis externa, feline
sinoorbital aspergillosis, and bronchopulmonary asper­
gillosis in dogs are relatively rare conditions, and beyond
the scope of this chapter. A variety of other molds less
commonly cause infections in dogs and cats, including
nonpigmented molds such as Penicillium, Paecilomyces,
Pseudallescheria, and Geotrichum (hyalohyphomycoses);
pigmented molds such as Alternaria, Exophiala, and
Cladophialophera (phaeohyphomycoses); and zygomy­
cetes such as Basidiobolus, Conidiobolus, and Mucor. The
reader is referred elsewhere for detailed discussions of
these pathogens.
Sinonasal aspergillosis is a subacute to chronic disease
of the nasal cavity and sinuses that is most often caused
by organisms that belong to the A. fumigatus complex.
In most cases, affected dogs have no evidence of immune
compromise, but sometimes SNA occurs as a result of
implantation of a foreign body or other preexisting nasal
disease, such as nasal neoplasia. SNA is a noninvasive
disease, and the fungus does not extend beyond the
mucosal epithelium. Production of toxins by the fungus
and a profound host inflammatory response are thought
to lead to extensive turbinate and bony destruction.
Disseminated (invasive) aspergillosis in dogs is most
often caused by A. terreus or A. deflectus, although other
Aspergillus species have also been isolated.
Epidemiology and Signalment
Sinonasal aspergillosis in dogs is most common in large,
nonbrachycephalic breeds. SNA uncommonly occurs in

995

VetBooks.ir

996

Section 9 Infectious Disease

cats, but diabetes mellitus has been identified in some
affected cats.
Disseminated aspergillosis in dogs likely occurs as a
result of an uncharacterized genetic immunodeficiency,
because young adult female German shepherds are
strongly predisposed, and immunosuppressive drug
treatment is rarely present in the history of affected dogs.
Disseminated aspergillosis is extremely rare in cats.
History and Clinical Signs
Clinical signs of SNA in dogs and cats consist of sneez­
ing, serous to mucopurulent nasal discharge, depigmen­
tation of the nasal planum (Figure 109.6), and, less
commonly, epistaxis.
Nasal pain may be manifest in dogs as pawing at the
face or withdrawal. Nasal airflow is usually normal or
increased. Serous ocular discharge may occur as a result
of destruction of the bones of the orbit. Rarely, palpation
of the nasal bones or the hard palate reveals defects.
Osteolysis of the cribriform plate occasionally leads to
meningitis with neurologic signs such as obtundation or
seizures.
Sites often involved in dogs with disseminated asper­
gillosis include the vertebral endplates and discs, renal
pelvis, long bones, and lymph nodes. However, any organ
may be affected, including the spleen, liver, heart, cardiac
valves, pancreas, eyes, lungs, brain, meninges, small
intestine, skin, spinal cord, thyroid, adrenal glands, pros­
tate, and trachea. The most frequent clinical signs are
lethargy, inappetence, pain, lameness, and ataxia and
paresis secondary to discospondylitis.
Diagnosis
Imaging of the nasal cavity of dogs with SNA using plain
radiography (open mouth view), computed tomography

Figure 109.6 Nasal depigmentation and ulceration in a dog with
sinonasal aspergillosis.

(CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can reveal
loss of turbinates, defects in the nasal septum, and/or
increased soft tissue opacity within the nasal cavity. CT
and MRI have increased sensitivity over plain radiogra­
phy, and are the preferred imaging modalities. Osteolysis
of the cribriform plate, orbit, and frontal bones may be
identified using advanced imaging. In some animals,
lesions are limited to the frontal sinus. Visualization of
fungal plaques by rhinoscopy and sinuscopy confirms
the diagnosis. Trephination or surgical exploration of the
frontal sinuses may be necessary to visualize (and treat)
this region. Cytologic examination of mucosal swabs,
brush specimens of the nasal cavity, or nasal biopsies can
reveal hyphae, which are septate and branch at 45°
angles, and sometimes also conidia. Culture of Aspergillus
from nasal biopsies supports the diagnosis, although
negative culture results do not rule out SNA.
Disseminated aspergillosis may be suspected on the
basis of signalment and clinical findings. In some cases,
hyphae are visualized in tissue aspirates or urine sedi­
ment from affected dogs. Growth of a typical Aspergillus
species (most commonly A. terreus or A. deflectus) from
a normally sterile site confirms the diagnosis.
Both serum antibody and antigen assays have been
evaluated for diagnosis of SNA and disseminated asper­
gillosis in dogs. Assays that detect serum antibodies to
Aspergillus include ELISA and gel immunodiffusion (ID)
assays. Different antibody assays vary in their sensitivity
and specificity for diagnosis of SNA but in general, posi­
tive results suggest a diagnosis of SNA, but negative
results do not rule out SNA. Dogs with disseminated
aspergillosis frequently test negative, and so serum
­antibody testing is not recommended for diagnosis of
this disease.
The sensitivity and specificity of serum Aspergillus
galactomannan antigen ELISA (Platelia®) for diagnosis of
SNA are low, and its use is not recommended for this
condition. However, serum or urine antigen testing has
high sensitivity for diagnosis of disseminated aspergillo­
sis in dogs, and a high specificity when using a cut‐off
galactomannan index of 1.5. High‐level false positives
(>1.5) appear to occur only in dogs with other fungal
infections, especially those caused by Penicillium or
Paecilomyces, and dogs treated with Plasmalyte® fluid
therapy.
In summary, a strong positive assay result in a dog with
clinical abnormalities consistent with disseminated
aspergillosis and no history of Plasmalyte administration
supports a diagnosis of a mold infection, but fungal cul­
ture is required to confirm that Aspergillus is the causa­
tive agent. A negative result in a dog with disseminated
disease suggests that Aspergillus is not the cause, but
does not rule out the possibility of infection by another
fungal species.

VetBooks.ir

109 Fungal Infections

Therapy
Treatment of SNA requires thorough mechanical
debridement of plaques with endoscopic biopsy forceps
under anesthesia, followed by topical antifungal drug
therapy. Frontal sinus trephination and curettage or
open surgical debridement of the frontal sinus may be
required. Provided the cribriform plate is intact, debride­
ment is followed by lavage with 0.9% saline and suction,
followed by topical therapy with clotrimazole or enilcon­
azole. Several protocols for topical antifungal drug
administration have been described. The reader is
referred elsewhere for description of these protocols.
Debridement and a second treatment are then per­
formed one month later; sometimes, a third treatment
may be necessary. Additional systemic treatment with
antifungal drugs could also be considered, but it is not
clear whether this improves outcome. Systemic azole
antifungal drug therapy could be considered as an alter­
native to topical therapy in dogs with cribriform plate
destruction, when topical treatment has the potential to
lead to death or life‐threatening neurologic signs.
Canine disseminated aspergillosis is treated with itra­
conazole, voriconazole, posaconazole, and/or ampho­
tericin B. Terbinafine has been used in addition to azole
therapy with limited success. At best, treatment leads to
remission for months to more than a year, but usually
antigen titers remain high and eventually relapse occurs,
leading to euthanasia or death. Although expensive, vori­
conazole is a treatment of choice in humans with inva­
sive aspergillosis, and has led to remissions of many
months’ duration in some dogs. A. terreus is resistant in
vitro to amphotericin B, but clinical improvement still
occurs after treatment of some dogs with lipid com­
plexed amphotericin B. Caspofungin is also used to treat
invasive aspergillosis in humans, but expense and the
need for daily intravenous administration have limited
its use in dogs.
Prognosis
Success rates for treatment of SNA have varied from less
than 30% to 100%. Low success rates reflect extensive
disease that is often present at diagnosis, together with
irreversible turbinate loss. Dogs with turbinate loss are
predisposed to recurrent bacterial infections of the
nasal cavity, which lead to persistent nasal discharge
and sneezing. Therefore, attempts should be made to
reach a diagnosis as early as possible when SNA is on
the differential diagnosis list. Treatment with antibacte­
rial drugs without pursuing a diagnosis only leads to
disease progression, and is inappropriate because pri­
mary bacterial infections of the nasal cavity are rare in
adult dogs.

Many dogs with disseminated aspergillosis have
advanced disease at diagnosis, sometimes with respira­
tory distress, pathologic fractures, vertebral subluxa­
tions, and cord compression. The prognosis for these
dogs is poor.
Public Health Implications
Aspergillosis occurs in people who have significant
immunosuppressive disorders, such as transplant recipi­
ents, and is usually due to Aspergillus fumigatus complex
organisms. Infections are acquired from the environ­
ment, and transmission from dogs and cats has not been
described.

­Candidiasis
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Candida species are yeasts that belong to the normal
gastrointestinal, urogenital, and cutaneous flora but can
invade tissues and cause disease as a result of disruption
of normal host defenses. Candida species can also be
isolated from soil, inanimate objects, and hospital
­environments. The yeasts are small (3–6 μm), ovoid and
reproduce by budding. Budding results in the formation
of new yeast cells, pseudohyphae (chains of elongated
yeast cells), and true septate hyphae.
Disease syndromes caused by Candida spp. that
occur in dogs and cats include keratitis, cutaneous or
mucocutaneous candidiasis, otitis, urinary tract infec­
tions (UTIs), gastrointestinal candidiasis, peritonitis,
and disseminated infections. The most commonly iso­
lated species is Candida albicans, and only C. albicans
appears to cause disseminated disease in dogs and cats.
Epidemiology and Signalment
Predisposing factors in dogs or cats with local or dissem­
inated candidiasis have included diabetes mellitus, treat­
ment with immunosuppressive drugs or broad‐spectrum
antibacterial drugs, a history of gastrointestinal surgery,
parvoviral infections, and/or underlying malignancy.
Disseminated candidiasis has also been described in
apparently immunocompetent animals, which may
reflect an underlying genetic immunodeficiency.
Urethrostomy or cystostomy tube placement may be in
the history of some animals with Candida UTIs.
History and Clinical Signs
Lower urinary tract candidiasis may be subclinical or asso­
ciated with signs of lower urinary tract disease. Cutaneous
candidiasis may manifest as erythema, ­alopecia, erosions,

997

VetBooks.ir

998

Section 9 Infectious Disease

and crusting, often where disruption of cutaneous or
mucocutaneous regions has occurred (such as a previ­
ous surgical site or around a feeding tube or cystotomy
stoma). Candida peritonitis can follow intestinal sur­
gery, treatment with broad‐spectrum antibacterial
drugs, and subsequent enterotomy site dehiscence.
Mixed infections with Candida and intestinal flora may
develop. Affected dogs are febrile, have abdominal pain,
and may have other gastrointestinal signs such as vom­
iting and diarrhea.
Dogs with disseminated candidiasis frequently develop
rapidly progressive clinical signs that include fever, inap­
petence, weight loss, and other clinical signs that reflect
the specific organs involved. The latter can include the
pancreas, liver, mesentery, spleen, kidneys, heart, lungs,
lymph nodes, and less often the bone, intestinal tract,
eyes, meninges, thyroid, and/or prostate gland. Ocular
signs include keratitis, uveitis, chorioretinitis, and
endophthalmitis. Thromboembolic disease may compli­
cate disseminated infections.
Diagnosis
Definitive diagnosis of candidiasis requires visualization
of Candida blastospores, pseudohyphae, and true
hyphae within lesions by cytologic or histopathologic
examination, as well as confirmation of its identity using
fungal culture. Because Candida can be isolated from
the skin and mucous membranes of healthy dogs and
cats, infection must be confirmed with cytology or histo­
pathology when Candida is isolated from these sites.
A diagnosis of disseminated candidiasis should be
­considered whenever Candida is isolated from the eye,
skin, or urinary tract of an animal that develops systemic
illness, and aggressive treatment instituted without delay.
Isolation of Candida allows antifungal susceptibility
testing. Some isolates (especially C. glabrata and C. krusei)
are resistant to multiple antifungal drugs.
Therapy
Treatment of candidiasis should involve management of
underlying immunosuppressive disorders and specific
antifungal drug treatment. Systemic antibacterial drugs
should be discontinued if not clearly indicated, or the
spectrum of activity should be narrowed. Cutaneous and
corneal infections are usually treated with a combination
of topical antiseptics or antifungal medications and sys­
temic antifungal drugs until lesions resolve. Dogs and
cats with Candida UTIs should initially be treated with
fluconazole, which concentrates in urine. Intravesicular
treatment with 1% clotrimazole under anesthesia may
be necessary in animals that fail to respond to treat­
ment. Intravesicular treatment is continued weekly until

Candida can no longer be isolated from the urine.
Typically 1–4 treatments, spaced one week apart, are
required.
Systemic candidiasis is treated aggressively with
­systemic antifungal drugs, especially fluconazole, and
supportive care. One dog with Candida peritonitis was
treated successfully with surgical lavage of the abdo­
men, abdominal drain placement, and intravenous
­fluconazole. Antifungal drugs other than fluconazole
with activity against Candida include amphotericin B
and caspofungin, both of which must be administered
parenterally.
Prognosis
The prognosis for successful resolution of local Candida
infections is good, but successful treatment of systemic
candidiasis in dogs or cats is rarely described.
Public Health Implications
Human infections with Candida species result primarily
from invasion by normal flora.

­Sporotrichosis
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Sporothrix species are dimorphic, saprophytic fungi that
cause disease that often results from cutaneous or
subcutaneous inoculation of the organism through a
­
puncture wound, but can also follow inhalation of the
fungus. Direct contact with cats that have sporotricho­
sis, without an apparent break in the skin, can also result
in transmission.
Sporothrix species prefer moist soil that is rich in
decaying vegetation. The fungus is distributed world­
wide in tropical and temperate zones, but is most preva­
lent in tropical or subtropical regions of the Americas.
The S. schenckii species complex includes multiple
Sporothrix species, the epidemiology of which is still
incompletely understood.
Epidemiology and Signalment
Cats are more susceptible to sporotrichosis than dogs
and are thought to facilitate spread of organisms in the
environment. Contaminated claw or bite wounds are
thought to be important modes of transmission. Male
cats have been overrepresented. Sporotrichosis in dogs is
uncommon, but tends to occur in hunting breeds.
Introduction of the organism with plant foreign bodies
may lead to infection in some dogs.

VetBooks.ir

109 Fungal Infections

History and Clinical Signs

Therapy

In dogs and cats, Sporothrix spp. most often cause focal
or multifocal cutaneous lesions. These are crusted,
thickened or nodular lesions that often ulcerate or drain
serosanguinous fluid. Most cats have multiple cutaneous
lesions. These lesions may develop as a result of autoin­
oculation during grooming or they may be a manifesta­
tion of a disseminated infection.
Transmission by inhalation is thought to occur in some
cats that develop pulmonary and nasal cavity disease.
Respiratory signs include sneezing, cough, tachypnea,
increased respiratory effort, stertor, and/or nasal dis­
charge. Cats also can develop generalized disease, with
involvement of the lungs, liver, spleen, kidneys, lymph
nodes, and/or testicles. Clinical signs of systemic involve­
ment include fever, generalized lymphadenomegaly,
anorexia, vomiting, and weight loss. Osteoarticular
­sporotrichosis has rarely been described in dogs.

The treatment of choice for most dogs and cats with
sporotrichosis is itraconazole. Alternative antifungal
drugs for refractory disease include supersaturated
potassium or sodium iodide, terbinafine, or ampho­
tericin B. Unfortunately, potassium iodide formulations
often lead to adverse gastrointestinal signs in cats.
Localized hyperthermia has been used as adjunct ther­
apy to treat fixed cutaneous lesions, because most strains
of Sporothrix survive poorly at high temperatures. In this
case, a thermal bag at a temperature of 40–42 °C is
applied at least twice daily to lesions for 15 minutes.

Diagnosis
Cytologic examination or histopathology of affected tis­
sues from cats reveals pyogranulomatous inflammation
with large numbers of round to cigar‐shaped yeasts,
which can be found intracellularly within neutrophils
or macrophages and extracellularly (Figure 109.7).
The yeasts are 4–6 μm in diameter and typically exhibit a
single bud with a narrow base.
Dogs tend to have very low numbers of organisms in
skin lesions, which may not be readily detected. Definitive
diagnosis of sporotrichosis can be made by fungal ­culture
of aspirates or biopsies from lesions. Use of molecular
assays to identify Sporothrix could also be considered.

Prognosis
In general, the prognosis for cure of sporotrichosis is
good. Treatment durations of at least 4–6 months are
generally required, but some cats require more than a
year of treatment. Treatment should be continued for a
month after complete resolution of lesions.
Public Health Implications
Inoculation from cat scratches, bites or direct contact
with infected cats are important means by which people
acquire sporotrichosis. Sporotrichosis should be consid­
ered as a differential diagnosis for any cat with a draining
cutaneous lesion, and such cats should be handled with
gloves and hands washed after contact. Owners of
infected animals should minimize contact, and if contact
is necessary, it should be recommended that they wear
gloves and wash their hands immediately after handling
the animal. Owners should also be warned of the risk of
exposure to the organism in the environment. Needle‐
stick injuries should be avoided and laboratory person­
nel warned of suspect cases.

­Miscellaneous Fungus‐Like Infections
(Pythiosis and Rhinosporidiosis)
Etiology/Pathophysiology

Figure 109.7 Cytology of an impression smear of a skin lesion
from a cat with cutaneous sporotrichosis. Large numbers of
intracellular pleomorphic yeasts are present.

A variety of fungus‐like organisms that reside in
aquatic environments and are thought to invade dam­
aged host tissues can cause disease in dogs and cats.
These include Pythium insidiosum, Lagenidium spp.
and Rhinosporidium seeberi. Pythium insidiosum
and Lagenidium are oomycetes (water molds), whereas
R. seeberi is an aquatic protistan parasite (class Meso­
mycetozoea) that is taxonomically located between
­animals and fungi. Pythium insidiosum causes severe,
progressive gastrointestinal or cutaneous disease in dogs

999

VetBooks.ir

1000

Section 9 Infectious Disease

and rarely cats that is often fatal. In the US, pythiosis
most often occurs in the Gulf Coast states but has also
been recognized in other parts of the USA, including
California and Arizona. Lagenidium is found primarily
in the southern United States and causes ulcerative
cutaneous lesions or systemic lymphadenopathy in dogs.
Rhinosporidium seeberi is most often found in warm,
wet environments such as the southeastern and south‐­
central USA, where it causes polypoid masses in the
­rostral nasal cavity of dogs and rarely cats.
Epidemiology and Signalment
Pythiosis, lagenidiosis, and rhinosporidiosis most
­commonly occur in young, large‐breed dogs that are
apparently immunocompetent.
History and Clinical Signs
Gastrointestinal pythiosis in dogs is characterized by
severe, focal intestinal wall thickening, often with mes­
enteric lymphadenopathy. Clinical signs include weight
loss, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, and sometimes hema­
tochezia. Cutaneous pythiosis in dogs occurs most often
at the base of the tail, on the extremities, or the peri­
neum, and is characterized by ulcerated mass lesions
with draining tracts. Generally, gastrointestinal and
cutaneous pythiosis do not occur concurrently.
Dogs with lagenidiosis are typically evaluated for cuta­
neous lesions that resemble those of cutaneous pythio­
sis. Local lymphadenopathy occurs in some dogs, and
may occur in the absence of obvious cutaneous lesions.
Dogs with lagenidiosis may also have intrathoracic or
intraabdominal lesions, which may involve the great ves­
sels, tracheobronchial, sublumbar and/or inguinal lymph
nodes, lung or cranial mediastinum.
In dogs and cats, infection by R. seeberi leads to forma­
tion of pedunculate to sessile masses within the rostral
third of the nasal cavity. The polyps range in size from a
few millimeters to several centimeters. Clinical signs
consist of subacute to chronic progressive sneezing with
or without epistaxis, snuffling, and sometimes a serous,
mucoid or serosanguinous unilateral nasal discharge.

Cytologic examination of smears, brushings or biopsies
of R. seeberi polyps reveals pyogranulomatous inflamma­
tion with numerous R. seeberi endospores. Histopathology
reveals abundant sporangia in various stages of develop­
ment (Figure 109.8).
Therapy and Prognosis
Aggressive surgical resection is the treatment of choice
for these infections. A combination of high‐dose itracon­
azole (10 mg/kg PO q24h) and terbinafine (5–10 mg/kg
PO q24h) should be used to treat dogs with nonresecta­
ble pythiosis or lagenidiosis, or when there is concern
that not all margins have been cleared of disease. Dogs
with nonresectable gastrointestinal pythiosis may also
benefit from treatment with antiinflammatory doses of
glucocorticoids. Prognosis is guarded to poor, but some
dogs can be cured with aggressive therapy. To monitor
for recurrence, ELISA serology can be performed at sur­
gery and 2–3 months later. If serum antibody levels drop
by more than 50% within three months, medical therapy
can usually be discontinued.
Because Rhinosporidium polyps are often rostrally
located, surgical excisions can often be extended caudally
from the nares in order to remove the polyps. Many dogs
have no recurrence of clinical signs thereafter, but some
experience disease recurrence within months of surgery.
Public Health Implications
Human infections with P. insidiosum are rare and are
acquired from the environment. However, routine pre­
cautions when handling infected tissues or exudate
should be followed.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of pythiosis, lagenidiosis, and rhinosporidiosis
is often initially based on the results of cytology or histo­
pathology, which reveals broad, poorly septate hyphae
that resemble zygomycete hyphae. Culture and/or PCR
and sequencing can be used to distinguish between these
organisms. Serologic assays that detect antibody are also
available to assist diagnosis, but these do not discrimi­
nate between pythiosis and lagenidiosis.

Figure 109.8 Histopathology of a polyp caused by
Rhinosporidium seeberi. Sporangia that contain endospores are
seen in various stages of development.

VetBooks.ir

109 Fungal Infections

­Further Reading
Cook AK, Cunningham LY, Cowell AK, et al.
Clinical evaluation of urine Histoplasma capsulatum
antigen measurement in cats with suspected
disseminated histoplasmosis. J Feline Med Surg 2012;
14: 512–15.
Foy DS, Trepanier LA, Kirsch EJ, et al. Serum and urine
Blastomyces antigen concentrations as markers of
clinical remission in dogs treated for systemic
blastomycosis. J Vet Intern Med 2014;
28: 305–10.

Mason CL, Steen SI, Paterson S, et al. Study to assess
in vitro antimicrobial activity of nine ear cleaners
against 50 Malassezia pachydermatis isolates.
Vet Dermatol 2013; 24: 362–6.
Sykes JE, ed. Canine and Feline Infectious Diseases.
St Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2014.
Sykes JE, Sturges BK, Cannon MS, et al. Clinical signs,
imaging features, neuropathology, and outcome in cats
and dogs with central nervous system cryptococcosis
from California. J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24: 1427–38.

1001

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1003

110
Protozoal and Protozoa‐Like Infections
Gad Baneth, DVM, PhD, DECVCP1 and Laia Solano‐Gallego, DVM, PhD, DECVCP2
1
2

School of Veterinary Medicine, Hebrew University, Rehovot, Israel
Facultat de Veterinaria, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain

Parasites are responsible for some of the most important
and widespread diseases of domestic dogs and cats.
Some of these parasitic infections are also zoonotic and
can infect humans. A thorough understanding of the
pathogenesis and epidemiology of these parasitic diseases is required in order to treat infected pets and prevent the spread of disease efficiently. This chapter focuses
on important protozoal diseases in dogs and cats with
emphasis on etiology, pathophysiology, clinical manifestations, diagnosis, treatment, and prevention.

­Toxoplasmosis
Etiology and Pathophysiology
Toxoplasma gondii is a tissue coccidian protozoon with a
sexual life cycle in the intestine of felids, the definitive
host, and an asexual phase in intermediate hosts. The
intermediate hosts of T. gondii include all warm‐blooded
vertebrates including humans. Cats and intermediate
hosts can be infected by bradyzoites in meat or by sporulated T. gondii oocysts from cat feces. Cats shed T. gondii
oocysts in their feces within 3–10 days after infection by
bradyzoites from tissue cysts and excretion continues for
approximately 7–21 days (median eight days) with massive shedding which can reach hundreds of millions of
oocysts per cat during the shedding period. After that
initial period, risk of further oocyst shedding is limited.
Oocysts in cat feces undergo sporulation in the environment and develop sporocysts containing infective
sporozoites within 1–5 days in appropriate humidity,
temperature, and oxygenation conditions [1].
After oral infection, T. gondii sporozoites release from
the oocysts and can invade the gut, multiply as tachyzoites, disseminate systemically and localize in internal
organs, the nervous system, and muscle tissues. In most

cases, infection is subclinical and parasites are eventually
encysted as tachyzoites in tissues, but severe and fatal
disease can occur due to acute infection or reactivation
of parasites in tissue cysts. In addition, in some host species and in humans, infection can cross the placenta and
infect embryos intrauterinely.
Several T. gondii genotype strains have been described
with variable virulence and host predilection. These
include the more common genotypes I, II, and III described
in North America and Europe as well as ­several atypical
genotypes [2].
Epidemiology
Exposure to T. gondii in cat populations is widespread and
positive serology may be detected in up to 74% of cats in
domestic feline populations worldwide. Dogs have also
been reported to have high exposure to T. gondii with
seroprevalence rates ranging from 30% to 64% in different
countries and populations. Most T. gondii infections are
subclinical and hosts may remain chronically infected
without developing clinical disease. Cats are often infected
by preying on infected rodents and it has been shown that
T. gondii infection can alter rodent behavior and make
them less alarmed, consequently increasing their likelihood of falling prey to domestic cats. Toxoplasmosis is
one of the most common zoonotic infections in humans
and is responsible for human ­abortions, birth defects,
encephalitis, and generalized disease [1,3].
Signalment
Cats and dogs of any age or gender can be affected.
Young and immunosuppressed animals tend to develop
more severe disease. Congenital infection is usually associated with more severe disease than infection of adult
cats, often affecting the liver and respiratory tract.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1004

Section 9 Infectious Disease

History and Clinical Signs
Clinical signs in cats are rarely related to the gastrointestinal stage of T. gondii development which is usually subclinical. Cats affected by systemic infection may show a
variety of clinical signs including fever, anorexia, abdominal pain, respiratory distress, ocular inflammation, lethargy, and central nervous system disorders. These are
associated with tachyzoite dissemination and their cytotoxicity with generation of local and systemic inflammation. Acute disease in dogs may be accompanied by
neuromuscular, central nervous system (CNS), respiratory, gastrointestinal, hepatic, and more rarely ocular
manifestations. Myositis and myocarditis are also prevalent in canine toxoplasmosis. Disease in both cats and
dogs may result from new infection or from reactivation
of latent infections by immune suppression such as
cyclosporin treatment, distemper infection in dogs or
feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) in cats [4].
Diagnosis
Cats and dogs with acute systemic toxoplasmosis may
develop nonregenerative anemia, leukopenia with lymphopenia, or neutrophilic leukocytosis, monocytosis,
and eosinophilia. Serum biochemistry abnormalities
during acute toxoplasmosis may include hypoproteinemia with hypoalbuminemia. Increased activities of alanine aminotransferase (ALT), creatinine kinase (CK),
and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) are found in animals with hepatic or muscle necrosis.
Excretion of oocysts by cats during the limited shedding period can be detected by fecal examination or polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Oocysts are relatively
small (10 μM) and can be concentrated by fecal flotation

with centrifugation using sugar solutions such as Sheather’s
sugar solution. Hammondia hammondi and Besnoitia
spp. produce oocysts which are morphologically indistinguishable from T. gondii occysts in cat feces.
Diagnosis of clinically ill cats and dogs is based on
compatible clinical signs and laboratory abnormalities
and by the detection of specific serum antibodies, demonstration of parasite DNA by PCR, or visualization of
tachyzoites by cytology in clinical samples. T. gondii tachyzoites may be detected by cytology during acute toxoplasmosis in peritoneal and ascitic fluids, and more rarely
in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), blood and bronchoalveolar
lavage washings or other tissues. PCR performed on CSF,
aqueous humor, or any other body fluid or internal organ
tissue is confirmative of infection with T. gondii.
Serology is carried out by the enzyme‐linked immunoabsorbent assay (ELISA), immunofluorescence assay
(IFA) (Figure 110.1), agglutination assays, and immunochromatographic kits.
Subclinically infected animals may display antibody
levels, and therefore positive serologic results may only
indicate previous infection, which is not necessarily
acute. The demonstration of increased IgG levels by at
least fourfold in paired sera taken at least two weeks
apart or high IgM levels suggests active acute infection,
although this is often not observed. Immunoblotting and
ELISA assays have been developed for the measurement
of specific T. gondii IgM, IgG, and IgA antibody classes in
an effort to discern the kinetic pattern of antibody formation in feline infection.
About 80% of healthy cats experimentally infected with
T. gondii develop detectable specific IgM antibodies
within 2–4 weeks post infection and most become IgM
seronegative by 16 weeks. However, some cats, particularly those with FIV or ocular toxoplasmosis, may have

Figure 110.1 A positive indirect fluorescent
antigen test serologic response to Toxoplasma
gondii antigen. Source: Courtesy of Dr Monica
Leszkowicz Mazuz, Kimron Veterinary Institute,
Israel.

VetBooks.ir

110 Protozoal and Protozoa‐Like Infections

persistent IgM levels. Since some cats never develop a
detectable IgM response and others have persistent IgM
antibodies, it is not possible to accurately use IgM serology to predict recent infection, although a positive antibody titer can be suggestive of it. Furthermore, T.
gondii‐specific IgG can be detected by serum ELISA in
healthy cats from 3–4 weeks after experimental infection.
By this time, oocyst shedding has usually been completed
and therefore IgG seropositive cats are usually considered
of low risk to public health. However, T. gondii‐IgG antibodies usually persist in the sera of infected cats for years
or even for their lifetime due to the persistence of tissue
infection.
In addition, anti‐T. gondii antibodies can be measured in
the CSF and aqueous humor to demonstrate local production of antibodies as an indication of organ infection. This
local antibody production can be compared to the serum
antibody concentration using an antibody coefficient to
differentiate whether local production of antibodies is present or if antibodies have diffused from the circulation.
Therapy
Clindamycin is the current treatment of choice in dogs
and cats with clinical toxoplasmosis. It is administered at
10–20 mg/kg PO q12h for at least two weeks to dogs
and at 12.5 mg/kg PO q12h for 2–4 weeks to cats.
Azithromycin at 10 mg/kg PO q24h for four weeks is an
additional treatment choice for cats and trimethoprim‐
sulfonamide at 15 mg/kg PO q12h for 2–4 weeks is an
alternative treatment for animals with intolerance to
clindamycin. Uveitis due to toxoplasmosis is treated with
1% prednisolone acetate ophthalmic drops.
No vaccine is currently available commercially for the
prevention of T. gondii infection in cats and dogs, or the
prevention of oocyst shedding in cats. Avoiding exposure of cats and dogs to T. gondii infection includes
prevention of hunting and feeding of raw or undercooked meat. Cat feces should be discarded properly
every day to prevent exposure to sporulated oocysts.
Prognosis
Acute toxoplasmosis often starts improving 24–48 hours
after initiation of clindamycin treatment. Ocular and
CNS infections tend to respond more slowly and disease
in immunocompromised patients usually has a poorer
prognosis.

­Neosporosis
Etiology and Pathophysiology
Neospora caninum is a coccidian parasite which is an
important cause of abortion in livestock worldwide and
can also cause neurologic disease in dogs. Neospora caninum

can infect several domestic animal species including
dogs, cattle, sheep, goats, horses, and chickens, and wild
animal species including deer, rodents, rabbits, coyotes,
wolves, foxes, and birds. Dogs, wolves, coyotes, and foxes
are the definitive hosts of N. caninum [5].
The sexually reproductive stage of the parasite’s life cycle
occurs in the intestine of a canine definitive host which
passes unsporulated oocysts in the feces. Infective oocysts
are ingested by an intermediate host, such as cattle, following sporulation in the environment which happens within
24 hours. Tachyzoites of N. caninum develop in the infected
intermediate host during acute infection followed by the
development of bradyzoites walled off in tissue cysts as
infection becomes chronic. Dogs acquire the infection
mainly by ingesting parasite cysts from ­tissues of infected
intermediate hosts, in particular cattle, and shed oocysts
approximately five days after bradyzoite ingestion. In addition, transplacental transmission during pregnancy has
been shown to occur in dogs, sheep, and cattle.
Epidemiology
The prevalence of N. caninum varies in different dog
populations and has been reported to be associated with
the dog’s environment and lifestyle. Free‐roaming dogs
living in rural areas are more likely to be seropositive
than urban dogs with less access to infected prey, bovine
placentas, aborted fetuses or other potentially infected
tissues. High seroprevalence rates of above 50% have
been reported in beef farm dogs in South America,
whereas populations of healthy dogs in Europe and the
USA typically have seroprevalence rates below 15%.
Signalment
Dogs of any age or gender can be affected by N. caninum
but disease is more common in dogs under the age of
1 year.
History and Clinical Signs
The clinical manifestations of canine neosporosis are due
to inflammation and necrosis caused by cellular destruction induced by tachyzoites. As for T. gondii, disease by N.
caninum can be caused by new infection, or by reactivation of parasites in cysts during host stress or immune
compromise. Immune‐suppressive treatment for other
disease by cyclosporin, steroids or azathioprine may activate latent N. caninum infection. Neospora caninum may
replicate in the lower respiratory system, skin, liver, and
nervous system. Disease is mostly associated with the
neuromuscular predilection of this parasite. Neurologic
disease is especially severe in congenitally infected puppies and may be apparent shortly after birth or delayed
and manifested months after birth, usually before the age

1005

Section 9 Infectious Disease

Therapy

VetBooks.ir

1006

Figure 110.2 A young puppy with hindlimb paresis due to
Neospora caninum infection. Source: Courtesy of Dr Monica
Leszkowicz Mazuz, Kimron Veterinary Institute, Israel.

of six months. Typical signs in pups include ascending
hindlimb paresis and ataxia which becomes progressively
more severe (Figure 110.2), polymyositis, muscle atrophy,
muscular back pain, head tilt, ocular abnormalities, urinary incontinence and dysphagia.
Infected adult dogs may suffer from encephalomyelitis, polymyositis, focal cutaneous nodules or ulcers,
pneumonia, hepatitis, peritonitis, or myocarditis.
Diagnosis
The hematologic and serum biochemistry findings in
clinical neosporosis are nonspecific. Increased serum
activities of CK and AST may be evident in dogs with
myositis due to neosporosis. CSF abnormalities include
mild increase in protein and nucleated cells concentrations with predominantly mononuclear cells including
monocytes and lymphocytes and occasionally neutrophils and eosinophils [6].
The diagnosis of canine neosporosis can be based on
clinical signs and positive serology by ELISA or IFA.
Pups usually seroconvert 2–3 weeks after infection and
antibody levels are frequently high in clinically sick dogs.
A fourfold increase in antibody levels is associated with
recent infection and IFA titers of 1:800 or greater in conjunction with compatible clinical signs suggest clinical
neosporosis. Serologic cross‐reactivity between N. caninum and T. gondii antibodies is present in some assays
but not expected in sera from dogs with medium to high
titers. No correlation has been found between antibody
level and clinical severity in dogs with neosporosis and
subclinically infected dogs may also have high antibody
levels to N. caninum. Suspicion of canine neosporosis
can be confirmed by demonstrating the presence of the
parasite’s DNA by PCR of CSF or muscle biopsies [7].
Neospora caninum tachyzoites can occasionally be
detected in the CSF by cytology.

Clindamycin at 10–12 mg/kg PO q8h for at least one
month is the main drug used for the treatment of canine
neosporosis. Trimethoprim‐sulfa at 15 mg/kg PO q12h
alone or in combination with pyrimethamine at 1 mg/kg
PO q24h for at least a month is another treatment option.
Pyrimethamine may be combined also with clindamycin
at the same doses. Ponazuril has been shown to be effective in cattle and mice but there are insufficient data on
its efficacy against canine neosporosis. Treatment of
neosporosis may only be partially effective or not
effective at all and long‐term treatment of two months
or more is often required, until no further improvement
is noted.
Prevention should be aimed at avoiding the ingestion
of bovine placentas and raw bovine or prey meat by dogs,
and also elimination of fecal contamination of ruminant
feed by dog and wild canid feces.
It has been recommended to test all littermates of a
puppy with neosporosis by serology for infection and
treat all those who are positive, or further consider treatment of the whole litter for the sake of prevention,
regardless of seropositivity. Bitches who have given birth
to infected puppies should be tested for infection and not
be bred. Immunosuppressive therapy should preferably
not be administered to seropositive dogs due to potential
reactivation of tissue cysts.
Prognosis
The prognosis for treated dogs with cutaneous neosporosis is more favorable than for those with CNS and neuromuscular disease. Young dogs with muscle contracture
and rigid hyperextension of the back legs have a poor
prognosis and often do not improve with treatment. Older
juvenile dogs above 4 months of age and mature dogs with
neurologic disease often respond to long‐term treatment
but may not return to complete function and cure.
Untreated dogs with clinical neosporosis usually die.

­Trypanosomiasis
Trypanosomiasis is a group of diseases caused by flagellated protozoans of the genus Trypanosoma which are
mostly arthropod borne and transmitted by hematophageous insects. The life cycle of trypanosomes is shared
by two hosts: a vertebrate animal and an arthropod vector. Trypanosomes are divided to two main groups. The
Salivaria (including T. brucei, T. conglonese, and other
species, develop in the anterior part of the vector’s digestive tract and salivary glands, and are transmitted
in saliva through biting. In contrast the Stercocaria

VetBooks.ir

110 Protozoal and Protozoa‐Like Infections

(T. cruzi), develop in the posterior gut of the vector and
are transmitted in the fecal excretion of the vector. The
Salivaria species cause African trypanosomiasis, mainly
transmitted by tsetse flies (Glossina spp.), whereas the
Stercocaria T. cruzi causes American trypanosomiasis and is transmitted by Triatoma bugs (“kissing bugs”).
Trypanosoma evansi, which is closely related genetically
to the tsetse‐transmitted T. brucei, is transmitted
mechanically by biting flies without development in the
fly gut. The life cycle of African trypanosomes includes
an epimastigote stage which develops in the tsetse fly
and a trypomastigote stage found in the fly’s saliva and in
the blood and tissues of the animal. The life cycle of the
American trypanosome T. cruzi includes an additional
intracellular life stage in the animal host, the amastigote
(also found in Leishmania spp.).
African trypanosomes infect a large variety of animals,
with some species causing severe disease in humans,
such as T. brucei gambiense which is responsible for the
chronic debilitating disease sleeping sickness and T. brucei rhodesiense which causes a more acute severe form of
human trypanosomiasis. Dogs and cats are not known to
develop disease from these two important human pathogens. However, dogs do suffer from severe disease
due to T. congolense, and both dogs and cats suffer from
disease due to T. evansi. American trypanosomiasis is a
zoonotic disease caused by T. cruzi which has both wildlife and domestic animal hosts. It induces acute or
chronic disease associated with myocarditis and neuromuscular degeneration in dogs and humans.
Trypanosoma caninum is a newly discovered species
that has been found in the skin and other tissues of
dogs in Brazil. No apparent clinical signs have been
attributed to this infection and the relatedness of this
species to T. cruzi or African trypanosomes has not
been determined [8].
American Trypanosomiasis
Etiology and Pathophysiology

Trypanosoma cruzi, the zoonotic agent of Chagas disease or American trypanosomiasis, can cause acute or
chronic disease in dogs. Trypomastigotes of T. cruzi are
shed in the triatomine vector feces onto the skin of a vertebrate host. The parasite crosses the skin in bruised
areas or through rubbing or scratching and enters the
bloodstream. Trypomastigotes that invade macrophages
or myocytes transform into amastigotes which multiply
intracellularly. Amastigotes transform back to trypomastigotes and are released from destroyed host cells into
the blood and are ingested during a blood meal by the
vector. Trypomastigotes are transformed to epimastigotes in the triatomine’s gut and replicate until eventually
transferring to the posterior gut where they transform

back into infectious trypomastigotes before excretion in
the insect’s feces. The triatomine vectors defecate shortly
after feeding on blood thereby infecting animals and
humans. Dogs may also be infected orally by ingesting
triatomine bugs, their excretions or infected animal tissues. This route of infection is also prevalent in humans.
Furthermore, transplacental infection and transmission
from contaminated blood transfusion products are additional modes of transmission which enable the parasite’s
spread.
Invasion of cells by T. cruzi trypomastigotes, replication as amastigotes and then transformation back to trypomastigotes result in cell rupture and tissue damage.
Parasitemia with T. cruzi can be detected by examining
canine blood smears three days post infection, reaching
its peak 14 days later, and becomeing undetectable cytologically 30 days post infection. Acute cardiac disease
may develop as early as 14 days after infection and resolve
by one month. Chronic disease can develop after a long subclinical phase with progressive myocarditis and cardiomyopathy directly induced by the parasite or by an
autoimmune reaction which is unrelated to the intracellular
amastigote parasite load.
Epidemiology

Trypanosoma cruzi infects a large number of animal
species in the American continent and Caribbean
islands. These include wild animals such as armadillos,
opposums and raccoons, and also dogs and humans.
Cats may also be infected but less frequently than dogs
and without apparent clinical disease. The disease is
prevalent in humans in southern and central American
countries from Argentina to Mexico. It has also been
reported in the southern, United States, especially in
Texas. Dogs are considered the main domestic reservoir
for human infection in several areas, whereas wildlife
hosts are the main reservoirs in others. Canine infection
is more prevalent than its human counterpart in the
United States where the seroprevalence in dogs in Texas
and Louisiana ranges from 12% to 22% [3].
Signalment

Puppies and dogs younger than 1 year of age develop
more severe, acute, and frequently fatal disease compared
with older dogs.
History and Clinical Signs

Chagas disease myocarditis has three stages: acute,
intermediate (latent), and chronic. The main findings of
acute disease in puppies include lethargy, fever, lymphadenomegaly, pale mucous membranes, hepatosplenomegaly, and loss of appetite. This stage of the disease
results from direct myocardial cell injury by trypomastigotes and the associated inflammatory response.

1007

VetBooks.ir

1008

Section 9 Infectious Disease

Meningoencephalitis due to parasite invasion of the CNS
may also develop during the acute disease. Dogs older
than 6 months of age develop less severe clinical signs of
infection which may be inapparent. Survival of acute
infection may be preceded by a long subclinical latent
infection with no clinical signs and no apparent parasitemia. Some dogs develop the chronic form of the disease within 8–36 months after the acute phase. These
dogs suffer from cardiac failure that often begins as
right‐sided and may progress to left‐sided. Exercise
intolerance, ascites, pleural effusion, pulse deficits and
hepatomegaly can occur due to myocarditis, dilated
cardiomyopathy and arrhythmias.
Diagnosis

Dogs with acute T. cruzi infection may have hematologic
abnormalities that include anemia, thrombocytopenia,
neutrophilia, monocytosis, eosinophilia, and lymphocytosis. Serum biochemical abnormalities during acute T.
cruzi myocarditis may include increased muscle enzyme
activity and prerenal or renal azotemia. Changes in cardiac electrical conductivity including arrhythmias and
atrioventricular blocks will be evident on ECG during
acute T. cruzi myocarditis.
Trypomastigotes may be evident in stained blood
smears, and sensitivity can be improved by examining a
Giemsa‐stained thick buffy coat smear. Concentration of
trypomastigotes by centrifugation of plasma is also more
sensitive than examining blood smears. The parasite pellet
from plasma may be examined microscopically following
staining or used for DNA extraction and PCR. Trypanosoma
cruzi trypomastigotes or rarely intracellular amastigotes
may be demonstrated by examining lymph node cytology.
Serologic detection of antibodies to T. cruzi by IFA,
ELISA, or immunochromatography is the most common
diagnostic technique for the detection of latent and
chronic infection. Antibodies are detectable three weeks
after infection and persist for the lifetime of the dog irrespective of whether it remains in latent infection or
develops chronic disease. Serologic cross‐reactivity
between T. cruzi and Leishmania is a considerable problem in settings where these infections overlap. PCR
assays for the detection of T. cruzi are specific but are
often not sensitive during the latent and chronic stages
of the disease when parasitemia is rare.
Therapy

Benznidazole at 5–10 mg/kg PO q24h for 60 days or
nifurtimox at 2–7 mg/kg PO q6h for 3–5 months often in
association with prednisone are used at the acute disease
stage. These drugs, particularly nifurtimox, have severe
side‐effects, are not FDA approved for dogs and are often
difficult to obtain. Furthermore, infection may persist
despite treatment.

Prognosis

Infected dogs should be monitored for cardiac dysfunction
and are at risk for sudden death. Specific treatment for
cardiac failure is often indicated.
Prevention

Prevention consists of limitation of exposure to triatomine
vectors and access to potentially infected prey. Blood
donors should be screened for T. cruzi infection in and
around endemic regions.
African Trypanosomiasis and T. evansi
The African trypanosomes are a multitude of species for
which some distinct strains have been reported. All the
species that belong to the T. brucei complex and T. evansi
are similar morphologically and indistinguishable by
light microscopy, whereas T. congolense differs from the
T. brucei complex by the length and shape of its flagella.
All the African trypanosomes are strictly extracellular
and develop in the form of trypomastigotes in the vertebrate host, which transform to epimastigotes in the
tsetse vector. T. brucei is able to avoid elimination from
the mammalian host by periodic change of antigenicity
and evading the host’s immune system.
Epidemiology

Tsetse flies, the vectors of T. brucei and T. congolense, are
found only in sub‐Saharan Africa and therefore the
prevalence of diseases caused by these parasites is limited to this part of Africa. Because T. evansi is transmitted mechanically by tabanids and possibly by other
insects present also outside Africa, it was able to spread
away from Africa and be prevalent also in major parts of
Asia and South America.
Signalment

European breeds of dogs and cats imported into Africa
are considered more susceptible to clinical disease
caused by species of African trypanosomes, compared
with local domestic dogs and cats.
History and Clinical Signs

The clinical signs described in dogs with African trypanosomiasis include fever, anorexia, lethargy, lymphadenomegaly, hepatosplenomegaly, edema, ascites, petechial
hemorrhages, uveitis, oculonasal discharge, corneal
edema reminiscent of blue eye caused by canine adenovirus infection, and neurologic signs associated with
meningoencephalitis.
Diagnosis

Dogs may have anemia, leukocytosis or leukopenia and
thrombocytopenia. Serum biochemistry abnormalities

VetBooks.ir

110 Protozoal and Protozoa‐Like Infections

include increased activities of liver enzymes, azotemia,
hypoalbuminemia, and hyperglobulinemia.
The diagnosis of African trypnosomiasis in dogs and
cats involves detection of trypomastigotes by cytology
of blood, body fluids or tissues using microscopy
(Figure 110.3). PCR with sequencing is useful for detection of low parasitemias and for species determination.
The flagella of T. congolense trypomastigotes does not
extend separately beyond the body of the parasite whereas
the flagella of T. brucei and T. evansi extends posteriorly
after overlapping the parasite’s body. ELISA, IFA, and the
card agglutination trypanosomiasis test (CATT) are
available for the detection of antibodies against T. evansi.
Therapy

Trypanosoma congolense infection in dogs can be treated
with isometamidium chloride at 0.5 mg/kg injected deep
intramuscularly. Trypanosoma brucei infection of dogs is
apparently more resistant to drug therapy than T. congolense and its treatment consists of a higher dose of 1 mg/
kg isometamidium chloride intramuscularly or diminazene aceturate at 3.5 mg/kg IM or SC [9]. Trypanosoma
evansi in dogs and cats can be treated with diminazene
aceturate at the same dose for dogs as for the treatment
of T. congolense [10,11].
Prognosis

Dogs infected with T. congolense have been reported to
be treated successfully, unless infection involved the
CNS. Untreated disease is often fatal.

10 μm

Figure 110.3 Trypomastigotes of Trypanosoma congolense in a
blood smear from a naturallyinfected dog (May Grunwald–Giemsa
stain).

Prevention of African trypanosomiasis can be achieved
by eliminating dog contact with vectors by using
deltamethrin‐impregnated collars, or by injections of
isometamidium chloride every 2–3 months.

­Leishmaniosis
Etiology and Pathophysiology
The leishmanioses are a group of infectious diseases that
affect humans and domestic and wild animals worldwide
caused by diphasic protozoans of the genus Leishmania
(Kinetoplasta, Trypanosomatidae). Most transmission
cycles are zoonotic, involving reservoir hosts such as
rodents, marsupials, edentates, monkeys, domestic dogs,
and wild canids.
Canine leishmaniosis (CaNL) due to Leishmania
infantum is a major zoonotic disease endemic in more
than 70 countries. It is present in regions of southern
Europe, Africa, Asia, South and Central America and has
emerged in the United States mainly in foxhounds. In
Europe, the domestic dog is a reservoir host of major veterinary and human importance [12].
Natural transmission of L. infantum infection between
animals and from animals to humans occurs by the bite
of a phlebotomine sand fly species (Diptera, Psychodidae,
Phlebotominae) of the genera Phlebotomus (Old World)
and Lutzomyia (New World). Leishmania completes its
life cycle in the phlebotomine sand fly vector, which harbors the flagellated extracellular promastigote form, and
in a mammal where the intracellular amastigote forms
develop. A female sand fly ingests Leishmania while
feeding on blood and then transmits the infective stages
(metacyclic promastigotes) during a subsequent blood
meal. The infective promastigotes inoculated by the
sand fly into the skin of animals are phagocytosed in the
mammalian host by macrophages and other phagocytic
cells, in which they transform to amastigotes. In susceptible dogs or cats, amastigotes multiply and disseminate
to internal organs.
The immune response elicited by susceptible animals
is mainly an overwhelming humoral response that does
not control infection. This robust humoral immune
response coupled with a high parasite load leads to
immune complex formation and deposition which
causes a type III hypersensitivity reaction in several tissues and is associated with uveitis, polyarthritis or
­glomerulonephritis. In subclinical resistant animals, a
protective T cell‐mediated immune response predominates and controls the infection, preventing it from causing
clinical disease.
Proven modes of non-sand fly transmission in dogs
include infection through transfused blood products

1009

VetBooks.ir

1010

Section 9 Infectious Disease

from carriers and vertical transplacental transmission, as
documented in foxhounds in North America, and venereal transmission.
Epidemiology
At least 2.5 million dogs are estimated to be infected in
southwestern Europe alone, and the disease is spreading
north into the foothills of the Alps and the Pyrenees. The
number of infected dogs in South America also is estimated in millions, and there are high infection rates in
some areas of Venezuela and Brazil, where a high prevalence of canine infection is associated with high risk of
human disease.
The seroprevalence reported in dogs in the Mediterranean
basin ranges from 5% to 30%, depending on the region.
Surveys employing other detection methods to estimate
the prevalence of Leishmania infection by amplification
of Leishmania DNA from different tissues or by detection of specific anti‐Leishmania cellular immunity have
revealed even higher infection rates, approaching 70% in
some foci. Most dogs in these areas appear to have
chronic infection that may be lifelong, but only a low
proportion of dogs develop severe disease.
In cats, serologic and PCR surveys in southern Europe
indicate that Leishmania infection is more widespread
than clinical disease. Epidemiologic studies have des­
cribed rates ranging from 0.4% to 30% based on serologic
and molecular techniques. However, it is important to
highlight that clinical illness in cats is less frequently
reported than in their canine equivalents.
Signalment
Dogs and cats of either gender can suffer from clinical
leishmaniosis. Some dog breeds such as the boxer,
Rottweiler, cocker spaniel and German shepherds appear
to be more susceptible to the disease and other breeds
(Ibizan hound) are more resistant. Disease is most common in young adult (>6 months of age), adult, and older
dogs. Cats of any breed can be affected by this infection.
Disease is most common in adult or older cats [13].
History and Clinical Signs
The clinical manifestations of this infection are very
broad and variable, mainly due to the various types of
immune responses which may be elicited in the dog in
response to the parasite, the different organs affected
and the different types of pathogenic mechanisms of
disease that can be activated. Infection with L. infantum
causes chronic infection, which can sometimes occur in
a subclinical or mild self‐limiting illness, or as a moderate or severe illness in dogs which can be fatal. Four

clinical stages of the disease have been described based
on the severity of the disease (clinical and laboratory
abnormalities) and serology results, establishing different therapeutic regimens and forecast for each stage of
the disease.
The main clinical findings found on physical examination in classic CaNL include skin lesions, local or generalized lymphadenomegaly, loss of body weight, exercise
intolerance, decreased appetite, lethargy, splenomegaly,
polyuria and polydypsia, ocular lesions, epistaxis, onychogryposis, lameness, vomiting, and diarrhea [12,13].
Skin lesions are the most frequent manifestation of
CaNL in dogs brought for treatment due to suspicion of
the disease. Several dermatologic lesion patterns have
been described: exfoliative dermatitis with alopecia
which can be generalized or localized over the face,
ears and limbs; ulcerative dermatitis; nodular dermatitis;
mucocutaneous proliferative dermatitis; and papular
dermatitis.
The most common ocular manifestations of CaNL are
anterior uveitis, blepharitis (exfoliative, ulcerative, or
nodular), and keratoconjunctivitis, either common or
sicca. About 25% of dogs with clinical leishmaniosis have
ocular and periocular lesions including keratoconjunctivitis and uveitis. Ocular consequences of systemic hypertension such as retinal detachment and/or hemorrhages,
retinal arterial tortuosity, and hyphema are present in
the disease but not diagnosed frequently.
Some degree of renal pathology is present in most
dogs with CaNL and subsequent renal disease due to
immune‐complex glomerulonephritis eventually develops and is believed to be the main cause of death in
dogs with CaNL.
The most common clinical signs and clinical‐pathologic abnormalities compatible with feline leishmaniosis
(FeL) include lymph node enlargement and skin lesions
such as ulcerative, crusty or nodular dermatitis mainly on
the head or distal limbs, ocular lesions mainly with uveitis, feline chronic gingivostomatitis (FCGS) and mucocutaneous ulcerative or nodular lesions. Clinical illness is
frequently associated with impaired immune competence, such as retroviral infections or immunosuppressive therapy.
Diagnosis
The most common laboratory findings in CaNL are
hyperglobulinemia mainly with polyclonal gammaglobulinemia, hypoalbuminemia, decreased albumin:globulin
ratio, mild to severe proteinuria, mild to moderate nonregenerative anemia, renal azotemia, elevated liver
enzyme activities, thrombocytopenia, and thrombocy­ ormocytic
topathy. Hypergammaglobulinemia and mild n
normochromic anemia are commonly reported in FeL.

VetBooks.ir

110 Protozoal and Protozoa‐Like Infections

The pathologic findings observed by cytology or histology in CaNL and FeL are macrophagic, neutrophilic‐
macrophagic and lymphoplasmacytic inflammation in
affected tissues and reactive hyperplasia of lymphoid
organs.
The clinical diagnosis of leishmaniosis could be complex because of the broad spectrum of clinical and
clinicopathologic abnormalities which are often not specific. For this reason, it is important to separate the diagnosis of Leishmania infection from clinical disease and
to apply different diagnostic techniques for each situation [14]. Accurate diagnosis of CaNL and FeL often
requires an integrated approach consisting of a clinicopathologic assessment and specific laboratory tests. The
detection of L. infantum infection in dogs and cats
includes parasitologic (cytology, histology, immunochemistry, and culture), molecular (conventional, nested,
and real‐time PCR) and serologic methods (qualitative
and quantitative antibody tests). Detection of specific
serum antibodies to L. infantum should preferably be
based on quantitative serologic techniques, such as the
IFA and ELISA.
The challenges of serology include cross‐reactivity
with other pathogens such as other Leishmania and
Trypanosoma species, and with antibodies elicited by
vaccination against CaNL. High antibody levels are associated with severe parasitism and moderate to severe
disease. However, the presence of low antibody levels is
not necessarily indicative of disease and further work‐up
is necessary to confirm CaNL and FeL by other diagnostic methods such as cytology, histopathology, and PCR.
Information provided by PCR should not be separated
from the data obtained from clinicopathologic and serologic evaluations. These should all be combined for a
comprehensive assessment. It is essential to know the
terms and limitations of each diagnostic test and make
an adequate clinical interpretation [12–14].
Therapy
Treatment for CaNL depends on the severity of disease.
Different therapeutic regimens have been established for
each stage of CaNL. The drugs most frequently used in
moderate to severe CaNL (stage 2 and 3) are a combination of meglumine antimoniate at 75–100 mg/kg q24h or
40–75 mg/kg BID for four weeks SC and allopurinol at
10 mg/kg/BID/PO for at least one year. Alternatively, a
combination of miltefosine at 2 mg/kg/ PO q24h for four
weeks and allopurinol at the same dose described above is
also employed. Other drugs have been proposed for the
treatment of CaNL but their efficacy or safety are limited.
Clinical cure in CaNL is often obtained and is associated with reduction in the parasite load and infectiousness to sand flies, but infection may persist and clinical

relapse might occur and therefore life‐long follow‐up
post therapy should be maintained.
The most common drug used for FeL is allopurinol
administered alone at a dose of 10 mg/kg/BID/PO for at least
six months. Treatment with meglumine antimoniate alone
has been reported in rare cases of FeL. Most cats recover
clinically following prolonged treatment and as for dogs, follow‐up with routine laboratory tests, serology, and PCR is
essential for the prevention of clinical relapses [12–14].
Prognosis
The prognosis of dogs and cats with leishmaniosis
depends mainly on the severity of disease. Different
prognosis is expected for each stage of CaNL with generally poor prognosis observed in dogs with renal insufficiency or severe renal disease associated with profuse
proteinuria. The prognosis in cats is generally fair and a
poorer prognosis is associated mainly with the presence
of concomitant diseases and immune suppression.
Prevention
Several preventive measures are available for CaNL. The
use of individual topical pyrethroid insecticides in collars or spot‐on formulation has been shown to be effective in reducing L. infantum infection and, therefore,
they are commonly applied to dogs in endemic areas to
prevent infection.
Vaccination is also considered a promising tool for
controlling CaNL. Second‐generation vaccines for CaNL
are commercially available in Europe and Brazil, with
different efficacy rates in reducing the incidence of the
clinical illness in field. Domperidone, a hyperprolactinemic immunomodulatory drug, has recently been licensed
in some European countries for preventive use against
CanL. However, limited studies exist regarding its efficacy in preventing the disease.
Dog culling practiced in Brazil as a control measure
has been reported to have little impact on the incidence
of human and canine leishmaniosis [15].
To date, preventive measures for this infection in cats
are not commercially available.

­Hepatozoonosis
Etiology and Pathophysiology
Hepatozoonosis is an arthropod‐borne infection caused
by apicomplexan protozoa of the family Hepatozoidae
which are phylogenetically related to the piroplasms
(Babesia, Theileria, and Cytauxzoon). Two different
s­ pecies of Hepatozoon infect dogs: Hepatozoon canis
globally and Hepatozoon americanum in some parts of

1011

VetBooks.ir

1012

Section 9 Infectious Disease

the United States, mainly the southeastern states.
Hepatozoon canis infects the hemolymphatic tissues and
causes anemia and lethargy whereas H. americanum primarily infects muscular tissues and induces severe
myositis and lameness [16,17]. Feline hepatozoonosis is
caused by H. felis, which is prevalent in the Mediterranean
basin, Asia, Africa, South, Central and North America. It
infects muscle tissues including the myocardium and has
not been associated with severe clinical disease [18].
Recently, H. canis and H. silvestris infections have
been described in cats in Europe.
In contrast to most tick‐borne pathogens which are
transmitted via the tick salivary glands, Hepatozoon spp.
infect vertebrates when they ingest arthropod hosts containing infective sporozoites. The main vectors of H.
canis are the ticks Rhipicephalus sanguineus and R.
turanicus worldwide and Amblyomma ovale in South
America, whereas the Gulf Coast tick Amblyomma maculatum is the vector of H. americanum in North America.
The vector of H. felis has not been identified to date but
transplacental transmission in the feline host has been
shown. Transplacental transmission from dam to pups
has also been demonstrated for H. canis infection but
not for H. americanum. Transmission by carnivorism
and predation of the canine host on intermediate or
wildlife transport hosts with ingestion of parasite cyst
forms from their tissues has been shown for H. americanum and is considered as a main route of dog infection
with this parasite [19].
The life cycle of H. canis revolves between the canine and
tick hosts. When dogs ingest the vector tick or tick parts, H.
canis sporozoites are released from sporocysts in the intestine and penetrate the gut wall. The sporozoites invade
mononuclear cells and disseminate hematogenously or via
the lymph to hemolymphatic target organs that include the
bone marrow, spleen, and lymph nodes and to other internal organs such as the liver, kidney, and lungs. Meronts in
which asexually dividing merozoites develop are formed in
the dog’s tissues in the process of merogony and may cause
cellular necrosis in tissues. Merozoites release from mature
meronts, invade neutrophils and monocytes, and develop
into gamonts. Alternatively, merozoites can produce secondary meronts in the target tissues. The tick, which serves
as the definitive host, is infected by ingesting leukocytes
containing gamonts when feeding on a parasitemic dog.
Morphologically indistinguishable male and female H.
canis gamonts are released from the dog leukocytes within
the tick gut, associate in syzygy, and differentiate in the process of gametogenesis to distinct gametes. After fertilization, the zygote divides and sporogony takes place with the
formation of oocysts that release into the tick’s hemocoel.
The oocysts are large, spherical forms consisting of a membrane that envelops multiple sporocysts in which the infective sporozoites are found.

The life cycle of H. americanum differs from that of H.
canis particularly with regard to the parasite’s target tissues in the dog, the formation of distinct large cysts and
the inflammatory reaction formed in response to infection. Sporocysts of H. americanum sporozoites from the
hemocoel of an infected vector tick ingested by dogs
release infectious sporozoites following contact with bile
in the gut. Sporozoites are thought to cross the gut wall,
and then taken up by host macrophages and transmitted
via the lymph system or hematogenously to the target
organs consisting of skeletal and cardiac muscles.
Hepatozoon americanum‐infected macrophages lodge
between striated muscle fibers in these tissues and form
muscle cysts. Concentric layers of mucopolysaccharide
material are deposited by the infected cell forming a
cystic structure referred to as “onion skin cyst.” The
encysted zoite undergoes merogony and multiple merozoites are formed. Eventually, the cyst ruptures, releasing
mature individual merozoites into the surrounding tissue
and eliciting a strong local inflammatory response. The
pyogranulomatous inflammatory response is associated
with severe musculoskeletal pain. The merozoites are
taken up by leukocytes and are thought to undergo additional merogonic cycles or enter the blood vasculature,
develop into gamonts and circulate in monocytes.
Epidemiology
Hepatozoon canis infection is reported mainly from
tropical, subtropical, and temperate climate regions
where vector tick species are abundant. Infection with
H. canis has also been reported in dogs in the southeastern United States, mainly in some regions where H.
americanum is also prevalent, and co‐infections of both
species have been reported. In Europe, autochthonous
dog infection is found mostly close to the Mediterranean
basin. It has also been described in dogs imported into
nonendemic countries such as Germany, in foxes in
European countries where autochthonous canine infection is rare or has not been reported, and in Slovakia and
Poland where R. sanguineus, its tick vector, is not present. The prevalence of H. canis infection differs between
regions. The rates of infection based on blood smear
examination or PCR range from 1% to 64%.
The presence of H. americanum infection in the United
States has expanded north and east from Texas, where it
was first detected in 1978. It is found in several southeastern states, and occasionally cases are reported in other
locations including Nebraska, Vermont, Washington, and
California. Hepatozoon americanum infects wild coyotes
(Canis latrans) and in experimentally infected young coyotes, it causes similar disease to that seen in dogs. Surveys
of free‐ranging coyotes in Oklahoma showed that 40–50%
were infected naturally with H. americanum.

VetBooks.ir

110 Protozoal and Protozoa‐Like Infections

Signalment
Infection with Hepatozoon species is more common in
dogs and cats with frequent outdoor access and those
with contact to tick vectors. Hepatozoon americanum is
often detected in hunting and guard dogs in contact with
prey and potentially infected wild mammals. No age or
breed predilections have been reported.
The pathogenesis of H. canis infection is influenced by
immunodeficient conditions including immunosuppressive treatment, an immature immune system in young
pups, concurrent infectious diseases or debilitating concomitant diseases. Co‐infections with Toxoplasma,
Leishmania, Babesia, Ehrlichia canis, or viral infections
might predispose to clinical illness.
History and Clinical Signs
Hepatozoon canis infection varies from being subclinical
to a severe disease in which dogs present with lethargy,
fever, cachexia, and pale mucous membranes due to anemia. In contrast to the generally mild disease usually
found in H. canis infection, dogs diagnosed with
H. americanum infection are presented with fever, gait
abnormalities, muscular pain induced by myositis, generalized muscular atrophy and mucopurulent ocular discharge with decreased tear production associated with
inflammation of the extraocular muscles. Clinical signs
may start 4–6 weeks after infection due to the pyogranulomatous inflammatory response that occurs when
the encysted parasite cyst ruptures in muscle tissue.
American canine hepatozoonosis can have an acute
presentation or a waxing and waning chronic pattern.
Pain associated with disease may be generalized or localized in the lumbar and cervical spine, long bones, or
joints. Gait abnormalities range from limb stiffness to
complete recumbency and inability to rise. Chronic
infections can be associated with polydipsia and polyuria
due to renal amyloidosis or glomerulonephritis and an
ophthalmic examination may reveal uveitis. Hepatozoon
felis infection has not been associated directly with overt
clinical manifestations but H. silvestris has been reported
to cause severe disease in domestic cats.
Diagnosis
Subclinical infection or mild disease is the most common presentation of H. canis infection and it is usually
found in dogs with a low level of parasitemia (1–5%)
(Figure 110.4). Severe illness can be found in dogs and
may be associated with white blood cell concentrations
as high as 150 × 109 leukocytes/L. High parasitemia rates
of up to 100% can accompany extreme neutrophilia. A
case–control study of dogs with H. canis parasitemia

Figure 110.4 Hepatozoon canis gamont in a neutrophil from the
blood smear of a naturally infected dog (May Grunwald–Giemsa
stain 1000× magnification).

indicated that 15% had a high number of circulating
­parasites (>800 gamonts/μL) accompanied by elevated
body temperature, lethargy, weight loss, anemia, and
hyperglobulinemia. An association between the severity
of clinical signs and the level of parasitemia was also
found in a study of canine hepatozoonosis from Turkey.
The most frequent hematologic abnormality reported in
H. canis infection is mild to moderate normocytic normochromic nonregenerative anemia and, more rarely,
regenerative anemia. Abnormalities in serum chemistry
include hyperproteinemia with hyperglobulinemia due
to polyclonal gammopathy, hypoalbuminemia and
increased creatine kinase and alkaline phosphatase
activities. Meronts of H. canis are commonly found in
the spleen, bone marrow, and lymph nodes by cytology
and histopathology. Although lesions of the periosteum
are more frequently associated with H. americanum
infection, periostitis has also been described as a rare
finding in H. canis infection.
A marked neutrophilia is also one of the consistent
hematologic findings in H. americanum infection with
leukocyte counts of 30–200 × 109/L blood, although the
level of parasitaemia is typically very low. A mild to moderate normocytic normochromic nonregenerative anemia is frequent. Serum biochemical abnormalities include
increased alkaline phosphatase activity and hypoalbuminemia. Histopathology of skeletal muscles from dogs
with H. americanum infections reveals pyogranulomatous myositis and large round to oval “onion skin” cysts
(250–500 micrometer diameter). Radiography of the long
bones or pelvis demonstrating periosteal proliferation
can be used for screening suspected animals.
Hepatozoon canis infection is usually diagnosed by
microscopic detection of intracellular H. canis gamonts
in stained blood smears. Gamonts can be detected in the

1013

VetBooks.ir

1014

Section 9 Infectious Disease

blood at 28 days post infection. The gamonts are found
in the cytoplasm of neutrophils and monocytes, have an
ellipsoidal shape and are about 11 ×4 micrometers. In
contrast, H. americanum parasitaemia usually does not
exceed 0.1% of the leukocytes and rare gamonts may be
detected in the blood from 32 days post infection. The
confirmation of H. americanum infection can be achieved
by muscle biopsy and demonstration of typical parasite
cysts and granulomas or by PCR. PCR of blood for H.
canis or H. americanum is a sensitive and specific diagnostic option. Diagnostic real‐time PCR assays that can
also quantify the parasitic load are able to detect both
H. americanum and H. canis and distinguish between
the two species. Hepatozoon felis infection is usually
associated with a low parasitaemia and is best detected
by blood PCR.
Serologic testing for H. canis or H. americanum by an
IFA test or ELISA is used in epidemiologic studies but not
commonly employed for clinical diagnosis in practice.
Therapy
The current treatment for H. canis is the administration of imidocarb dipropionate at 5–6 mg/kg IM or
SC every 14 days until gamonts are no longer present
in blood smears. The decrease of parasitemia is slow
and usually requires several imidocarb treatments.
Studies with follow‐up by evaluation of buffy coat
smears and sensitive PCR indicated that complete
elimination of the parasite may frequently not be
achieved with imidocarb dipropionate alone and
also with combinations of imidocarb dipropionate
and toltrazuril/emodepside, or imidocarb dipripionate with clindamycin [20].
Hepatozoon americanum is treated with a combination oral therapy of trimethoprim‐sulfadiazine (15 mg/
kg q12h), pyrimethamine (0.25 mg/kg q24h), and clindamycin (10 mg/kg q8h) for 14 days. Ponazuril (10 mg/kg
PO q12h for 14–28 days) has been suggested as an alternative to the combination antiprotozoal treatment. After
initial improvement of clinical disease signs is obtained,
remission can be prolonged with the oral administration
of the coccidiostat decoquinate at 15 mg/kg mixed in
food q12h for two years. Relapse of clinical disease is frequent following discontinuation of treatment. Supportive
therapy with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs is
effective in relieving pain and fever in dogs with H. americanum infection and administered initially with the
combination antiprotozoal therapy.
No controlled trials have been published on the treatment of feline hepatozoonosis. Single cases have been
treated with doxycycline, a single dose of 2 mg/kg primaquine PO or imidocarb at 2.5 m/kg IM with undetermined efficacy in eliminating the infection.

Prognosis
The prognosis of treated dogs with a low H. canis
parasitemia is generally good even if decrease of parasitemia is slow and requires several imidocarb treatments. The prognosis for dogs with high parasitemia is
good to guarded and sometimes associated with the outcome of a concurrent illness.
Hepatozoon americanum infection may be fatal without treatment within several months. Prognosis with
antiprotozoal treatment followed up by long‐term decoquinate therapy is guarded.
Prevention
Prevention of both H. canis and H. americanum infections
consists of the use of topical acaricides and environmental parasiticides. Furthermore, avoidance of tick ingestion while scavenging or grooming, and of eating raw
prey meat potentially harboring infectious tissue stages
of the parasite is recommended [16].
To date, hepatozoonosis has not been shown to be
established in recipient dogs following transfusion.
Transfusion of the blood gamont stage is not likely to
result in establishment of infection in the recipient dog
as the gamont stage found in blood has to continue to the
sexual parts of the parasite’s life cycle in the tick before
the parasite replicates.

­Feline Cytauxzoonosis
Etiology and Pathophysiology
Feline cytauxzoonosis is an emerging tick‐borne disease
with an expanding geographic distribution caused
by parasites from the genus Cytauxzoon (phylum
Apicomplexa, class Piroplasmea, order Piroplasmida).
Parasites of the genus Cytauxzoon are closely related to
those of the genera Babesia and Theileria.
Cytauxzoon felis is a species infecting domestic cats
and wild felids in the United States and South America
and detailed clinical, parasitologic, and epidemiologic
information is available on this infection. Other
Cytauxzoon parasites which are genetically different and
of decreased pathogenicity have been described in
Europe in domestic cats and wild felids but limited
­information is available on these species.
Cytauxzoon felis is transmitted by the tick Amblyomma
americanum in the United States. Amblyomma cajennense
and other ixodid ticks have been presumed as vectors in
South America. Other routes of transmission have not
been well studied for this infection. The tick vector for
Cytauxzoon spp. infection in felids in Europe remains
unknown as well as other possible modes of transmission.

VetBooks.ir

110 Protozoal and Protozoa‐Like Infections

The wildlife animal reservoir for C. felis infection in
the United States is the bobcat (Lynx rufus) where infection is mostly subclinical and a persistent erythroparasitemia is commonly found. Conversely, clinical illness is
frequently found in infected domestic cats. Cytauxzoon
felis infection in the cat varies in its clinical manifestation from a severe acute fatal disease to subclinical
chronic infection.
Cytauxzoon species are detectable in two main forms
in the mammalian host: schizonts in histiocytic cells and
merozoites in erythrocytes. A phase of asexual schizogenous reproduction, within the host’s mononuclear
phagocytic cells, is responsible for the pathologic processes resulting in clinical illness. Large schizonts can
occlude small blood vessels and cause thrombosis in the
visceral organs and the brain. The onset of clinical disease occurs usually 1–3 weeks after tick‐transmitted
infection and the entire disease course is rapid, with cats
frequently succumbing to infection within days.
Epidemiology
The geographic distribution and seasonality of cytauxzoonosis due to C. felis is largely correlated with relevant tick
vector activity and presence of bobcats. This infection is
present in the south‐central, southeastern, and mid‐
Atlantic regions of the United States. Infected domestic
cats are commonly from rural or suburban wooded areas.
The prevalence of C. felis infection in domestic cats is
­variable in different published studies. In healthy cats,
prevalence of C. felis infection ranged from 0.3% to 28%.
Cytauxzoonosis accounted for 1.5% of all feline admissions to the veterinary teaching hospital at Oklahoma
State University between 1998 and 2006 [21–23].
Signalment
Disease due to C. felis can occur in cats of any age and
either gender with no identified breed predilections.
Likewise, no signalment predispositions have been found
in feline infections due to other species of Cytauxzoon.
History and Clinical Signs
Outdoor cats are more likely to be infected during spring
and summer due to the presence of tick vector. Immune
suppression has not been found to be a risk factor for
infection with C. felis. Cytauxzoon spp. infection has
been associated with living in a cat colony and outdoor
lifestyle in domestic cats from Europe.
The clinical signs of C. felis infection are nonspecific
and include an acute onset of anorexia, lethargy, and
fever. Other clinical signs include increased vocalization,
weakness, dehydration, icteric or pale mucous mem-

branes, pigmenturia, mild to moderate lymphadenomegaly, splenomegaly and hepatomegaly, generalized
pain, tachypnea and tachycardia with or without respiratory distress, dull mentation, and seizures.
Cytauxzoon spp. appear to mainly cause a subclinical
infection with evidence of erythroparasitemia in domestic and wild felids in Europe. So far, evidence of clinical
manifestations of a tissue schizogonic phase, as found for
C. felis, has not been observed in Cytauxzoon spp. infection in Europe.
Diagnosis
Laboratory abnormalities due to C. felis infection include
pancytopenia, hyperbilirubinemia, mild to moderate normocytic normochromic nonregenerative anemia, thrombocytopenia, lymphopenia, neutropenia, mild to moderate
elevation of liver enzyme activities (ALT and ALP), prerenal
azotemia, electrolyte disturbances (hypocalcemia, hypokalemia, and hyponatremia), hyperglycemia, mild hypoproteinemia with hypoalbuminemia and hypocholesterolemia.
Detection of Cytauxzoon in stained blood smears is
useful in the diagnosis of erythroparasitemia. Infection
may also be visualized by microscopic identification of
schizont‐laden macrophages in cytology of fine needle
aspirates of lymph nodes, spleen or liver. PCR is a valuable tool to detect low parasitemia with higher sensitivity
than blood smear. Furthermore, PCR and genetic characterization can distinguish between infection with
Cytauxzoon and small Babesia spp. Serology is not used
in the clinical setting.
Therapy
The combination of the antimalarial atovaquone (15 mg/
kg PO q8h) and the macrolide azithromycin (10 mg/kg
PO q24h) for 10 days is currently considered the best
treatment option for acute cytauxzoonosis due to
C. felis, with an approximately 60% survival rate in sick
cats, while other treatments such as imidocarb dipropionate
(3.5–5 mg/kg IM repeated at 14‐day intervals if needed)
have been reported to result in lower survival rates [23].
Medical management of this disease requires supportive treatments.
Prognosis
The prognosis for acute cytauxzoonosis in domestic cats
due to C. felis is guarded to poor.
Prevention
So far, there is no vaccine commercially available for the
prevention of Cytauxzoon infection. Prevention is focused

1015

VetBooks.ir

1016

Section 9 Infectious Disease

on avoidance of tick bites. A combination of tick control
that targets the specific tick vectors and indoor lifestyle is
the best strategy to reduce tick exposure.

­Babesiosis
Etiology and Pathophysiology
Babesia are tick‐borne protozoan parasites of erythrocytes that infect domestic and wild animals, and humans.
Babesia belongs to the phylum Apicomplexa, class
Piroplasmea, and order Piroplasmida [24].
Canine infections caused by different Babesia species
are protozoal tick‐borne diseases with worldwide distribution and global significance. Large‐form Babesia spp.
include Babesia rossi, B. canis, and B. vogeli. These species
were previously considered subspecies of B. canis. They
are identical morphologically but differ in the severity of
clinical manifestations which they cause, their tick vectors, genetic characteristics, and geographic distribution.
Therefore, they are currently considered separate species.
Another yet unnamed large Babesia species most closely
related to B. bigemina was found to infect immunocompromised dogs in the United States. The small Babesia
spp. include B. gibsoni, B. conradae, and B. vulpes (formerly referred to as B. microti‐like piroplasm and Theileria
annae).
Babesiosis of domestic cats has mostly been reported
in South Africa where infection is mainly due to B. felis,
a small Babesia species that causes anemia and icterus.
In addition, B. cati was reported from a cat in India and
sporadic cases of infection in domestic cats by unnamed
Babesia parasites have been reported in France,
Germany, Thailand, and Zimbabwe. B. canis infection
was reported from three cats in a study from Spain and
Portugal in domestic cats with molecular evidence for
infection. Additionally, infection of domestic cats with a
genetically distinct species related to B. canis and named
B. canis subsp. presentii was described in Israel [25].
Dogs and cats are infected when Babesia sporozoites
are injected with saliva into the host’s skin during a blood
meal. The parasites invade the erythrocytes and form
ring‐shaped trophozoites which replicate within the
erythrocyte and form merozoites observed as pairs of
attached pear‐shaped parasites in some Babesia species.
Merozoites may further divide, forming eight or more
parasites in the same erythrocyte and eventually lysing
the cell, discharging into the blood to invade additional
erythrocytes. Ticks feeding on infected blood take up
merozoites and sexual parasite development in the tick
gut is followed by sporogony in its salivary gland or ovaries. The parasite can be transmitted from the tick salivary glands during a tick bite or transovarially through
its oocytes, as found in some Babesia species.

Babesia gibsoni infection has also been shown to be
transmitted via blood transfusion and transplacentally.
Furthermore, several studies have provided evidence
that B. gibsoni is likely transmitted directly from dog to
dog via bite wounds, saliva, or ingested blood [25,26].
Epidemiology
The geographic distribution of the causative agents and
thus the occurrence of babesiosis is largely dependent on
the habitat of tick vector species, with the exception of
B. gibsoni where evidence for dog‐to‐dog transmission
indicates that infection can be transmitted among fighting dog breeds independently of the limitations of vector
tick infestation. Babesia vogeli and B. gibsoni have worldwide distribution, whereas B. rossi and B. canis have
been mostly restricted to Africa and Europe, respectively. The unnamed large Babesia sp. most closely
related to B. bigemina and B. conradae has been reported
only from North America whereas B. vulpes was reported
in Europe and North America.
Signalment
Puppies and dogs of any age with concomitant disease
or immune suppression suffer clinical babesiosis due to
B. vogeli more frequently compared to healthy adult
dogs. Breed and gender do not appear to be predisposing
factors.
Babesia canis, B. rossi, and B. vulpes have been reported
to more frequently affect young to adult outdoor hunting
and shepherd dogs. Breed and gender do not appear to
be predisposing factors.
Disease due to B. gibsoni is found mostly in fighting
dogs and breeds such as the pit bull terrier and tosa.
Gender and age do not appear to be predisposing factors.
Gender, breed, and age have also not been reported to be
predisposing factors for B. conradae infection.
Splenectomized and immune‐compromised dogs are
more susceptible to infection with any Babesia species.
History and Clinical Signs
The main clinical findings reported in dogs suffering
from B. canis infection include dehydration, lethargy,
anorexia and fever, Babesia vogeli usually causes a subclinical infection or mild to moderate clinical disease
which often accompanies other concomitant diseases or
immunosuppressive conditions or affects splenectomized dogs. Severe fatal hemolytic anemia has been
reported in puppies.
The most virulent large‐form Babesia is B. rossi.
Babesiosis due to B. rossi can manifest with uncomplicated common clinical signs as described for other babesial species or with complicated clinical disorders

VetBooks.ir

110 Protozoal and Protozoa‐Like Infections

including acute renal failure with anuria, icterus, hypotension, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS),
vomiting, diarrhea, pancreatitis, myalgia, rhabdomyolysis, ascites, pulmonary edema, encephalomyelitis, and
peracute shock. The clinical findings associated with
B. gibsoni infection include fever, splenomegaly, lymphadenomegaly, hepatomegaly, and lethargy. Babesia conradae infection has been described as more virulent than
B. gibsoni infection, resulting in higher rates of mortality.
The most common clinical findings reported in dogs
infected with B. vulpes from the northwest of Spain
include fever, lethargy, weakness, and pigmenturia.
Diagnosis
The main clinicopathologic findings reported in dogs
suffering from B. canis infection include mild to severe
thrombocytopenia, hyperfibrinogenemia, mild to moderate normocytic-normochromic nonregenerative anemia, hemolysis and neutropenia. Hemoglobinuria has
also been described in naturally infected dogs. Common
laboratory abnormalities in dogs infected with B. vogeli,
B. gibsoni and B. conradae are regenerative anemia and
thrombocytopenia. Although they are both small
Babesia species, more pronounced anemia occurs in B.
conradae infection than with B. gibsoni infection. Dogs
with B. vulpes infections in northern Spain have demonstrated moderate to severe regenerative anemia, thrombocytopenia and azotemia. Hyperglobulinemia and
proteinuria can also occur in Babesia infected dogs. The
hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia associated
with Babesia infections appear to occur by multiple
mechanisms including immune-mediated destruction.
Positive Coombs’ testing, spherocytosis, positive saline
agglutination tests and anti-platelet antibodies can occur.
Therefore, it is important to rule-out babesiosis in
patients with suspected idiopathic immune-mediated
hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia. Detection of
large or small species of Babesia in stained blood smears
has been the standard for diagnosis for many years. This
method is reliable when a moderate to high parasitemia
is present, but there is not always a correlation between
the level of parasitemia and the severity of clinical signs.
A fresh smear is recommended for the accurate diagnosis of infection. Serology can indicate past infection or a
present persistent one. Some serologic cross‐reactivity
exists between Babesia species. False‐negative results
are likely in peracute or acute infection and therefore
convalescent antibody titers are needed to prove acute
infection. Some evidence suggests that seroconversion
may not occur in immunocompromised or young animals. The PCR is particularly useful in the diagnosis of
babesiosis in dogs with a low parasitemia level including
suspected carrier dogs or chronically infected animals
and for speciation of parasites. However, a negative PCR

does not rule out infection. Several molecular methods
including seminested PCR, reverse line blotting (RLB),
and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP)
PCR permit discrimination between species.
Therapy
Large Babesia spp. infections of dogs and cats are commonly treated with one dose of imidocarb dipropionate
at 5–6 mg/kg (dog) and 2.5 mg/kg (cat) IM or SC with
good clinical response. Babesia gibsoni and B. conradae
infections are often resistant to imidocarb dipropionate
and diminazene aceturate. The treatment of choice for
these small Babesia species is a combination of the antimalarial atovaquone and the macrolide azithromycin.
This combination is also likely to be a good treatment
option for B. vulpes infection. The most commonly used
dose of atovaquone is 13.5 mg/kg, administered PO q8h
with fatty food to maximize drug absorption, in combination with azithromycin at 10 mg/kg PO for 10 days.
Clindamycin in combination with metronidazole and
doxycycline for a minimum of three months has also
been used for treatment of B. gibsoni, although its overall
efficacy is uncertain. The use of clindamycin alone is not
recommended by some authors given the potential for
selection of resistance and may subsequently interfere
with alternative treatments.
The treatment of choice for B. felis in cats is ­primaquine
phosphate. Published dosages range from 0.5 to 1.0 mg/
kg PO, IV, or IM once, or administered daily on three
consecutive days. Clinical and parasitologic cure are
commonly not achieved in small babesial spp. infections
in dogs and cats and clinical relapses may occur
frequently. Medical management of infection may
­
require supportive treatments including blood transfusions, intravenous fluids, and the use of antiinflammatory drugs [24–27].
Prognosis
The prognosis of dogs and cats infected with large forms
of Babesia is generally good with appropriate therapy.
Canine infection with small Babesia spp. may be more
resistant to treatment and have a poorer prognosis.
Prevention
The prevention of babesiosis relies mostly on topical and
environmental acaricidal treatments aimed at reducing
exposure to vector ticks and transmission of the pathogen to dogs and cats. As Babesia species are transmitted
by blood product transfusions, it is recommended to
screen canine blood donors for Babesia infection on a
regular basis and consider screening cat blood in relevant areas. Nonvectorial dog‐to‐dog transmission of

1017

VetBooks.ir

1018

Section 9 Infectious Disease

babesiae by fighting is preventable and can be responsible for the spread of babesiosis into previously nonendemic areas. A vaccine against Babesia is commercially
available in some countries in Europe.

­Giardiasis
Etiology and Pathophysiology
The genus Giardia includes intestinal flagellated protozoan parasites that infect a large number of host species,
ranging from mammals to amphibians and birds. The
most important Giardia species, G. duodenalis, infects
cats, dogs, livestock, and humans with a broad host range
and considerable public health significance. Giardia
duodenalis is currently considered a multispecies complex. Multigeneic sequence analyses have identified different genetic assemblages of G. duodenalis including
assemblages A and B in man and animal species, assemblages C and D in dogs, assemblage E from ruminants
and pigs, assemblage F from cats, and assemblage G
from rodents. To date, no association has been made
regarding specific assemblages and the induction of
­certain characteristic clinical signs or the degree of their
severity [2,3].
The life cycle of Giardia is direct and has two stages:
the trophozoite and a cyst. The infective stage of the parasite, the cyst, is encysted when released into the feces
and is immediately infectious. Cysts remain infectious for
months in cool, damp conditions and accumulate in the
environment. When ingested by the host, cysts excyst in
the duodenum, releasing motile trophozoites. The latter
undergo repeated mitotic division and form environmentally resistant cysts. Cysts pass through the intestine in
feces and are spread by contaminated water, food, and
fomites, and by direct contact. Giardia is transmitted
mostly by ingestion of cysts in contaminated food or
water. Following the ingestion of cysts and their exposure
to the gut environment, each cyst releases two trophozoites which attach to the villi of the small intestinal epithelium. Trophozoites multiply by binary fission and
eventually form cysts which are shed in the feces. The
parasite presence in the intestine induces diarrhea by
hypersecretion and malabsorption with increased intestinal permeability. Giardia infection in most dogs and cats
is subclinical, but some animals suffer from severe diarrhea and weight loss which can become chronic.
Epidemiology
Infection rates with Giardia in dogs and cats vary in the
5–30% range. The infection rates found in a large multicountry study in Europe were 24.8% in dogs and 20.3% in

cats. Shedding Giardia is often subclinical and has frequently not been associated with clinical signs in population surveys. However, diarrhea and illness due to
Giardia infection have been associated with puppies and
kittens of young age as well as immune‐suppressed animals and pets living in crowded conditions.
The relationship between human and animal Giardia
infection is not clear. Humans certainly infect each other
frequently and although they share the same G. duodenalis assemblages with animals with whom they have
close contact, such as household dogs, it is not known
how frequently infection is actually acquired from
household animal contact or whether both human and
pets acquire it from a common source, such as contaminated water [2].
Signalment
There is no breed or gender predilection. Young,
immune‐suppressed animals or those living in crowded
conditions are more predisposed to the disease.
History and Clinical Signs
Most feline and canine Giardia shedders are infected
subclinically. Those affected clinically suffer primarily
from diarrhea and weight loss if disease becomes chronic.
Diarrhea can be acute, intermittent or chronic and is
mucoid, soft to watery and rarely bloody. Diarrhea can
worsen and become bloody in animals co‐infected with
other intestinal parasites such as Ancylostoma spp.,
Coccidia or Tritrichomonas foetus. Vomiting and fever
are rare. Reinfection with Giardia after successful treatment
may occur.
Diagnosis
Giardia infection can be diagnosed by stool examination
to identify cyst and trophozoite stages in direct fresh
stool smears or by flotation for cysts. Sheather’s sugar
centrifugation and zinc sulfate centrifugation can be
used for concentrating cysts. Rapid detection of Giardia
antigen can be made using immunochromatographic
kits, or by immunofluorescence, ELISA, and PCR in the
parasitology laboratory [28].
Therapy
Dogs and cats can be treated with febendazole at 50 mg/
kg PO q24h for 3–5 days, or with combined febantel, pyrantel, and praziquantel according to the febantel component at 37.8 mg/kg PO q24h for 3–5 days, or with
metronidazole at 15–25 mg/kg PO q12–24h for 5–7 days.
Since Giardia strains may have different antiprotozoal

VetBooks.ir

110 Protozoal and Protozoa‐Like Infections

susceptibilities, treatment with one of these drug options
should be replaced by another if it is not successful in
effectively relieving clinical signs. Furthermore, co‐infections should be diagnosed and treated and sanitary management with quaternary ammonium disinfectants
should be instituted to prevent reinfection.
Prognosis
The prognosis of treated dogs and cats is usually good
and clinical signs are ameliorated, although some animals could suffer from persistent or recurrent infection.
Prevention
Disinfection of kennels, cages, and the animal’s direct
environment, boiling or filtering drinking water and
removal of feces are important for controlling the spread
of infection among animals that live in close proximity.
Bathing of dogs and cats in infected kennels may decrease
transmission of giardiasis between individual animals.

­Miscellaneous Infections
Amebiasis
Amoebas are unicellular protozoal organisms with
motile cytoplasm and a flexible cell wall. Molecular phylogenetic studies have shown that amoebas do not form
a single taxonomic group and are found in many lineages
of eukaryotic organisms. In older nomenclature classifications, most amoebas were placed in the class or subphylum Sarcodina, a group of single‐celled motile
organisms that possess pseudopods or move by protoplasmic flow. However, the amoeboid organisms are not
classified together in one group any longer. Amoebas can
be classified as enteric and residing in the gastrointestinal tract or nonenteric and associated with visceral and
CNS invasion. Amoebas of different species are a rare
cause of disease in dogs and cats. Different species of
Acanthamoeba, Balamuthia, Hartmannella, and other
amoebic genera and species may infect dogs and cats and
colonize various organs, causing pneumonia, meningoencephalitis, renal disease, gastrointestinal disease of
the small or large bowel, dermatitis, nasal disease, and
keratitis [29,30].
Affected cats and dogs may be febrile and show a variety of clinical signs including neurologic abnormalities.
Diagnosis is based on finding amoebae in excretions as
cysts or trophozoites, or in tissues by cytology or histopathology and genetic characterization by specific PCR
assays. Treatment consists of metronidazole for enteric
infection and other antiprotozoal and antifungal drugs

such as amphotericin B, ketoconazole, and miltefosine
for deep organ infection.
Trichomoniasis
Trichomonas spp. are flagellated protozoa that belong to
the order Trichomonadida, reproduce by binary fission,
and do not produce cysts. Cats and more rarely dogs can
be infected with Tritrichomonas foetus which is transmitted by the direct fecal–oral route and causes diarrhea
[31,32]. Tritrichomonas foetus survives in feces and
humid environment outside the animal’s body for up to a
few days. The parasite has been reported in numerous
countries and has a worldwide distribution, with infection
rates of up to 32% in cat populations from different countries in Europe [32]. Subclinical infection with T. foetus is
common and there is not a direct relationship between
infection and clinical signs. Infection is more common in
cats from multicat settings and breeding catteries
and clinical signs are more common in young cats under
12 months of age.
Tritrichomonas foetus attaches to the intestinal epithelium and induces a lymphoplamsmacytic and neutrophilic inflammatory response with large bowel diarrhea
and frequent passage of soft liquid feces which may contain mucus and fresh blood [33]. Irritation of the anus
may be present with swelling and edema. Diagnosis is
made by identification of the organism in fresh feces by
direct microscopic examination in which typical forward
movement directed by the parasite’s flagella and undulating membrane can be detected. Stained thin fecal
smears may aid in the detection of the parasite with its
typical form which is different from the Giardia trophozoites (Figure 110.5), when its presence is suspected

Figure 110.5 Tritrichomonas foetus in a stained fecal smear from a
naturally infected cat (May Grunwald–Giemsa stain 1000×
magnification).

1019

VetBooks.ir

1020

Section 9 Infectious Disease

based on wet smear microscopy. PCR is able to diagnose
infection with high sensitivity and specificity, and culture in an “in pouch” medium is also used for diagnostic
purposes. The drug of choice for treatment of T. foetus in
cats is ronidazole at 30 mg/kg PO q24h for 14 days.
Ronidazole is neurotoxic to cats at higher doses and is
also teratogenic and should not be used to treat pregnant
or lactating queens or young kittens.
Pneumocystosis
Pneumocystis is a genus of pathogens most closely related
to Ascomycetes fungi. Current research has indicated
that Pneumocystis species appear to be host specific. Five
species have been described, including Pneumocystis
jirovecii which infects humans and P. carinii which is a
pathogen of rats, although much of the previous scientific literature has related to P. carinii as a human pathogen. Dogs may be infected with a different Pneumocystis
species or strain provisionally termed P. canis.
Pneumocystis causes pneumonia in dogs and its
transmission is thought to be air‐borne in inhaled respiratory aerosol from infected hosts. Young dogs less
than 1 year of age of either gender may be infected and
Cavalier King Charles spaniels, Shetland sheepdogs
and miniature dachshunds are predisposed to disease.

Immunoglobulin deficiency and other congenital or
acquired states of immune suppression have been
reported in infected dogs [34]. Trophozoites and cysts
of Pneumocystis are found in the lung alveolar spaces
where the pathogen and its associated inflammatory
response damage the alveolar septa. Dogs with pneumocystosis suffer from respiratory distress, tachypnea,
weight loss, tachycardia, and exercise intolerance
which progress and worsen over weeks to months.
Thoracic radiographs show diffuse interstitial to
­alveolar patterns of lung disease and fluid collected on
bronchoalveolar lavage or lung aspirates may show
Pneumocystis trophozoites and cysts by cytology. Lung
histopathology and PCR are also helpful in confirming
infection. Pneumocystis does not grow in fungal culture and serologic tests have not provided a reliable
diagnosis for canine infection.
The antimicrobial treatment of choice for canine
pneumocystosis is trimethoprim‐sulfonamide at 15 mg/
kg PO q8h for three weeks. Pentamidine isethionate at
4 mg/kg IM q24h for two weeks is also used for pneumocytosis treatment, as well as atovaquone at 15 mg/kg PO
q24h for three weeks, and a combination of clindamycin
and primaquine (3–13 mg/kg PO q8h for three weeks).
Supportive therapy to ease the respiratory distress is
necessary in acute pneumocystosis.

­Selected Reading and References
1 Lappin MR. Update on the diagnosis and management

of Toxoplasma gondii infection in cats. Top Compan
Anim Med 2010; 25: 136–41.
2 Baneth G, Thamsborg SM, Otranto D, et al. Major
parasitic zoonoses associated with dogs and cats in
Europe. J Comp Pathol 2016; 155(1 Suppl 1): S54–74.
3 Esch KJ, Petersen CA. Transmission and epidemiology
of zoonotic protozoal diseases of companion animals.
Clin Microbiol Rev 2013; 26: 58–85.
4 Hartmann K, Addie D, Belák S, et al. Toxoplasma gondii
infection in cats: ABCD guidelines on prevention and
management. J Feline Med Surg 2013; 15: 631–7.
5 Dubey JP, Schares G. Neosporosis in animals – the last
five years. Vet Parasitol 2011; 180: 90–108.
6 Lyon C. Update on the diagnosis and management of
Neospora caninum infections in dogs. Top Compan
Anim Med 2010; 25: 170–5.
7 Ishigaki K, Noya M, Kagawa Y, Ike K, Orima H, Imai S.
Detection of Neospora caninum‐specific DNA from
cerebrospinal fluid by polymerase chain reaction in a dog
with confirmed neosporosis. J Vet Med Sci 2012; 74: 1051–5.
8 Madeira MF, Almeida AB, Barros JH, et al. Trypanosoma
caninum, a new parasite described in dogs in Brazil:
aspects of natural infection. J Parasitol 2014; 100: 231–4.

9 Watier‐Grillot S, Herder S, Marié JL, Cuny G,

Davoust B. Chemoprophylaxis and treatment of
African canine trypanosomosis in French military
working dogs: a retrospective study. Vet Parasitol
2013; 194: 1–8.
10 Desquesnes M, Dargantes A, Lai DH, Lun ZR,
Holzmuller P, Jittapalapong S. Trypanosoma evansi and
surra: a review and perspectives on transmission,
epidemiology and control, impact, and zoonotic
aspects. Biomed Res Int 2013; 2013: 321237.
11 Rjeibi MR, Ben Hamida T, Dalgatova Z, et al. First
report of surra (Trypanosoma evansi infection) in a
Tunisian dog. Parasite 2015; 22: 3.
12 Solano‐Gallego L, Koutinas A, Miró G, et al.
Directions for the diagnosis, clinical staging,
treatment and prevention of canine leishmaniosis.
Vet Parasitol 2009; 165: 1–18.
13 Pennisi MG, Cardoso L, Baneth G, et al. LeishVet
update and recommendations on feline leishmaniosis.
Parasit Vectors 2015; 8: 302.
14 Solano‐Gallego L, Miró G, Koutinas A, et al.
LeishVet guidelines for the practical management
of canine leishmaniosis. Parasit Vectors
2011; 4: 86.

VetBooks.ir

110 Protozoal and Protozoa‐Like Infections

15 Otranto D, Dantas‐Torres F. The prevention of canine

leishmaniasis and its impact on public health. Trends
Parasitol 2013; 29: 339–45.
16 Baneth G. Perspectives on canine and feline
hepatozoonosis. Vet Parasitol 2011; 181: 3–11.
17 Allen KE, Johnson EM, Little SE. Hepatozoon spp.
infections in the United States. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2011; 41: 1221–38.
18 Baneth G, Sheiner A, Eyal O, et al. Redescription of
Hepatozoon felis (Apicomplexa: Hepatozoidae) based
on phylogenetic analysis, tissue and blood form
morphology, and possible transplacental transmission.
Parasite Vectors 2013; 6: 102.
19 Johnson EM, Panciera RJ, Allen KE, et al. Alternate
pathway of infection with Hepatozoon americanum
and the epidemiologic importance of predation.
J Vet Intern Med 2009; 23: 1315–18.
20 De Tommasi AS, Giannelli A, de Caprariis D, et al.
Failure of imidocarb dipropionate and toltrazuril/
emodepside plus clindamycin in treating Hepatozoon
canis infection. Vet Parasitol 2014; 200: 242–5.
21 Cohn LA, Birkenheuer AJ. Cytauxzoonosis, In: Greene
CE, ed. Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 4th edn.
St Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2012, pp. 764–71.
22 Carli E, Trotta M, Chinelli R, et al. Cytauxzoon sp.
infection in the first endemic focus described in domestic
cats in Europe. Vet Parasitol 2012; 183: 343–52.
23 Sherrill MK, Cohn LA. Cytauxzoonosis: diagnosis
and treatment of an emerging disease. J Feline Med
Surg 2015; 17: 940–8.
24 Solano‐Gallego L, Baneth G. Babesiosis in dogs and
cats – expanding parasitological and clinical spectra.
Vet Parasitol 2011; 181: 48–60.

25 Hartmann K, Addie D, Belák S, et al. Babesiosis in

cats: ABCD guidelines on prevention and
management. J Feline Med Surg 2013; 15: 643–6.
26 Irwin PJ. Canine babesiosis. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 2010; 40: 1141–56.
27 Ayoob AL, Hackner SG, Prittie J. Clinical management
of canine babesiosis. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2010; 20:
77–89.
28 Gruffydd‐Jones T, Addie D, Belák S, et al. Giardiasis
in cats: ABCD guidelines on prevention and
management. J Feline Med Surg 2013; 15: 650–2.
29 Kent M, Platt SR, Rech RR, et al. Multisystemic
infection with an Acanthamoeba sp in a dog. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2011; 238: 1476–81.
30 Carlesso AM, Mentz MB, da Machado ML, et al.
Characterization of isolates of Acanthamoeba
from the nasal mucosa and cutaneous lesions of dogs.
Curr Microbiol 2014; 68: 702–7.
31 Gruffydd‐Jones T, Addie D, Belák S, et al.
Tritrichomoniasis in cats: ABCD guidelines on
prevention and management. J Feline Med Surg
2013; 15: 647–9.
32 Yao C, Köster LS. Tritrichomonas foetus infection, a
cause of chronic diarrhea in the domestic cat. Vet Res
2015; 46: 35.
33 Tolbert MK, Stauffer SH, Gookin JL. Feline
Tritrichomonas foetus adhere to intestinal epithelium
by receptor‐ligand‐dependent mechanisms. Vet
Parasitol 2013; 192: 75–82.
34 Kanemoto H, Morikawa R, Chambers JK, et al.
Common variable immune deficiency in a Pomeranian
with Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia. J Vet Med Sci
2015; 77: 715–19.

1021

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1023

111
Coccidia
Chris Adolph, DVM, MS, Diplomate ACVM (Parasitology)
Zoetis Inc., Tulsa, OK, USA

­Cystoisospora spp.
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Within the last few years, canine and feline enteric coccidia belonging to the genus Isospora were reorganized
and are now recognized by the genus Cystoisospora. This
designation is now well accepted but not well integrated.
The reader should recognize that both terms refer to the
same genus.
Coccidia are obligate intracellular parasites classified in
the phylum Apicomplexa, and are commonly identified
infecting the gastrointestinal tract of dogs and cats. Dogs
are the definitive host to four species of Cystoisospora:
C. canis, C. ohioensis, C. burrowsi, and C. neorivolta. The
latter three species are generally grouped together
as C. ohioensis complex. Cats are the definitive host
for two species of Cystoisospora: C. felis and C. rivolta.
Cystoisospora spp. are very species specific; dogs are not
infected with cat Cystoisospora spp. and cats are not
infected with dog Cystoisospora spp.
To truly understand the pathophysiology of these
organisms, one must first understand the life cycle. The
typical Apicomplexa life cycle consists of sexual and asexual reproductive events that occur inside and outside the
host. A sporozoite is the infective stage and is the end‐
product of sporogony, a form of asexual reproduction.
For Cystoisospora spp., this occurs in the environment
outside the host. Sporozoites are contained within a sporulated oocysts. If this environmental sporulated oocyst is
ingested by the target host, the sporozoites emerge from
the oocyst, or excyst, in the small intestine. It should be
noted that Cystoisospora spp. have the ability to utilize
paratenic hosts as a means of completing the life cycle. If
a paratenic host ingests the sporulated oocysts, the sporozoite will invade the extraintestinal soft tissues and encyst.
This stage is infective to the final host if the paratenic host

is ingested. In the small intestine, the sporozoite excysts
from the sporocyst and invades small intestinal cells. The
site, location, and number of asexual generation vary with
each species of Cystoisospora. Once the sporozoite
invades the cell wall, it essentially hijacks the host cell and
can evade the host immune response. After another
round of asexual reproduction by endogeny to produce
first‐generation schizonts (aka meronts) containing merozoites, the host intestinal cell is ruptured, releasing the
merozoites to invade other cells. This process continues
for a programmed number of cycles until the last cycle
which is the sexual phase known as gametogony. Here,
the merozoites differentiate into either a microgametocyte (male) or a macrogametocyte (female). The microgametocyte leaves the cell in search of a macrogametocyte
to fertilize. The end‐product of the sexual stage is a gametozoite known as an oocyst.
Pathologic changes to the host occur when developing
stages (merozoites and gametozoites) emerge and rupture the epithelial cells. This leads to gastrointestinal
bacteria colonizing the ruptured enterocyte.
Epidemiology
Transmission of Cystoisospora spp. is fecal–oral. Oocysts
that are shed are not immediately infective to the next host.
The oocyst needs time to sporulate in the environment
(eight hours) to be infectious. Cystoisospora spp. also
infect the definitive host via predation of a ­paratenic host.
When this route is utilized, a paratenic host c­onsumes
sporulated oocysts, but asexual and s­ exual development
do not occur. Sporozoites then enter extraintestinal tissue
and form monozoic cysts, commonly found in mesenteric
lymph nodes. Once a definitive host consumes the paratenic host, the life cycle continues as described previously.
Infections are generally self‐limiting.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1024

Section 9 Infectious Disease

The distribution of Cystoisospora is worldwide. Due to
the fecal–oral route of transmission, cases are associated
with crowded and unhygienic environments. In the
United States, prevalence of canine Cystoisospora spp.
has been estimated to be between 3.1% and 4.4% while
feline Cystoisospora spp. prevalence has been estimated
to be between 3.9% and 6.3%.
Signalment
In most surveys, Cystoisospora spp. are detected in puppies and kittens less than 6 months of age. There does not
appear to be a breed predilection. Patients that are most
susceptible to clinical disease include nursing, recently
weaned, and immunocompromised dogs and cats.
History and Clinical Signs
Clinical symptoms are more common in puppies and
kittens acquired from unsanitary or overcrowded
­
e­ nvironments. Cystoisospora spp. can cause large or
small bowel diarrhea, although patients may be asymptomatic despite shedding oocysts. Other clinical symptoms reported include anemia, dehydration, vomiting,
anorexia, and weight loss. Physical exam findings of
patients with Cystoisospora spp. are nonspecific and can
include abdominal pain, increased gas or fluid in the
­gastrointestinal tract, and thickened loops of bowel.

and examined for the presence of characteristic oocysts
(Figure 111.1).
It is important to differentiate oocysts of Cystoisospora
spp. from those of Eimeria spp., which are not pathologic
to canine and feline patients. Coprophagy of the feces of
animals such as cattle, sheep, and chickens may lead to
spurious detection of Eimeria spp. in canine and feline
fecal samples. Both Eimeria and Cystoisospora are
­species specific and therefore pathogenic only to their
target species.
Therapy
Asymptomatic adult patients demonstrating fecal
oocysts may be monitored for development of clinical
signs. Patients that meet criteria of history, clinical signs,
and detection of the organism are treated symptomatically for diarrhea, and concurrently with antiprotozoal
medications such as ponazuril, sulfonamides, or amprolium (Tables 111.1 and 111.2).
Table 111.1 Enteric coccidia of the dog and cat
Diagnostic stage

Size (μM)

Canine
C. canis
C. ohioensis
C. neorivolta
C. burrowsi

Oocyst
Oocyst
Oocyst
Oocyst

30 × 38
19 × 23
11 × 13
17 × 20

History, clinical symptoms, and detection of the organism are needed for a definitive diagnosis of coccidiosis.
Fecal flotation, centrifugal or passive, can be performed

Feline
C. felis
C. rivolta

Oocyst
Oocyst

30 × 40
20 × 25

(a)

(b)

Diagnosis

Organism

Cystoisospora spp.

Figure 111.1 (a) Sporulated and (b) unsporulated Cystoisospora ohioensis. Source: Courtesy of the National Center for Veterinary
Parasitology, Oklahoma State University.

VetBooks.ir

110 Coccidia

Table 111.2 Treatment of enteric coccidiosis in dogs and cats
Antiprotozoal agent

Treatment regimen

Ponazurila

20 mg/kg PO twice 1–7 days apart OR
50 mg/kg PO once

Sulfadimethoxineb

50–60 mg/kg PO daily for 5–20 days

Trimethoprim‐
sulfonamidec

15–30 mg/kg PO every 12–24 hours for
5 days

Amproliumd

300–400 mg PO daily for 5 days (canine)
60–100 mg PO daily for 7 days (feline)

Furazolidone

8–20 mg/kg PO every 12–24 hours for
5 days

recover from Cystoisospora spp. infections have species‐
specific immunity, but remain susceptible to infection
with other Cystoisospora spp. infections. For example, a
puppy that acquires a C. canis infection and recovers
remains susceptible to infection with C. ohioensis.
While patients with coccidiosis respond to appropriate
­therapy, untreated infections can lead to death from
dehydration.
Public Health Implications
Due to the species specificity, Cystoisospora spp. of dogs
and cats are not zoonotic to humans.

a

Ponazuril is coccidiocidal and may be superior to other drugs.
Sulfadimethoxine is the only approved drug for treatment of
coccidiosis in the United States.
c
Trimethoprim‐sulfonamide combinations may cause acute hepatic
necrosis, keratoconjunctvitis sicca, macrocytic anemia, and type III
hypersensitivity reactions.
d
Amprolium can cause anorexia, depression, diarrhea, and CNS
disease due to induction of thiamine deficiency.
PO, by mouth (per os).
b

Symptomatic therapy begins by withholding food
­initially, followed by small, frequent meals with a bland
diet once symptoms diminish. A class of medications
commonly utilized to treat coccidiosis are the sulfonamides, which may be potentiated for better efficacy.
Sulfadimethoxine is labeled in the US for dogs with bacterial enteritis associated with coccidiosis. Sulfonamides
block folic acid synthesis and are effective against the
schizont, an asexual stage. Sulfonamides are coccidiostatic, therefore fecal analysis may remain positive for
oocysts during the course of therapy. Toxicity with use of
sulfonamides has been reported and includes crystalluria, renal toxicity, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, type 3
hypersensitivity disorders, acute hepatic necrosis, and
hematopoietic disorders. Dobermans are at increased
risk for immune‐mediated complications.
Ponazuril, a medication used to treat equine protozoal
myeloencephalitis, has recently gained popularity as an
off‐label treatment for canine and feline coccidiosis. The
mechanism of action is incompletely understood. A key
improvement over previous treatments is that ponazuril
is coccidiocidal rather than coccidiostatic, and fecal
flotation can be negative 1–2 days post treatment.
Amprolium, another coccidiostat, has also been used for
canine and feline coccidiosis. It is a competitive inhibitor
of thiamine and is most effective against the first‐generation schizont.
Prognosis
Prognosis following proper diagnosis and treatment of
canine and feline coccidiosis is good. Patients who

­Cryptosporidium spp.
Epidemiology/Pathophysiology
There are many species of Cryptosporidium that infect a
wide range of hosts, including dogs and cats. This genus
is considered by some parasitologists to be more closely
related to a group of the Apicomplexa known as the gregarines, which infect mostly invertebrates. Recently,
­gregarine‐like stages have been described in multiple
Cryptosporidium spp. This may lead to a reclassification
of this genus in the future, and could possibly explain
why most of the medications effective against coccidia
are ineffective against Cryptosporidium spp.
The major host of C. canis is the dog; for C. felis,
the major host is the cat. Unlike Cystoisospora spp.,
Cryptosporidium spp. are not host specific, although dog
and cat Cryptosporidium spp. tend to favor the major
host. This is an important distinction as other species,
such as C. parvum, can be zoonotic. The life cycle is similar to that of Cystoisospora. The oocyst that is infective
to the host contains four sporozoites that are not contained within sporocysts. The sporozoite will penetrate
the host epithelial cell where trophozoites undergo
schizogony to form merozoites. These merozoites will,
in turn, invade other epithelial cells and undergo another
round of schizogony. This is followed by the sexual
phase, or gametogony, where microgametocytes are produced, fuse, and form zygotes. Zygotes can ultimately
form either a thick‐walled oocyst that is infective (sporulated) when it leaves the host, or a thin‐walled oocyst
that remains within the host and leads to autoinfection.
Pathologic changes occur when epithelial cells are
damaged by emerging stages. Malabsorption ensues, and
diarrhea is the primary clinical presentation. The severity of the infection is limited by developing immunity.
Infection can be self‐limiting if a host has a competent
immune system. However, clinical disease may be prolonged in dogs and cats with a compromised immune
system.

1025

VetBooks.ir

1026

Section 9 Infectious Disease

Epidemiology
Transmission of Cryptosporidium spp. is fecal–oral.
Oocysts that are shed are immediately infective to the
next host. Oocysts are stable in the environment,
and high population densities as well as unsanitary
­conditions favor transmission. Young and immunocompromised animals are considered to be at greater risk.
The infective dose is low; very few oocysts are required
to produce an infection leading to clinical disease.
The distribution of Cryptosporidium spp. in dogs and
cats is worldwide. Prevalence of Cryptosporidium spp. in
dogs and cats varies, but has been estimated at 5%.

Intravenous fluid administration may be needed to treat
severe dehydration.
Published data regarding the treatment of cryptosporidiosis are lacking. Treatment protocols at this point
are anecdotal and treatment needs to be calibrated to
the needs and response of the individual patient.
Azithromycin (10 mg/kg PO, SID until resolution), nitazoxanide (25 mg/kg PO, BID for seven days), paromomycin (150 mg/kg PO, SID for at least five days), and tylosin
(10–15 mg/kg PO, BID‐TID for 14–21 days) have been
used. Paromomycin has the potential for nephrotoxicity
and should not be used in dehydrated patients.

Signalment

Prognosis

Most cases of cryptosporidiosis have been reported in
dogs and cats with a compromised immune system,
those co‐infected with other pathogens, or with preexisting conditions of the gastrointestinal tract (inflammatory bowel disease [IBD], lymphoma, feline leukemia
virus [FeLV], canine distemper). Gastrointestinal symptoms may be more common in cats than in dogs.

In an immunocompetent animal, infection with Crypto­
sporidium spp. usually resolves. Conversely, treatment of
immunocompromised animals can be very difficult, and
extended supportive measures may be necessary.

History and Clinical Signs
The majority of canine and feline patients with detectable Cryptosporidium spp. oocysts are asymptomatic.
When clinical disease is present, small bowel diarrhea,
anorexia, and weight loss are common. Water loss
secondary to malabsorption can lead to severe fluid
­
imbalance.
Diagnosis
A combination of a direct saline smear and fecal flotation
is preferred as the initial step, as oocyst excretion coincides with the onset of clinical signs. However, these
techniques have poor sensitivity due to the small size of
the oocyst. Fecal smears may be stained to enhance
detection. Direct fluorescent antibody, enzyme‐linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) are also available. These detection methods provide greater sensitivity than that observed with
other detection methods.
Therapy
Direct treatment of the organism is difficult and the
main goal of therapy is supportive. Initiation of highly
digestible diets, fiber, and probiotics may be of benefit.

Public Health Implications
Health professionals should be aware that there have
been cases of Cryptosporidium spp. transmission from
animals to people. In a majority of cases, the pathogen
was C. parvum and the source of infection was farm
animals. However, C. felis and C. canis have been
reported in the feces of some people. With no established treatment protocol for these cases, it is recommended that immunocompromised people avoid
contact with animal feces, in particular the feces of
strays and young pets (<6 months old) and utilize
proper handwashing techniques.

­Microspora
Microsporidia typically parasitize invertebrates, but
Encephalitozoon caniculi can occasionally cause disease in dogs and cats following exposure. The life cycle
is direct as environmentally resistant spores are passed
in the urine or feces of an infected host and are consumed by a susceptible host. After ingestion and host
cell penetration, organisms can be found in many cell
types, with kidney and brain being the major organs
affected. Transplacental transmission can occur, resulting in weakness, stunted growth, and later development
of CNS disease and renal failure. Diagnosis is by detection of stained urine sediment. Serologic testing is also
available.

VetBooks.ir

110 Coccidia

­Further Reading
Bybee S, Scorza A, Lappin M. Effect of probiotic
Enterococcus faecium SF68 on the presence of diarrhea
in cats and dogs housed in an animal shelter. J Vet Intern
Med 2011; 25: 856–60.
Gates M, Nolan T. Endoparasite prevalence and recurrence
across different age groups of dogs and cats.
Vet Parasitol 2009; 166: 153–8.

Little S, Johnson E, Lewis D, et al. Prevalence of intestinal
parasites in pet dogs in the United States. Vet Parasitol
2009; 166: 144–62.
Scorza V, Tangtrongsup S. Update on the diagnosis
and management of Cryptosporidium spp. infections
in dogs and cats. Top Compan Anim Med 2010;
25: 163–9.

1027

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1029

112
Surgical, Traumatic, and Bite Wound Infections
Laura L. Nelson, DVM, MS, DACVS
College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA

­Surgical and Traumatic Wound
Infections
Etiology/Pathophysiology
In its most basic form, a wound is a break in the protective barrier organ that is the skin. Wounds can be created
by almost anything, but are usefully described or defined
in ways that reflect their degree of bacterial contamination, cause (i.e., bite wound, surgical site infection), and
the depth or degree of tissue damage that accompanies
them (i.e., superficial vs deep).
All wounds, regardless of cause or conditions present at
their creation, can become infected. The likelihood of
wound infection is directly related to the number and pathogenicity of bacterial contamination of the wound and
inversely related to the overall health of the patient and the
wound environment. This relationship can be defined as:
Infection risk

# of bacteria virulence
Host resistance

A threshold number of 105 bacteria per gram of tissue
has often been quoted for the establishment of infection
in a wound. The relationship of contamination to infection is borne out by the significant relationship between
wound classification as clean, clean‐contaminated, contaminated, and dirty (a proxy for the level of bacterial
contamination in wounds) and infection risk in small
animals. This number, however, is not absolute, as a
wound may become infected after contamination with
fewer organisms if the host cannot respond appropriately to bacterial contamination (discussed later) or if the
bacteria in the wound possess specific virulence factors.
For example, Staphylococcus aureus bacteria that do not
express compounds anchored to their cell walls that

adhere to matrix molecules in the host tissue do not
cause invasive infection.
The health of the host and local wound environment
are also very important in determining resistance to
infection. Although a number of systemic conditions are
associated with risk of surgical infection in humans, few
of these risks have been investigated in veterinary
patients. However, it is likely that patients with significant co‐morbidities or extremes of age may be more susceptible. The use of perioperative antibiotics can be
viewed as a means of increasing host resistance to infection. Finally, intraoperative management of the patient,
including surgical time, surgical technique, use of surgical implants, anesthesia time, and maintenance of normothermia, plays a role in host resistance to infection.
Epidemiology
The bacterial flora of a wound is initially determined by
its location (i.e., perineal) and cause (i.e., bite wound),
but as time passes, opportunistic nosocomial pathogens
such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Enterococcus species become more prevalent. These bacteria often have
inherent (Enterococcus) and acquired resistance to multiple classes of commonly used antibiotics.
In acute, nonbite wounds, bacterial culture and sensitivity are unlikely to be helpful, as bacteria isolated will
reflect wound contamination that may or may not lead to
infection. In this circumstance, empiric, broad‐spectrum
antibiotic treatment based on common flora of the skin
is an appropriate first‐line therapy. This should take into
account the potential for bacterial resistance associated
with previous antimicrobial therapy, in which case culture may be warranted.
The presence of biofilms is increasingly recognized as a
factor in the pathogenesis of chronic wounds and surgical
site infections associated with foreign materials or implants.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1030

Section 9 Infectious Disease

Biofilms are multispecies aggregates of microbes that manufacture a protective carbohydrate matrix. Within this
matrix, they are shielded from their environment, including
the immune system and antibiotic therapy. Moreover, bacteria within biofilms assume a sessile rather than planktonic
state, which diminishes the likelihood that they will be
detected using conventional culture techniques.
Antimicrobial resistance is a growing problem in
­veterinary and human medicine and is seen in both
nosocomial and community‐acquired infections.
Mechanisms of antimicrobial drug resistance have been
well reviewed, and prevention and management of
resistant bacterial infections are discussed in Chapter 114.
Signalment
Any animal can develop a surgical site infection or sustain a traumatic wound that becomes infected.
History and Clinical Signs
Surgical site infection is more likely to occur after
contaminated surgeries or surgery on contaminated
­
areas (e.g., perineal region), surgeries that involve the
implantation of foreign material (orthopedic implants,
mesh, bone allografts), and those that involve prolonged
anesthesia time. However, any patient undergoing surgery is at risk of surgical site infection. Traumatic wounds
that involve significant tissue trauma, that do not receive

appropriate early treatment, that are penetrating in
nature, or that leave embedded foreign material behind
(e.g., pieces of bark) are more likely than superficial lacerations to become infected.
Wound infection is suspected based on the presence of
redness, pain, exudate, or swelling of the wound area. In
some cases, wound infection is characterized by an
apparent delay or interruption of normal healing. Wound
infections from surgical or traumatic causes can also be
systemically apparent, causing fever, pain, tachycardia,
and other signs associated with bacteremia or systemic
inflammatory response. Sometimes systemic signs are
more prominent than the superficial appearance of the
inciting wound, highlighting the need for exploration
and debridement of wounds.
Although it seems that wound infection should occur
shortly following creation of the wound, it may take days
or weeks (even months, in the case of wounds in which
implants are placed) before signs of infection become
evident. In addition, wound and surgical site infections
can occur at various tissue levels, ranging from superficial or incisional infection to deeper or cavitary infection.
The depth of infection can play a role in determining the
most appropriate course of treatment.
Diagnosis
Box 112.1 defines criteria used in the diagnosis of surgical site infections. Though this scheme was designed to

Box 112.1 Criteria for surgical site infection (SSI) definition
Superficial incisional SSI

Deep incisional SSI

Infection occurs within 30 days after operation
and
infection involves only skin or subcutaneous tissue of the
incision
and at least one of the following.

Infection occurs within 30 days after operation if no implant
is left in place or within one year if implant is left in place
and infection appears to be related to the operation
and
infection involves deep soft tissues (e.g., fascial and muscle
layers) of the incision
and at least one of the following.

1) Purulent drainage, with or without laboratory conformation, from the superficial incision
2) Organisms isolated from an aseptically obtained culture
of fluid or tissue from the superficial incision
3) At least one of the following signs or symptoms of infection: pain or tenderness, localized swelling, redness, or
heat and superficial incision is deliberately opened by
surgeon, unless incision is culture negative
4) Diagnosis of superficial incisional SSI by the surgeon or
attending clinician
Suture abscess (minimal inflammation and discharge ­confined
to points of suture penetration) is not considered a SSI.

1) Purulent drainage from the deep incision but not from
the organ/space component of the surgical site
2) A deep incision spontaneously dehisces or is deliberately
left open by a surgeon when the patient has at least one
of the following signs or symptoms: fever, localized pain,
or tenderness, unless site is culture negative
3) An abscess or other evidence of infection involving the deep
incision is found on direct examination, during reoperation,
or by histopathologic or radiographic examination
4) Diagnosis of a deep incisional SSI by a surgeon or
attending clinician

VetBooks.ir

112 Surgical, Traumatic, and Bite Wound Infections

Infections that involve both superficial and deep incision
sites and organ/space SSI that drain through the incision
are reported as deep incisional SSI.
Organ/space SSI
Infection occurs within 30 days after the operation if no implant
is left in place or within one year if implant is left in place and the
infection appears to be related to the operation
and
infection involves any part of the anatomy (e.g., organs or
spaces), other than the incision, which was opened or
manipulated during an operation

assist the diagnosis of surgical site infection, it is applicable
to the diagnosis of any wound infection.
When an infection is present, clinical signs, particularly pain, lethargy, local swelling, drainage (ranging
from serous to purulent to sanguineous in gross appearance), are generally present. Draining tracts can occur in
cases of deep traumatic or surgical site infection, particularly if devitalized tissue (e.g., bone sequestrum) or
foreign material (e.g., plant material, retained gauze
sponge, surgical implant) are present. Draining tracts
may occur relatively distant to the inciting foreign material, depending on tissue planes.
A patient suspected of having an infected wound
should be thoroughly evaluated with a physical examination and by imaging appropriate to the area of interest if
the wound is believed to involve tissue deeper than the
skin and subcutis. Patients with traumatic wounds to the
trunk should be evaluated with thoracic and abdominal
radiographs to evaluate for pneumothorax or pneumoperitoneum, and abdominal or thoracic effusion.
Though many patients with chronic or superficial
infections are relatively unaffected, those with significant or deep injuries, uncontrolled infections, continued
bacterial contamination, devitalized tissue, and/or
abscess formation can show significant systemic illness.
Evaluation of these patients should include, in addition
to those diagnostics listed earlier, evaluation of a complete blood count, biochemical profile, and urinalysis.
Blood and urine cultures may be submitted. Exploration
and debridement of infected areas should be performed
shortly after initial treatment for sepsis and shock
(described elsewhere in this text).
Therapy
Superficial infections that involve only cellulitis without
evidence of deeper extension or abscess formation may
be managed with oral antibiotic therapy alone. However,

and at least one of the following.
1) Purulent drainage from a drain that is placed through a
stab wound into the organ/space
2) Organisms isolated from an aseptically obtained c­ ulture
of fluid or tissue in the organ/space
3) An abscess or other evidence of infection involving the
organ/space that is found on direct examination,
­during reoperation, or by histopathologic or radiologic
examination
4) Diagnosis of an organ/space SSI by a surgeon or attending
clinician
Source: Modified from Horan et al. (1992).

antibiotic therapy is not a replacement for exploration
and debridement.
Wound management commences after managing
more life‐threatening concerns, critical diagnostics, and
instituting necessary fluid replacement, analgesia, and
supportive care. To prevent cross‐contamination of the
wound and hospital environment, the wound should be
covered with a clean dressing and personnel handling
the patient and/or wound should wear examination
gloves at all times.
Wound Preparation

Under appropriate general anesthesia or heavy sedation,
the wounds are packed with damp gauze or clean water‐
soluble lubricant to prevent further contamination. Hair
is clipped widely around the wound area. The most obvious wound openings may represent the “tip of the iceberg,”
particularly when dealing with deep surgical site infections
or bite wounds, so skin must be prepared to allow for
extensive exploration and, if indicated, drain placement.
Following hair removal, the wound and surrounding
­tissues are cleaned with an appropriate antiseptic detergent, such as chlorhexidine gluconate.
Exploration and Initial Debridement

The wound should be opened to its full extent to allow
for complete exploration. Probing a smaller wound is not
sufficient to determine its extent or level of contamination. The wound should be thoroughly assessed for
involvement of deeper tissues or cavities (i.e., extension
into the abdomen or thorax), necrotic or devitalized
­tissue, and foreign material. Necrotic, extensively contaminated, or devitalized tissue is judiciously removed
using sharp dissection. Because many infected wounds
are left open during initial treatment, serial debridement
over several days is appropriate for important tissues of
uncertain viability, which in some cases can partially or
completely recover.

1031

VetBooks.ir

1032

Section 9 Infectious Disease

Lavage

Normal saline, a buffered isotonic fluid (i.e., lactated
Ringer’s solution [LRS]), or, in the case of significantly contaminated or large wounds, clean tap water can be used to
copiously lavage the area. Though the hypotonicity of tap
water is theoretically cytotoxic to cells in the wound, the
clinical effect of this is not significant and may be outweighed by the practical utility of using a large sprayer or
shower head to remove gross debris from a large wound
area. The use of tap water lavage has not been shown to
increase wound infection rates compared to saline in several human studies. Some authors promote intermediate
pressure irrigation of 5–8 pounds per square inch, which
can be generated by lavaging wounds using a 35 mL syringe
and 18 gauge needle or catheter. Commercially available
wound lavage units or a sink sprayer (tap water) may also
be used. Warmed fluids should be considered to limit
hypothermia, particularly in smaller patients, more extensive wounds, or wounds on the trunk.
Bandaging

Infected wounds are best managed as open wounds until
healthy, at which time closure or reconstruction may be
considered. When wounds communicate with a body
cavity, the cavity should be evaluated, lavaged with warm,
sterile isotonic solution, and drainage established
through the use of a thoracostomy tube or closed‐suction abdominal drain. A basic bandage includes the following components.
Contact layer: directly interacts with the wound surface. A number of wound dressings are available and
have been extensively reviewed elsewhere. This layer
should ideally provide a protected, moist wound environment without macerating the tissue surrounding
the wound. Some contact layers have antimicrobial
properties or can be used with topical ointments that
may provide a useful complement to systemic antibiotic therapy.
●● Secondary layer: provides protection of wound and
absorption of wound drainage.
●● Protective layer: protects the bandage from dislodgment and environmental contamination.
●●

Bandages should be changed as needed. During the first
1–2 days of wound evaluation (when further sharp
debridement may be needed) or with more traditional
dressings such as wet‐to‐dry, the bandage should be
changed every 12–24 hours. Bandages should be changed
when wound fluid reaches the protective layer of the
bandage (also referred to as strikethrough). Some contact dressings such as alginates are intended to be left in
place for 3–5 days.
Negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT) has been
recently described as an alternative to conventional

wound management. A number of NPWT devices are on
the market, with increasing expansion into the veterinary field. NPWT can facilitate the development of a
healthy granulation tissue bed following initial wound
debridement without the need for frequent dressing
changes.
Wound Closure

Wound closure is often possible in small animals due to
the elasticity and quantity of truncal skin and availability
of versatile axial pattern and other skin flaps. Wound
closure or reconstruction of an infected wound should
not be attempted until the wound is free of debris and
necrotic tissue, a healthy wound bed is established,
appropriate antimicrobial therapy has been started, the
periwound tissues are healthy (not erythematous, macerated, or edematous), and the patient in good health.
Many wounds, particularly those on extremities, are difficult to reconstruct or close and may be managed until
contraction and epithelialization complete the healing
process (second intention healing). Wounds in the perineal region are often best left to heal by second intention because of the difficulty of maintaining bandages in
the area. In these cases, owners can be instructed to lavage the wound once or twice daily with tap water with a
conventional shower head and apply an antimicrobial
cream such as silver sulfadiazine to the area. An e‐collar
is provided to prevent self‐trauma.
Prognosis
The prognosis for wound infections is variable depending on the source, location, and extent of infection (local
vs systemic, deep vs superficial). Wound infections are
often not amenable to a “quick fix.” Owners should be
counseled that management of an infected surgical or
traumatic wound will likely require serial anesthesia and
surgery to debride and potentially to later close the
wound. Owners will need to accept that plans to reconstruct or close the wound may be delayed based on the
appearance of the wound, and that multiple bandage
changes or home wound management may be necessary.
In some cases, the consequences of wound infection can
negate the benefit associated with a surgery, such as for a
total joint replacement. Fortunately, most appropriately
managed wound infections can be satisfactorily managed, with patients returning to excellent health and
quality of life.
Public Health Implications
Surgical wound infections with antibiotic‐resistant
bacteria are of significant human and animal health
concern.

VetBooks.ir

112 Surgical, Traumatic, and Bite Wound Infections

­Bite Wounds
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Although dog and cat bite wounds are managed similarly
to other infected or traumatic wounds (see earlier), the
frequency and potential severity of bite wounds seen in
small animal practice merit particular discussion.
Dogs can bite with significant force, and the orientation of their teeth results in puncture wounds from the
canine and crushing or lacerating wounds from the
incisor and molar/premolar teeth. Dogs also pull and
shake victims following bites, resulting in avulsion of
cutaneous vasculature and subcutaneous tissue. Dog
bite wounds can be relatively minor lacerations and
puncture wounds, or can be associated with extensive,
life‐threatening injury. Particularly severe are “big dog/
little dog” injuries to small dogs or cats in which the
victim is lifted and shaken by the aggressor. Although
the limbs, head, and neck are common sites, injuries to
the thorax and abdomen are relatively common in
small‐breed dogs. Dog bite wounds can be superficially
dramatic, but often the skin wounds are the “tip of the
iceberg,” with extensive damage and contamination of
underlying tissues lying deep to several small puncture
wounds.
Due to the presence of contamination and the potential for serious tissue injury, dog bite wounds can lead to
the systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS)
and septicemia. Without appropriate therapy, patients
that survive the initial attack can die of these sequelae. It
is important to recognize that a patient that seems relatively stable on initial presentation following a dog attack
can rapidly progress to SIRS and septicemia.
Epidemiology
All bite wounds are considered to be contaminated due
to the inoculation of the wound with the oral flora of the
biter, the skin flora of the victim, and the bacteria or
fungi in the environment. The common flora of the
canine and feline oral cavity has been reviewed elsewhere, with Pasteurella multocida commonly cultured
from both species.
Cat bite wounds are more likely to become infected
due to the inoculation of oropharyngeal bacteria into
deeper tissues. Cat–cat bite wounds are often not diagnosed until an abscess and associated clinical signs
develop.
It is important to consider that organisms that cause
hematologic disease such as hemotropic mycoplasmas
and Babesia gibsoni are likely transmitted by bite
wounds and follow‐up testing may be warranted in
some patients.

Signalment
Though any dog or cat can sustain a bite wound, smaller
(≤10 kg) male dogs are overrepresented. Studies have
identified higher percentages of certain breeds within
this number, including Jack Russell terriers, dachshunds,
pinschers, Yorkshire terriers, and Maltese dogs.
History and Clinical Signs
Dogs suspected or known to have been in a dog fight,
particularly if multiple dogs were involved or if a size
­disparity was present, should be encouraged to undergo
prompt evaluation by a veterinarian.
Diagnosis
The patient should be thoroughly examined, with prompt
initial attention paid to cardiovascular and respiratory
systems. The clinician should be ready to establish intravenous access and provide respiratory support if
necessary through supplemental oxygen, intubation, tracheostomy, or thoracocentesis if indicated. A complete
neurologic examination should be performed, particularly
if wounds affect the head, neck, back, or extremity.
Following initial assessment and stabilization, radiographs
of the thorax and abdomen with or without focused
assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST) scan for
pleural and peritoneal fluid are warranted for wounds
over the trunk. However, the absence of apparent free air
or other abnormalities on radiographs does not guarantee that damage to the thoracic or abdominal body wall
is not present.
Acute bite wounds are not infected, so wound cultures
are often not helpful. More chronic wounds should be
sampled for aerobic and anaerobic bacterial cultures.
Therapy
Initial stabilization will depend on the condition of the
patient and will not be discussed in detail here, but
should include the prompt administration of antibiotics.
Intravenous administration of a broad‐spectrum antibiotic or combination of antibiotics with good activity
against skin and oropharygeal flora is warranted. As with
infected surgical or traumatic wounds, it is wise to cover
the open wound with a clean dressing and to wear gloves
during initial assessment to prevent cross‐contamination
of the wound and hospital environment during assessment and stabilization.
As for infected surgical and traumatic wounds, surgical
debridement and the establishment of drainage are
important tenets in the successful management of dog
bite wounds. The patient is carefully evaluated and the
hair liberally clipped in wounded areas. In patients with

1033

VetBooks.ir

1034

Section 9 Infectious Disease

thick hair coats, it may not be possible to evaluate for
smaller puncture wounds without removing hair along
the majority of the neck and trunk. The presence of multiple bites is common and, as mentioned earlier, small
puncture wounds can be the only external indication of
significant damage to deeper tissues.
After stabilization and anesthesia, the skin is prepared
as noted in the general section discussing management
of infected wounds. After skin preparation and draping,
the wounds should be opened and aseptically explored to
determine the extent of tissue damage. Simply probing
the cutaneous defects is insufficient for bite wounds.
Once each wound area is explored, and debris and devitalized tissue removed, the wound is lavaged with isotonic fluid such as normal saline or LRS. Once opened,
wounds can be left open and bandaged or, if minimally
extensive, closed with appropriate placement of a drain.
The reader is referred to surgical texts for a more detailed
description of drain placement.
If there is any doubt about the state of the wound, if the
wound is already infected, or if it is particularly severe,

the author’s preference is to leave wounds open and
bandage them for several days. Delayed primary closure
or tertiary closure may be pursued when the patient is
stable, the wound bed is healthy, and the clinician is sure
that no further tissue necrosis will occur.
Prognosis
As for infected traumatic and surgical wounds, the prognosis
associated with bite wounds varies with the severity and
location of the wound and the general health status of
the patient.
Public Health Implications
In a dog or cat that has been or may have been bitten by a
wild animal, potential rabies exposure protocols ­consistent
with state regulations should be followed. All draining
wounds in cats in particular should be handled with
appropriate precautions due to the potential for sporotrichosis and other zoonotic diseases such as tularemia.

­Further Reading
Cheadle WG. Risk factors for surgical site infection. Surg
Infect 2006; 7(Suppl 1): S7–11.
Fry DE. The continued challenge of Staphylococcus aureus
in the surgical patient. Am Surg 2013; 79(1): 1–10.
Horan TC, Gaynes RP, Martone WJ, Jarvis WR, Emori TG.
CDC definitions of nosocomial surgical site infections,
1992: a modification of CDC definitions of surgical wound
infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1992; 13: 606–8.

Nelson LL. Surgical site infections in small animal s­ urgery.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2011; 41(5):
1041–56.
Shamir MH, Leisner S, Klement E, et al. Dog bite wounds
in dogs and cats: a retrospective study of 196 cases. J Vet
Med A 2002; 49(2): 107–12.
Tobias KM, Johnston SA, eds. Veterinary Surgery: Small
Animal. St Louis, MO: Saunders, 2012.

VetBooks.ir

1035

113
Canine Infectious Respiratory Disease Complex
Jonathan Dear, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA, USA

Canine infectious respiratory disease complex is a
­multifaceted disease of immunologically naive, immunocompromised, and otherwise healthy dogs. Formerly
known as kennel cough or infectious tracheobronchitis,
studies show that the syndrome is far more ­complex than
previously imagined, with a multitude of contributory
pathogens and risk factors as well as ­variable outcomes.

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Canine infectious respiratory disease (CIRD) is a complex rather than a single disease in which various pathogens, including viruses, bacteria and mycoplasma, co‐infect
naive, immunocompromised or previously vaccinated
dogs. CIRD usually presents in an acute, self‐resolving
(uncomplicated) form characterized by a dry, hacking
cough with retching and gagging; the syndrome is
­generally initiated by viral pathogens. Occasionally, in
immunocompromised or immunologically naive animals, the pathologic changes induced by viral disease
predispose dogs to subsequent infection with opportunistic bacteria and Mycoplasma, thereby resulting in more
severe (complicated) upper respiratory signs, bronchopneumonia, and death. Susceptibility to the complex is
multifactorial and stems from both host and environmental factors. Many pathogens implicated in this
­complex are ubiquitous, being particularly prevalent in
overcrowded housing facilities such as animal shelters,
training and boarding facilities. The individual’s stress
induced by the new environment and exposures to novel
pathogens both likely play a role in the development of
clinical signs and disease.
Generally, respiratory signs are present for days to weeks
and most animals show mild to moderate clinical signs. In
most cases, viruses cause initial infection and result in
clinical signs within 3–5 days of infection. Viruses that

have been identified include canine i­nfluenza virus (CIV),
canine respiratory coronavirus (CRCoV), canine parainfluenza virus (CPiV), canine adenovirus‐2 (CAV‐2),
canine herpes virus (CHV), and rarely canine distemper
virus (CDV). Research suggests that novel viral pathogens
(canine reovirus, canine bocavirus, canine pneumovirus,
and canine hepacivrus) may also contribute to the disease,
but reports remain preliminary.
The tropism of viral agents associated with CIRD varies
but mostly includes lymphoid and epithelial tissues
throughout the upper and lower respiratory tracts,
though notable exceptions are CHV and CDV with
­pronounced tropism towards monocytic cells. In more
severe cases, viral infections cause either a bronchopneumonia or bronchointerstitial pneumonia due to their propensity to infect and damage type I pneumocytes. As the
condition progresses, desquamation of the respiratory
epithelium and aggregation of inflammatory cells further
reduce the lungs’ natural defenses, increasing the potential for secondary bacterial colonization and infection.
Notably, CRCoV leads to loss of cilia from respiratory epithelium, thereby increasing the severity and duration of
clinical signs associated with secondary infections.
While many animals develop only mild, self‐limiting
disease induced by viral infection, some animals go on to
develop progressive clinical signs subsequent to secondary bacterial colonization. Bacteria and Mycoplasma
which have been implicated in the development of
CIRD include Bordetella bronchiseptica, Streptococcus
canis, Streptococcus equi subsp. zooepidemicus, and
Mycoplasma cynos.
Bordetella bronchiseptica, once presumed to be the sole
player in the development of canine infectious upper airway disease, remains one of the most common pathogens
detected and possesses unique mechanisms to evade host
immune responses and allow for primary bacterial infection of the airways. Primarily, B. bronchiseptica expresses

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1036

Section 9 Infectious Disease

adhesins along the cell membrane, which facilitate colonization of the ciliated respiratory epithelium. Following
adherence, the bacteria release exotoxins that reduce the
body’s ability to clear the d
­ isease and increase its susceptibility to other organisms. S. equi subsp. zooepidemicus
infections, in particular, have been associated with a rapidly progressive and often fatal hemorrhagic pneumonia.
Mycoplasmas have long been suspected to be part of the
commensal flora of both upper and lower respiratory
tracts, though M. cynos has been found to be present in
significantly greater numbers of affected animals with
moderate disease.

­Epidemiology
Most of the organisms involved with CIRD are primary
pathogens of the respiratory epithelium and thus require
aerosol exposure or contact with fomites to facilitate
infection. Following exposure, clinical signs generally
develop within 3–5 days and the animal may shed virus for
up to 8–10 days, though influenza virus can be shed for up
to several weeks following infection. The course of disease
associated with S. equi subsp. zooepidemicus seems to be
much more rapid, with several case series reporting death
within two days of exposure, sometimes without clinical
evidence of respiratory disease. Animals in intensive housing with close exposure to other animals are at increased
risk for development of clinical signs. Furthermore, prolonged housing in shelters or kennels increases the risk of
developing disease and seroconverting.

­Signalment
Canine infectious respiratory disease has a propensity
for young, immunologically naive animals and immunocompromised patients. No sex or breed predilections
have been identified. The greatest known risk factors
stem from immune status and environmental history
(see later).

­History and Clinical Signs
Canine infectious respiratory disease usually presents as
a dry, hacking cough often followed by a terminal retch.
In particular, paroxysms of cough may be elicited by
­gentle tracheal palpation. In most cases, the infection is
isolated to the upper respiratory tract so most affected
dogs lack systemic signs, though mild lethargy and exercise intolerance are sometimes reported.
A history of recent exposure to other animals or housing facilities increases the suspicion of this disease.

Animal shelters and rehoming kennels may provide the
first exposure to immunologically naive animals, causing
outbreak of clinical disease. Intuitively, greater length of
exposure increases the risk of developing clinical signs.
Additionally, the environmental stresses (i.e., crowded
housing and poor nutrition) placed upon the animals may
contribute to increased morbidity in these populations.
Most organisms associated with CIRD are found
throughout the United States, though CIV seems to have
a particularly higher seroprevalence in racing greyhounds and dogs from Florida (H3N8) and the Midwest
(H3N2). Certain organisms like CHV are more prone to
develop into clinical respiratory disease in patients
undergoing immunosuppressive therapy.

­Diagnosis
In an ideal world, diagnosis of the diseases associated
with CIRD would precede therapy and help guide the use
of (or withholding of ) antimicrobials. However, even with
the best intentions, identification of many of these organisms can be difficult. Furthermore, as many cases of CIRD
are mild and self‐resolving, diagnosis is often made based
on clinical suspicion, taking into consideration the dog’s
age, environmental history, health, and vaccine status.
In most cases of uncomplicated disease, the physical
exam is unremarkable with the exception of an inducible
cough. Thoracic auscultation and radiography are generally unrewarding in milder cases. With progressive disease, nonspecific signs of systemic health and respiratory
disease may be noted, including oculonasal discharge,
pyrexia, adventitious lung sounds, and other indicators
of malaise. Ideally, in more severe cases, fluid from a
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) should be collected using
sterile technique and submitted for cytologic analysis,
bacterial culture (aerobic and Mycoplasma +/‐ anaerobic) and saved for potential molecular techniques (real‐
time polymerase chain reaction [PCR]) to detect viral
organisms. Recently, the development of PCR panels run
on nasal or oropharyngeal swabs has introduced a novel
approach to the diagnosis of these diseases. Unfortunately,
no published reports validate the sensitivity and specificity of these panels and false positives (due to contamination and/or vaccination) can occur along with false
negatives (due to low virus shedding).

­Therapy and Prevention
Most cases of CIRD in the otherwise healthy individual
are self‐limiting and respond well to basic supportive
care. Strict environmental containment should be
employed to prevent horizontal transmission. Affected

VetBooks.ir

113 Canine Infectious Respiratory Disease Complex

animals should be quarantined beyond complete resolution of clinical signs. Within the veterinary hospital,
personal protective equipment (gowns, gloves, shoe
covers, and masks) should be used, with care taken to
disinfect potential fomites (scales, medical equipment,
bowls, and cages). Bactericidal and virucidal disinfectant solutions with rapid action should be used consistently to limit the spread of disease since the pathogens
involved with this complex can remain in the environment for weeks to months.
Antimicrobial therapy, when indicated, should be
directed by culture of BAL or tracheal wash fluid. In the
absence of microbiology results, empiric therapy may
be directed to those bacterial pathogens suspected.
Tetracycline antibiotics (such as doxycycline 5 mg/kg PO
BID for 14–28 days) achieve excellent tissue penetration and are a good choice for B. bronchiseptica and
Mycoplasma infections, but some strains of S. equi subsp.
zooepidemicus have proven antimicrobial resistance to
this class of drugs. Alternatives include macrolide antibiotics (azithromycin), potentiated penicillins (amoxicillin/clavulanic acid) or fluoroquinolones (enrofloxacin).
Given the potential for disease in young animals, the
­clinician should consider potential adverse effects of the
use of these drugs, including enamel discoloration with
tetracyline (less severe with doxycyline) and cartilage
development abnormalities with fluoroquinolones.
When bronchopneumonia is suspected, routine supportive care including intravenous fluid administration,
saline nebulization, and coupage is useful to help expectorate airway secretions.
In refractory cases involving paroxysms of cough and
retching, antitussive medications like hydrocodone/
homatropine (Hycodan®) or butorphanol (Torbugesic®)
can help to relieve clinical signs, though these drugs
should not be used in cases of suspected bronchopneumonia as they prevent expectoration of respiratory
secretions. The use of antiinflammatory doses of corticosteroids remains controversial.
The most effective strategy for prevention employs
strategic immunization and environmental controls to
prevent exposure and limit passage of disease. Most
owned dogs are immunized (parenterally) against CDV
and CAV‐2 as part of their core vaccines. Parenteral
CAV‐2 vaccination is considered a core vaccine due
to its ability to cross‐protect against CAV‐1, but the
intranasal vaccine does not provide this protection
and is considered noncore but recommended for
dogs likely to encounter the virus. Though considered
to be noncore, routine vaccination for CPiV and B.
bronchiseptica is recommended for animals likely to
enter facilities where the diseases may be encountered
(boarding and grooming facilities, training kennels). A
vaccine for CIV (Nobivac® bivalent canine flu H3N8/

H3N2) has been licensed in the US and shown to reduce
clinical signs and virus shedding, though is still considered noncore. There are no licensed vaccines for CHV,
CRCoV, and S. equi subsp. zooepidemicus at the present
time. The reader is advised to consult the most recent
AAHA Canine Vaccination Guidelines (2017 at time of
publication) for more information regarding vaccine
recommendations.

­Prognosis
Overall prognosis for otherwise healthy dogs with
uncomplicated CIRD is generally good, with most dogs
recovering within 7–10 days after receiving only basic
supportive care. Dogs with complicated infections (such
as with S. equi subsp. zooepidemicus and M. cynos) have
a more guarded prognosis. S. equi subsp. zooepidemicus
progresses rapidly following the development of clinical
signs and can lead to death due to sepsis, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and multiple organ dysfunction.
Disease of the lower respiratory tract in conjunction
with M. cynos infections seems to yield moderate clinical
signs early following exposure, though these seem to
lessen within 2–3 weeks.

­Public Health Implications
Most pathogens involved in CIRD do not appear to present zoonotic risk, though there remains a possibility of
human infection with these diseases. Several reports
suggest that both healthy and immunocompromised
individuals may be susceptible to B. bronchiseptica following administration of modified‐live vaccines to companion animals. Given this potential, care should be used
when administering all aerosol (intranasal) vaccines;
only trained healthcare providers should administer and
restrain the animal during this procedure. There have
been no confirmed cases of zoonotic transmission of
B. bronchiseptica from canine to human.
Likewise, though canine respiratory coronavirus has
yet to be implicated in the development of respiratory
disease in humans, these viruses as a family are known to
jump species lines and may have the potential for zoonotic
transmission. A notable example is the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), beginning in Asia in 2002
(caused by the SARS‐CoV), which is thought to have
spread to human patients through wild captive mammals. Further coronavirus outbreaks in the Middle East
and Western Europe (2012) continue to demonstrate the
infectious and adaptive nature of these viruses that likely
originated from animal reservoirs.

1037

VetBooks.ir

1038

Section 9 Infectious Disease

Finally, there appears to be some zoonotic risk of transmission of S. equi subsp. zooepidemicus from canine
patients to both healthy and immunocompromised
human handlers. Most reported cases of infection in
humans develop subsequent to ingestion of contaminated milk and dairy products or contact with infected
equine patients. Concurrently, contact with respiratory
secretions – either aerosolized or in contact with mucous
membranes – appears to be capable of infection causing
acute nephritis, meningitis, pneumonia, and death.

­Conclusion
Canine infectious respiratory disease is an evolving and
multifaceted condition with many implicated pathogens
and varied outcomes. Simple cases often respond to
nonspecific supportive care while more severe cases may
prove lethal even with the most advanced therapy.
Prevention, through appropriate sanitation, husbandry
and vaccination, remains the most effective way to limit
disease transmission and morbidity. The zoonotic implications of many of the organisms associated with the
complex deserve further study.

­Further Reading
Chalker VJ, Brooks HW, Brownlie J. The association of
Streptococcus equi subsp. zooepidemicus with canine
infectious respiratory disease. Vet Microbiol 2003;
95(1–2): 149–56.
Chalker VJ, Owen WM, Paterson C, et al. Mycoplasmas
associated with canine infectious respiratory disease.
Microbiology 2004; 150(Pt 10): 3491–7.
Pesavento PA, Hurley KF, Bannasch MJ, Artiushin S,
Timoney JF. A clonal outbreak of acute fatal

hemorrhagic pneumonia in intensively housed
(shelter) dogs caused by Streptococcus equi subsp.
zooepidemicus. Vet Pathol 2008; 45(1): 51–3.
Priestnall S, Erles K. Streptococcus zooepidemicus: an
emerging canine pathogen. Vet J 2011; 188(2): 142–8.
Radhakrishnan A, Drobatz KJ, Culp WTN, King LG.
Community‐acquired infectious pneumonia in puppies:
65 cases (1993–2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007;
230(10): 1493–7.

VetBooks.ir

1039

Part 3

Therapeutic Considerations

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1041

114
Antimicrobial Therapy in Dogs and Cats
Katrina R. Viviano, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM), DACVCP
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin, Madision, WI, USA

To optimize antimicrobial therapy, clinicians should
have a working knowledge of available antimicrobials
and their spectrum of activity. Of equal importance is an
understanding of clinically important side‐effects, drug–
drug interactions, and knowledge of circumstances in
which certain antimicrobials should be avoided, or dosage adjustments should be considered to minimize
potential adverse effects. This chapter will summarize
these important considerations for commonly used antimicrobials in small animal medicine. The common
classes of antimicrobials used and the clinically important antimicrobial side‐effects/drug–drug interactions
in dogs and cats are summarized in Tables 114.1 and
114.2, respectively.

­Common Classes of Antimicrobials
Aminoglycosides (AG)
The AG spectrum of activity is primarily limited to gram‐
negative aerobes, including Pseudomonas ­aeruginosa. In
vivo, AGs are considered synergistic with beta‐lactams.
AGs penetrate the bacterial cell envelope in part through
an oxygen‐dependent active transport mechanism as well
as passive diffusion. By co‐administering AGs with penicillins, the penicillins interfere with bacterial cell wall
synthesis, enhancing the penetration of AGs into the
bacterial cell envelope.
The dose‐dependent nephrotoxicity of the AGs limits
their clinical use. AGs bind the brush border of the proximal renal tubular cells and accumulate in lysosomes
through active reabsorption. Through the inhibition of
lysosomal phospholipase, phospholipid metabolism is
inhibited, resulting in renal tubular cell death. Risk f­ actors
for nephrotoxicity include high dosages, multi-dose
­protocols, long duration of treatment, pre-existing renal

dysfunction, dehydration, concurrent use with other
­
nephrotoxic drugs or diuretics, and young or old age.
The active tubular reabsorption of AGs is a saturable
process with an increase in nephrotoxicity when lower,
more frequent dosing protocols are used. Despite AGs
having a short elimination half‐life, they demonstrate a
post-antibiotic effect and concentration‐dependent bacterial killing. Nephrotoxicity correlates with drug trough
concentrations and is not observed following a high single dose; but is cumulative and occurs in association with
multidose protocols, within 5–7 days after initiating
therapy. Once‐daily dosing is recommended to minimize
nephrotoxicity while maintaining efficacy.
Aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity is reversible if recognized early so close monitoring is recommended. AGs
should be avoided in patients with underlying kidney
disease. If an alternative antimicrobial with an appropriate spectrum of activity is not available, dose reduction is
recommended in azotemic patients. To help prevent
nephrotoxicity, all patients should be well hydrated
before and during the course of therapy. As mentioned
above, once‐daily dosing is recommended, and when
possible the duration of therapy should be limited to
5–7 days. To detect proximal renal tubular damage, urine
should be examined prior to and daily during therapy for
the presence of granular casts, proteinuria, and glucosuria. Serum BUN and creatinine levels should also be
monitored. Therapy should be discontinued if markers
of nephrotoxicity develop.
Aminoglycosides also accumulate in the inner ear, leading to dose‐dependent ototoxicity. Auditory toxicity is
more common with amikacin, while vestibular toxicity is
more common with gentamicin, especially in cats. Also,
the use of AG is contraindicated in patients with disease
of the neuromuscular junction (e.g., myasthenia gravis)
due to inhibition of acetylcholine release and decreased
receptor sensitivity leading to neuromuscular blockade.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1042

Section 9 Infectious Disease

Table 114.1 Classes of antimicrobials used in small animal veterinary medicine including mechanism of action, spectrum of activity,
and common drugs of each class
Drug class

Mechanism of action

Spectrum of activity

Examples*

Aminoglycosides
(AG)

Alter protein
synthesis – irreversibly bind the
30S ribosome
Synergistic with beta‐lactams

Gram‐negative aerobes (including
Pseudomonas)

Gentamicin
Amikacin
Neomycin

Amphenicols

Inhibit protein
synthesis – reversibly bind the 50S
ribosome subunit

Gram‐positive aerobes
Gram‐negative aerobes
Anaerobes
Rickettsia rickettsii
Mycoplasma spp.
Chlamydia spp.

Chloramphenicol

Beta‐lactams
Penicillins

Cell wall synthesis inhibitor via
binding to penicillin binding
protein (PBP)
Synergistic with AG

Gram‐positive aerobes (including
Enterococcus)
Anaerobes
Spirochetes
●● Leptospira spp.
●● Borrelia spp.

Penicillin G
Ampicillin/amoxicillin
Amoxicillin/clavulanate
Ampicillin/sulbactam
Ticarcillin
Methacillin/oxacillin

Beta‐lactams
●● Cephalosporins

Cell wall synthesis inhibitor via
binding to PBP

First generation
●● Gram‐positive aerobes
●● Gram‐negative aerobes (some)
●● Anaerobes (some)

First generation
●● Cephalothin
●● Cefazolin
●● Cephalexin
●● Cephadroxil
Second generation
●● Cefoxitin
●● Cefotetan

●●

Second generation
Gram‐negative aerobes
●● Gram‐positive aerobes
●● Anaerobes (Bacteroides)
Third generation
●● Gram‐negative aerobes
●● Pseudomonas spp. (ceftazidime)
●● Gram‐positive aerobes
●●

Borrelia
Fourth generation
Gram‐negative aerobes
●● Gram‐positive aerobes
Extended spectrum
●● Gram‐positive aerobes
●● Gram‐negative aerobes (some)
●● Anaerobes
●●

Third generation
Ceftiofur
●● Ceftazidime
●● Cefotaxime
●● Ceftriaxone
●● Cefpodoxime proxetil
●●

Fourth generation
Cefepime

●●

Extended spectrum
Cefovecin

●●

Beta‐lactams
●● Carbapenems

Cell wall synthesis inhibitor via
binding the PBP

Gram‐positive aerobes
Gram‐negative aerobes (including
Pseudomonas spp.)
Anaerobes

Imipenem
Meropenem

Fluoroquinolones

Inhibit DNA gyrase
(topoisomerase II) – target in
gram‐negative bacteria
Inhibit topoisomerase IV – target
in gram‐positive bacteria

Gram‐negative aerobes
●● Many including Brucella
Gram‐positive aerobes (limited)
●● Mycoplasma
●● Chlamydia
●● Mycobacteria
●● Rickettsia rickettsii

Enrofloxacin
Ciprofloxacin
Marbofloxacin
Pradofloxacin

VetBooks.ir

114 Antimicrobial Therapy in Dogs and Cats

Table 114.1 (Continued)
Drug class

Mechanism of action

Spectrum of activity

Examples*

Lincosamides

Inhibit protein
synthesis – reversibly bind the 50S
ribosome subunit

Gram‐positive aerobes
Anaerobes
●● Clostridium perfringens
●● C. tetani
●● Bacteroides
●● Fusobacterium
●● Actinomyces
●● Mycoplasma spp.
Protozoans
●● Toxoplasma
●● Neospora

Clindamycin

Macrolides

Inhibit protein
synthesis – reversibly bind the 50S
ribosome subunit

Gram‐positive aerobes
●● Campylobacter jejuni (erythromycin)
●● Mycoplasma spp.
●● Chlamydia
●● Mycobacterium spp. (azithromycin,
clarithromycin)

Erythromycin
Azithromycin
Clarithromycin
Tylosin

Nitroimidazoles

Disrupt bacterial DNA
synthesis – under anaerobic
conditions converted to a unstable
intermediate (nitroso free radical)

Anaerobes
●● Bacteroides fragilis
●● Clostridium perfringens
●● Fusobacterium
Protozoans
●● Giardia spp.

Metronidazole

Potentiated
sulfonamides

Target bacterial folic acid synthesis
at two different steps:
1 Inhibitors of dihydrofolate
reductase (trimethoprim,
ormetoprim)
2 PABA analog (sulfonamides)

Gram‐positive aerobes
Gram‐negative aerobes
●● Nocardia
Protozoans
●● Toxoplasma
●● Neospora
Atypical Mycobacteria

Trimethoprim/
sulfadiazine
Ormetoprin/
sulfadimethoxine
Trimethoprim/
sulfamethoxazole

Tetracyclines

Alter protein synthesis via
reversibly binding the 30S and 50S
ribosome

Gram‐positive aerobes
Staphylococcus spp.
●● Streptococcus spp.
●● Clostridium tetani
●● Nocardia
Gram‐negative aerobes (some)
●● Bordetella spp.
●● Brucella
Spirochetes
●● Leptospira spp.
●● Borrelia spp.
Rickettsial
●● E. canis
●● R. rickettsii
●● Anaplasma spp.
●● Wolbachia
Mycoplasma spp.
Chlamydia spp.

Doxycycline
Minocycline

●●

* Note that not all organisms listed under “Spectrum of activity” are susceptible to each specific example of antibiotic listed. Please see text and
other resources for more comprehensive sensitivity information.

1043

VetBooks.ir

1044

Section 9 Infectious Disease

Table 114.2 Clinically important side‐effects and drug–drug interactions associated with antimicrobials commonly used in small animal
medicine
Antimicrobial

Side‐effect

Drug–drug interaction

Aminoglycosides

Nephrotoxicity (dose‐dep.)
Ototoxicity (dose‐dep.)
Neuromuscular blockade (inhibition of ACh release)

Synergistic with penicillins

Chloramphenicol

Bone marrow suppression (dose‐dep.)
Irreversible aplastic anemia (people, idiosyncratic)

Phenobarbital/propofol (dog, CYP 2B inhibition)

Carbapenems

CNS toxicity (imipenem > meropenem)
Nephrotoxicity (imipenem)

Fluoroquinolones

Articular cartilage erosions/blisters (growing animals)
Retinal toxicity (cats, dose‐dep.)

Macrolides

Theophylline (CYP3A inhibition, erythromycin,
clarithromycin)

Lincosamides

Esophageal structures (cats, clindamycin)

Metronidazole

Neurotoxicity/cerebellovestibular ataxia

Potentiated
sulfonamides

Tetracyclines

Antacids/sucralfate (decreased oral absorption)
Theophylline (CYP1A inhibition)

Idiosyncratic (dogs)
Blood dyscrasias
●● Hepatoxicity
●● Polyarthritis
●● Cutaneous skin eruptions
●● KCS
Dose dependent (dogs)
●● Nonregenerative anemia
●● Inhibition of thyroid hormone synthesis
●●

Tooth enamel discoloration (young, tetracyclines,
oxytetracycline)
Esophageal strictures (cats, doxycycline)

Antacids/sucralfate (decreased oral absorption)

ACh, acetylcholine; CNS, central nervous sysem; KCS, keratoconjunctivitis sicca.

The clinical situation where the risk of the systemic
side‐effects of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity may be
avoided is the use of orally administered neomycin in
the treatment of hepatic encephalopathy. The AGs have
poor oral bioavailability. In patients with hepatic encephalopathy, the goal of therapy is to target the ammonia‐
producing bacteria within the gut. However, if the
integrity of the gastrointestinal tract is compromised,
systemic absorption and the associated side‐effects may
theoretically occur.
Amphenicols (e.g., Chloramphenicol)
Chloramphenicol has a wide spectrum of activity
against gram‐positive and gram‐negative organisms.
Many anaerobic bacteria are also sensitive to chloramphenicol, including Clostridium, Bacteroides (B. fragilis),
and Fusobacterium species. Other susceptible bacteria
include Chlamydia spp., Mycoplasma spp., and Rickettsia
rickettsii.
In dogs and cats, chloramphenicol can result in bone
marrow suppression. This side‐effect is considered dose-

dependent and more likely if patients, especially cats, are
treated for an extended duration. In people, the major
route of chloramphenicol metabolism and elimination is
glucuronidation. This suggests that decreased glucuronidation may contribute to the increased risk of toxicity
in cats. In addition, 25% of the dose is reported to be
excreted unchanged in the urine of cats compared to
most other species, in which elimination is primarily via
hepatic metabolism. Therefore, dose reduction should
be considered in cats with kidney disease.
In dogs, chloramphenicol is a potent inhibitor of the
hepatic microsomal cytochrome P450 enzyme system,
specifically the subfamily CYP2B11. Through this CYP
inhibition, the metabolism of barbiturates, like phenobarbital, and propofol may be impacted. Dogs concurrently prescribed chloramphenicol and phenobarbital
have an increased risk of phenobarbital toxicity and dogs
anesthetized with propofol may have prolonged recoveries if they are also being treated with chloramphenicol.
Chloramphenicol is associated with an irreversible
aplastic anemia in people that is an idiosyncratic
­toxicity. Due to this unpredictable toxicity in people,

VetBooks.ir

114 Antimicrobial Therapy in Dogs and Cats

the use of chloramphenicol in veterinary medicine is
limited primarily to patients with cultured bacterial
­isolates that have maintained their sensitivity to chloramphenicol but are multidrug‐resistant organisms (e.g.,
methicillin‐resistant Staphylococcus pseudintermedius).
When prescribing chloramphenicol, owners need to be
educated about the associated risk of exposure and
toxicity to themselves and the need to wear gloves
­
­whenever the drug is being handled to avoid accidental
ingestion or exposure.
Beta‐Lactams
Penicillins

The broader spectrum (e.g., amoxicillin, ampicillin) or
potentiated penicillins (e.g., amoxicillin/clavulanate and
ampicillin/sulbactam) have an increased spectrum of
activity against gram‐negative organisms, including some
of the beta‐lactamase‐producing bacteria and anaerobes.
Ticarcillin has a strong gram‐negative spectrum with
activity against Pseudomonas spp. Methicillin/oxacillin
has activity against the beta‐lactamase‐­producing bacteria (e.g., Staphylococcus spp.) and is used primarily for
susceptibility testing.
Beta‐lactams have relatively limited side‐effects and
are clinically well tolerated. The most common side‐
effect is gastrointestinal upset, which is most commonly
associated with amoxicillin/clavulanate, especially in
cats. Hypersensitivity or allergic reactions to the penicillins are not very common in small animal medicine, in
comparison to people. The beta‐lactams are largely
excreted in the urine and in patients with kidney disease,
dose reduction may be necessary. However, due to the
wide margin of safety of these drugs, dose reduction is
often not routinely pursued in patients with mild to
moderate azotemia.
Cephalosporins

The cephalosporins have a broad spectrum of activity
against gram‐positive organisms, with the exception
of the Enterococcus spp. which are not susceptible.
The cephalosporins as a group have some anaerobic
activity but relative to the penicillins and potentiated
penicillins (e.g., amoxicillin/clavulanate), their anaerobic spectrum is limited. Generally, the gram‐negative
spectrum of activity increases from the first‐ to third‐
generation cephalosporins. However, some of the less
frequently dosed third‐generation (e.g., cefpodoxime)
and extended‐generation cephalosporins (e.g., cefovecin) have a bacterial spectrum more consistent with
the first‐generation cephalosporins, including activity
against many gram‐positive and some gram‐negative
organisms but no activity against Enterococcus or
Pseudomonas species.

Cefpodoxime is an oral formulation dosed once a day,
and cefovecin an injectable slow‐release formulation that
delivers antibacterial activity for 14 days. Cefovecin’s
extended persistence may provide convenient dosing but
in the event of an adverse effect, the drug cannot be
withdrawn and in the case of treatment failure, continued drug exposure may contribute to antimicrobial
resistance. The clinical use of cefovecin should be limited to fractious or noncompliant patients that cannot be
medicated daily.
The fourth‐generation cephalosporins have both
gram‐positive and gram‐negative activity and their use
should be limited to patients with a cultured susceptible
gram‐negative or gram‐positive isolate, patients with
susceptible mixed infections, or a serious to life‐threatening susceptible multidrug‐resistant and/or nosocomial infection(s). The later generation cephalosporins
are expensive, require frequent dosing, and in some
cases, a constant rate infusion is necessary for effective
therapy.
Carbapenems
Carbapenems are considered powerful antibiotics with a
very broad spectrum of activity. Therefore, their use
should be dictated by the results of bacterial culture and
antimicrobial susceptibility testing. The carbapenems
are expensive and must be administered parenterally.
Side‐effects, more common with imipenem than meropenem, include central nervous system (CNS) toxicity
and nephrotoxicity. Imipenem is available co‐formulated
with cilastatin (an inhibitor of imipenem metabolism)
which minimizes nephrotoxicity. In the absence of
cilastatin, imipenem is converted to a nephrotoxic
­
metabolite in the proximal renal tubule, resulting in
necrosis. In many patients, the use of meropenem may
be better tolerated as it is more soluble and can delivered
in smaller volumes relative to imipenem.
Fluoroquinolones
The spectrum of activity of fluoroquinolones classically
targets aerobic gram‐negative organisms. Pradofloxacin
is a third‐generation fluoroquinolone that has recently
been approved in the US for the treatment of skin infections in cats. Pradofloxacin has an extended spectrum
against many gram‐positive organisms and anaerobes in
addition to having a good gram‐negative spectrum.
Fluoroquinolones are associated with significant
side‐effects and clinically important drug interactions.
Articular cartilage erosions or blister lesions occur in
growing animals, especially dogs treated with high doses.
Clinical signs of lameness and joint swelling have
been reported as early as two days following therapy in

1045

VetBooks.ir

1046

Section 9 Infectious Disease

experimental dogs given four times the recommended
dose of ofloxacin. The use of fluoroquinolones is generally avoided in young puppies (<8 months), but in an
experimental study in young beagles (13–16 weeks old),
an oral dose of ciprofloxacin 10 mg/kg/day for 14 days
did not induce joint lesions.
A species‐specific side‐effect of the fluoroquinolones
is dose‐dependent retinal toxicity in cats. Cats are functionally deficient in the ATP‐binding cassette subfamily
G member 2 (ABCG2) protein, encoded by the ABCG2
gene. This membrane‐associated protein functions at
the blood–retinal barrier to limit xenobiotics (e.g., fluoroquinolone) from entering the retina. When fluoroquinolones are administered to cats, the photosensitive
fluoroquinolones have access to the retina, leading to
retinal degeneration and blindness. All fluoroquinolones
have the potential to cause retinal lesions with a modest
overdose in cats, although there are differences between
the fluoroquinolones. Retinal toxicity has been reported
for enrofloxacin at 4-times the label dose and orbifloxacin at 18-times the label dose. In contrast, marbofloxacin
and pradofloxacin did not cause retinal lesions when
administered at 20-times and 10-times the label dose,
respectively. To minimize retinal toxicity in cats, the recommended label dose should not be exceeded, rapid IV
infusions and prolonged treatment durations should be
avoided, and dose adjustment in patients with underlying kidney disease should be considered.
Two important drug–drug interactions are associated
with clinical use of fluoroquinolones. Orally administered fluoroquinolones chelate with di‐ or tri-valent
­cations (e.g., calcium, aluminum, or magnesium), resulting in decreased absorption. The co‐administration of
fluoroquinolones with antacids containing aluminum
­
or magnesium, or sucralfate should be avoided. If co‐
administration is necessary, separate the administration
times by at least two hours (e.g., give the fluoroquinolone
at least two hours before any products that contain di‐ or
tri-valent cations). Fluoroquinolones inhibit the hepatic
microsomal cytochrome P450 enzyme system, specifically CYP1A2 in people. CYP1A inhibition will decrease
the elimination of substrate drugs, like theophylline,
resulting in clinical signs of theophylline toxicity
(­tachycardia, excitability, tremors, or seizures). In clinical practice, it would be best to avoid the concurrent
therapy of a fluoroquinolone (e.g., ciprofloxacin) with
theophylline. Alternatively, a significant reduction in the
theophylline dose can be considered to avoid toxicity.
Lincosamides and Macrolides
The lincosamides and macrolides have a similar ­spectrum
of activity to include most gram‐positive organisms.
The most common side‐effects are gastrointestinal signs,

including vomiting and diarrhea after oral administration. Clindamycin capsules have been associated with
esophageal strictures in cats. Stricture formation is
thought to occur secondary to prolonged esophageal
mucosal contact of the capsule if administration is not
preceded or followed by food or liquid.
Potential drug interactions associated with some
­macrolides are their ability to inhibit the metabolism of
other drugs which are substrates of the CYP3A subfamily of the microsomal cytochrome P450 enzyme system.
Erythromycin and clarithromycin are inhibitors of
CYP3A (i.e., CYP3A4 in people) which will inhibit the
metabolism of CYP3A substrate drugs (e.g., theophylline), leading to toxicity when prescribed concurrently.
Azithromycin is not a cytochrome P450 inhibitor.
Nitroimidazoles (e.g., Metronidazole)
Metronidazole has activity against anaerobes to include
Bacteroides (B. fragilis), Fusobacterium, and Clostridium
species. Other organisms susceptible to metronidazole
include Giardia and Trichomonas. An overdose of metronidazole is associated with neurotoxicity leading to cerebellovestibular ataxia in dog and cats. The mechanism of
toxicity is thought to be inhibition of the gamma‐aminobutyric acid (GABA) neurotransmitter. At toxic doses,
clinical signs include ataxia, nystagmus, and proprioceptive deficits which are reversible once the drug is discontinued. To avoid toxicity in patients with impaired liver
function, dose reduction is recommended (e.g., an empirical dose reduction to 7.5 mg/kg twice a day for metronidazole in patients with underlying liver failure or cirrhosis).
Potentiated Sulfonamides
The potentiated sulfonamides provide broad‐spectrum
activity against gram‐positive and gram‐negative
organisms and some activity against Coccidia and
­
Toxoplasma. Pseudomonas aeruginosa is not susceptible
to the potentiated sulfonamides. Many Staphylococcus
spp., including methicillin‐resistant Staphylococcus
pseudintermedius (MRSP), remain susceptible to the
potentiated sulfonamides. The major limitation of the
use of potentiated sulfonamides in veterinary medicine,
and specifically in dogs, is the risk of an idiosyncratic
and/or dose‐dependent side‐effect.
Sulfonamide‐induced side‐effects in dogs may be
in part due to the dog’s inability to metabolize the sulfonamides via acetylation (the major metabolic pathway
for sulfonamides in people). The underlying pathophysiology is not well understood but in part involves
immune‐mediated mechanisms. For example, sulfonamide metabolites may play a role in triggering a T cell‐
mediated response to haptenated proteins.

VetBooks.ir

114 Antimicrobial Therapy in Dogs and Cats

Idiosyncratic sulfonamide hypersensitivity reactions
in dogs occur at standard doses and have a reported incidence of 0.25%. Many body systems can be affected,
including blood dyscrasias (immune‐mediated hemolytic anemia, immune‐mediated thrombocytopenia and/
or neutropenia), acute hepatotoxicity, polyarthropathy
(Doberman pinschers are overrepresented or predisposed to developing a sulfonamide‐triggered arthropathy), cutaneous skin eruptions, keratoconjunctivitis
sicca (KCS), and uveitis. Clinical symptoms occur at
least 5–7 days after drug initiation and in many cases
resolve with drug withdrawal. The specific clinical signs
observed are dependent on the body system(s) affected
but often include non-specific systemic signs, most commonly fever. These sulfonamide hypersensitivity reactions are much less common in cats and more likely
include mucocutaneous ulceration and ulcerative
dermatitis.
Dose‐dependent side‐effects of the potentiated sulfonamides in dogs include non-regenerative anemia and
the inhibition of thyroid hormone synthesis. A normocytic, non-regenerative anemia may arise in dogs treated
with high‐dose, long‐duration therapy (i.e., 30–60 mg/
kg/day for eight weeks). The suspected mechanism for
this non-regenerative anemia is a secondary folate deficiency arising from the simultaneous inhibition of
folate synthesis by trimethoprim (inhibitor of dihydrofolate reductase) and sulfonamide (a folate analog).
The degree of anemia tends to be mild to moderate and
normocytic. In several species, including dogs, sulfonamides inhibit thyroid peroxidase, the enzyme needed
for iodination and thyroid hormone production. Dogs
undergoing prolonged therapy with a potentiated sulfonamide may be at risk for clinical hypothyroidism;
however, the frequency in dogs appears variable and
effects are reversible once the sulfonamide administration is discontinued.
Patients prescribed potentiated sulfonamide therapy
should be monitored during therapy for adverse reactions. In addition, owners should be educated as to the
clinical signs (decreased appetite, vomiting, diarrhea,
lameness, lethargy, ocular changes or discharge, and
dark to red urine) associated with an adverse effect to
enable early intervention, including drug discontinuation. Ideally, a systemic work‐up is indicated in any dog
with clinical signs of a sulfonamide hypersensitivity during or following a course of therapy. Indicated diagnostics include a physical exam, ocular exam, complete
blood count (CBC), biochemistry profile, urinalysis, and
Schirmer test (STT). Prior to prescribing a potentiated
sulfonamide to a dog, a baseline physical exam, CBC,
biochemistry panel, and STT are recommended to avoid
their use in dogs with KCS and to provide a baseline for
comparison during and following therapy.

Tetracyclines
As a group, the tetracyclines are considered as relatively
broad‐spectrum antimicrobials, but the common gram‐
negative organisms (E. coli, Klebsiella, Bacteroides,
Enterobacter, Proteus, and Pseudomonas species) develop
resistance to the tetracyclines. In small animal veterinary
medicine, doxycycline is the most common tetracycline
­ iseases, leptoused in the treatment of some tick‐borne d
spirosis, or respiratory infections associated with
Bordetella bronchiseptica or Mycoplasma pneumoniae.
Minocycline has previously had limited clinical use in
veterinary medicine but its use may increase based on
the current cost and availability of doxycycline. In people, minocycline is well tolerated, with gastrointestinal
signs reported. Anecdotally, the clinical use of oral minocycline in dogs has been associated with more gastrointestinal upset (resulting in drug discontinuation) relative
to doxycycline.
Minocycline has a spectrum of activity and pharmacokinetics similar to those of doxycycline. The exceptions are some MRSP isolates that are resistant to
tetracycline but remain sensitive to minocycline. A tetracycline induction assay (which may not be available in all
microbiology laboratories) is necessary to determine
susceptibility of MRSP isolates to minocycline.
Side‐effects associated with the tetracyclines may limit
their use in some patient populations. Young dogs and
cats may experience tooth enamel discoloration following therapy with a tetracycline. Tetracyclines have an
affinity for polyvalent cations and are taken up by
­calcifying tissues (i.e., teeth and bone) as a fluorescent
pigment. When tetracyclines are administered during
tooth development, the tetracycline pigment is taken up
by the enamel and dentin, resulting in permanent discoloration. Doxycycline appears to have a lower risk of
tooth discoloration compared to other tetracyclines.
In cats, doxycycline has been associated with the
development of esophageal strictures. In people, when
capsules are retained in the esophagus, the acidity of
doxycycline salts (hyclate or hydrochloride > monohydrate) can cause local esophagitis and ulceration, leading
to stricture formation. A similar mechanism of stricture
formation has been proposed in cats. Administering a
liquid formulation versus capsules of doxycycline to cats
is recommended to avoid stricture formation.
Clinically important drug interactions are also associated with orally administered tetracyclines. Tetracyclines
administered in association with drugs or vitamins containing di‐ or tri-valent cations (e.g., calcium, magnesium, iron) result in dramatically lower oral absorption
of tetracycline antimicrobials. Common drugs that contain aluminum and/or magnesium should not be co‐
administered with any of the tetracycline a­ntibiotics,

1047

VetBooks.ir

1048

Section 9 Infectious Disease

including bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto‐Bismol®), sucralfate, and many antacids. This interaction may be less
clinically significant for doxycycline due to its lower
affinity for calcium relative to other tetracyclines.
Additional Considerations
To optimize antimicrobial therapy, clinicians should
have a working knowledge of the available drugs, including their spectrum of activity, clinically important side‐
effects, and drug–drug interactions. Prior to writing any
antibiotic prescription, consideration of some important
questions can help optimize clinical outcomes. Define
the need for antimicrobial therapy. Is a bacterial infection suspected or identified? Define the spectrum of
activity needed. Where is the site of infection? What is
the most likely infecting bacterial pathogen(s)? Are
additional diagnostics necessary such as culture and
­
antimicrobial susceptibility testing? Define the patient
characteristics which may limit efficacy or increase the
risk for an adverse event or drug–drug interaction. Does
my patient have underlying kidney or liver disease? What
other drugs are being administered to this patient?

Often, in otherwise healthy patients with uncomplicated bacterial infections in which the infecting
pathogen(s) are predictable (e.g., canine female lower
urinary tract infections), empiric antimicrobial therapy
is effective. However, bacterial culture and antimicrobial susceptibility become mandatory for any patient
following their first empiric antibiotic therapeutic failure. Other clinical situations in which antimicrobial
therapy becomes more complicated include patients
with recurrent infections, multidrug‐resistant infections, or in immunocompromised patients in which
bacterial culture and antimicrobial susceptibility testing
are critical to optimize efficacy and minimize further
antimicrobial resistance. In cases of chronic recurrent
or multidrug‐resistant infection, repeating bacterial
culture and antimicrobial susceptibility testing during
therapy and/or following therapy becomes essential to
confirm responsiveness to antimicrobial therapy and/or
confirm the resolution of infection. Consensus guidelines for treatment of bacterial infections in dogs and
cats are available at the International Society for
Companion Animal Infectious Disease website (www.
iscaid.org)

­Further Reading
Hillier A, Lloyd DH, Weese JS, et al. Guidelines for the
diagnosis and antimicrobial therapy of canine superficial
bacterial folliculitis (Antimicrobial Guidelines Working
Group of the International Society for Companion Animal
Infectious Diseases). Vet Derm 2014;25:163–e143.
Lappin MR, Blondeau J, Boothe D, et al. Antimicrobial use
Guidelines for Treatment of Respiratory Tract Disease in
Dogs and Cats: Antimicrobial Guidelines Working Group
of the International Society for Companion Animal
Infectious Diseases. J Vet Intern Med 2017;31:279–294.
Lees P. Pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and
therapeutics of pradofloxacin in the dog and cat. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2013; 36: 209–21.
Ramirez CJ, Minch JD, Gay JM, et al. Molecular genetic
basis for fluoroquinolone‐induced retinal degeneration
in cats. Pharmacogenet Genomics 2010; 21: 66–75.

Trepanier LA. Idiosyncratic toxicity associated with
potentiated sulfonamides in the dog. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 2004; 27: 129–38.
Trepanier LA. Cytochrome P450 and its role in veterinary
drug interactions. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2006; 36: 975–85, v.
Weese JS, Blondeau JM, Boothe D, et al. Antimicrobial use
guidelines for treatment of urinary tract disease in dogs
and cats: antimicrobial guidelines working group of the
international society for companion animal infectious
diseases. Vet Med Int 2011; 2011: 263768.
Weese JS, Blondeau J, Boothe D, et al. International Society
for Companion Animal Infectious Diseases (ISCAID)
guidelines for the diagnosis and management of
bacterial urinary tract infections in dogs and cats. The
Veterinary Journal 2019;247:8–25.

VetBooks.ir

1049

115
Antifungal Therapy
Daniel S. Foy, MS, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), DACVECC
College of Veterinary Medicine, Midwestern University, Glendale, AZ, USA

Until relatively recently, treatment of systemic mycoses
was limited to intravenous amphotericin B and oral keto­
conazole. However, in the last two decades, significant
progress has been made in the development of first‐­
generation triazole drugs, newer second‐generation
­triazole drugs, and echinocandins.
New antifungal therapies are often constrained by the
fact that fungal organisms are eukaryotic, and therefore
greater potential exists for host toxicity. For example,
traditional antifungal medications that target ergosterol,
or its production, can cause toxicity in mammalian cells
via inhibition of cholesterol production or damage to cell
membranes. Newer therapies are being directed at com­
ponents unique to fungal organisms, thereby sparing
mammalian cells. Although in vitro testing frequently
finds antifungal drugs to be fungicidal, most appear to be
fungistatic in vivo, thus the host immune system must
eliminate the organisms.

­Amphotericin B
Since its discovery in 1956 and increased availability in
the early 1960s, amphotericin B has become, and remains,
the reference treatment for invasive fungal infections.
Amphotericin B is a macrocyclic polyene antibiotic origi­
nally extracted from Streptomyces nodosus. This drug
forms micelles with fungal ergosterol, which creates
channels in the fungal membrane, alters cell permeability,
and allows leakage of ions and cellular components from
the fungal organism. The effectiveness of amphotericin B
is due to its greater affinity for ergosterol, the major sterol
of fungal cell membranes, relative to cholesterol.
Effective amphotericin B treatment requires intrave­
nous (IV) administration, with the major limiting factor
in its use being cumulative nephrotoxicity; however,
the only absolute contraindication to use is anaphylaxis.

The cause of nephrotoxicity remains incompletely
understood, but is potentially related to both direct tox­
icity to epithelial cell membranes and renal vasoconstric­
tion. In people, serum creatinine is monitored during
treatment; a clinically significant increase is considered a
new elevation above the normal range, or an increase of
greater than 20% from the baseline value.
The inherent nephrotoxicity of the original ampho­
tericin B formulation led to the development of three
new formulations: liposomal preparation, lipid complex,
and colloidal dispersion with cholesterol sulfate.
Liposomal amphotericin B (lip‐amB) achieves higher
plasma concentrations than the original formulation; this
is thought to be due to decreased uptake by the reticu­
loendothelial system (RES). Liposomes containing
amphotericin B fuse with the fungal cell membrane, lead­
ing to fungal cell death. Lip‐amB has been evaluated for
safety in healthy beagle dogs, and when dosed at 1 mg/kg/
day for 29 days, no azotemia was noted, and minimal
renal tubular necrosis was seen on histopathology.
Amphotericin B lipid complex (ABLC) is composed of a
suspension of amphotericin B complexed with two phos­
pholipids: dimyristoylphosphatidylcholine and dimyris­
toylphosphatidylglycerol. ABLC is taken up by the cells of
the RES, and subsequently concentrates in the liver, lungs,
and spleen. The lipid complexes are likely disrupted by
phospholipases at sites of inflammation or infection, lead­
ing to the release of amphotericin B. Repeated dosing of
up to 5 mg/kg/day in research dogs found ABLC to be
8–10‐fold less nephrotoxic, on the basis of renal values
and histology, than conventional amphotericin B.
Importantly, although mean glomerular filtration rate
(GFR) decreased over the course of treatment, only one of
10 dogs that received 8–12 mg/kg ABLC showed a
decrease in GFR below the reference range.
The third lipid‐incorporated preparation to be devel­
oped was amphotericin B colloidal dispersion (ABCD).

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1050

Section 9 Infectious Disease

This formulation is composed of amphotericin B inserted
between cholesterol sulfate bilayers, creating a disc‐like
structure. Similar to ABLC, the RES rapidly takes up
ABCD. In one canine study, ABCD led to high concen­
trations in the bone marrow, liver, and spleen in healthy
dogs, while concentrations remained low in the kidneys
and lungs.
All three modified amphotericin B preparations have
greater hydrophobicity, which likely results in greater
delivery to the site of infection, and decreased delivery to
the kidneys. All three modifications appear to maintain
efficacy relative to conventional amphotericin B, while
decreasing nephrotoxicity in humans. Amphotericin B
remains an important treatment option in veterinary
medicine, as many of the newer drugs available for peo­
ple are cost‐prohibitive in veterinary patients.

­Azoles
The azole drugs exert their effect by inhibition of lanos­
terol 14‐alpha demethylase, leading to ergosterol deple­
tion and accumulation of aberrant and potentially toxic
sterols in the cell membrane. Azoles are classified as
imidazoles or triazoles depending on whether they
­

­possess two or three nitrogen molecules within their azole
ring. Individual azole drugs are summarized in Table 115.1.
Ketoconazole
Ketoconazole was the first azole released, and is the only
imidazole antifungal agent remaining in use for the treat­
ment of systemic mycoses. It is highly lipophilic, and is
~99% plasma protein bound in humans, which impairs
distribution to the brain and cerebrospinal fluid.
Ketoconazole shows optimal dissolution and absorption
at an acidic gastric pH in both humans and dogs, and
should not be given with antacids.
In dogs, ketoconazole has been used historically to
treat various systemic mycoses, including blastomycosis
and histoplasmosis. Although ketoconazole has been
successful in treating systemic mycoses, it should be
combined with amphotericin B to yield response rates
that are comparable to itraconazole alone in dogs with
systemic blastomycosis. When dosed at 5–10 mg/kg/day
for three weeks, ketoconazole remains an inexpensive
and effective treatment for Malassezia dermatitis in
­veterinary patients.
Gastrointestinal upset or decreased appetite account
for over half of the adverse events reported in dogs

Table 115.1 Summary of azole antifungal drugs, including formulation, indications, and side‐effects
Drug (trade name)

Class and formulation

Indications

Side‐effects

Ketoconazole
(Nizoral®)

Imidazole
(oral, topical)

Topical mycotic infections
Malassezia dermatitis
Third‐line treatment for systemic mycoses

GI upset
Dose‐dependent increases in ALT
Potent CYP3A inhibitor
Inhibitor of p‐glycoprotein
Absorption impaired by antacids

Fluconazole
(Diflucan®)

First‐generation
triazole
(oral, injectable)

Candidiasis and cryptococcosis
Systemic mycoses with ocular or CNS involvement
Possibly first‐line treatment of blastomycosis

GI upset
Dose‐dependent increases in ALT
Requires dosage reduction in
renal failure

Itraconazole
(Sporanox®)

First‐generation
triazole
(oral)

First‐line for nonlife‐threatening systemic mycoses
that do not involve CNS

GI upset
Dose‐dependent increases in ALT
CYP3A inhibitor
Absorption impaired by antacids

Voriconazole
(Vfend®)

Second‐generation
triazole
(oral, injectable)

Invasive aspergillosis
Likely efficacious against most systemic mycoses

Visual and neurologic
abnormalities
CYP3A inhibitor
Induces its own metabolism over
time in dogs

Posaconazole
(Noxafil®)

Second‐generation
triazole
(oral)

Aspergillosis, candidiasis, and cryptococcosis
Limited data but likely effective against other
systemic mycoses

GI upset
Headache
Prolongation of QT interval
CYP3A inhibitor

Clotrimazole

Imidazole
(topical)

Sinonasal aspergillosis
Malassezia otitis

Poor oral bioavailability

Enilconazole

Imidazole
(topical)

Sinonasal aspergillosis

Poor oral bioavailability

VetBooks.ir

115 Antifungal Therapy

treated with ketoconazole, with 7% of dogs exhibiting
nausea or vomiting and 5% showing only inappetence;
similar signs are seen in treated cats. Hepatotoxicity and
cutaneous reactions are much less frequently observed.
Hepatotoxicity from ketoconazole typically manifests as
mild to moderate increases in alanine aminotransferase
(ALT) that are reversible with drug discontinuation.
Ketoconazole is a potent inhibitor of both the P450
enzyme CYP3A and p‐glycoprotein, and therefore has
many potential drug interactions. For example, ketocon­
azole leads to increased plasma concentrations of iver­
mectin and midazolam in dogs, and cyclosporine in dogs
and cats. It inhibits the adrenal production of many adre­
nal steroids such as cortisol and testosterone, and should
be avoided in breeding animals.
Fluconazole
Fluconazole is a first‐generation triazole drug that was
initially released in 1990 for the treatment of candidiasis
and cryptococcosis. Its in vitro susceptibility profile sug­
gests low potency as an antifungal agent; however, it is
relatively water soluble, minimally (~10%) protein bound,
and distributes well throughout the body, leading to bet­
ter efficacy in vivo. Fluconazole effectively penetrates the
blood–brain barrier, as well as the blood–ocular and
blood–prostate barriers, in both people and veterinary
patients. Fluconazole absorption is not affected by con­
current use of antacids, and may be a better choice in
patients requiring H2 blockers or proton pump inhibitor
therapy. Fluconazole also does not require food for opti­
mal absorption. As fluconazole is approximately 70%
excreted unchanged in the urine, the dosage should be
reduced in patients with compromised renal function.
As in humans, fluconazole has been recommended for
veterinary patients with systemic mycoses affecting the
central nervous system (CNS) or eyes. Fluconazole has
been used successfully in dogs and cats with cryptococ­
cosis and blastomycosis, and the introduction of generic
fluconazole has significantly reduced its cost. Moderate,
reversible ALT increases have been observed in dogs
receiving fluconazole for treatment of blastomycosis.
Fluconazole is a teratogen in animals, and should be
avoided during pregnancy.
Fluconazole is empirically prescribed at a dosage of
5–10 mg/kg per day in dogs, while cats may receive a
dosage of 50 mg per day. Because of its predictable phar­
macokinetics, fluconazole does not require therapeutic
drug monitoring.
Itraconazole
Itraconazole is another first‐generation triazole that was
released in 1992, and rapidly became the oral treatment
of choice for both histoplasmosis and blastomycosis in

humans. Today, itraconazole remains the preferred azole
in people for nonlife‐threatening systemic mycoses that
do not involve the CNS. It is lipophilic and is highly pro­
tein bound (>99%). Like ketoconazole, the absorption of
itraconazole is diminished in the presence of antacids so
it is recommended that itraconazole be administered
with food, and that antacids are avoided during itracona­
zole therapy.
Itraconazole has become the drug of choice for
­treatment of systemic mycoses in dogs and cats, and is
effective for the treatment of blastomycosis, histo­
plasmosis, cryptococcosis, and coccidioidomycosis.
Although itraconazole does not effectively penetrate
the blood–brain or blood–ocular barriers, it may
achieve adequate levels to treat CNS or ocular infection
when there is associated inflammation and compro­
mise of the barriers.
Itraconazole has been dosed at 5–10 mg/kg per day,
and may be administered as a single dose or divided into
twice‐daily dosing. The most common side‐effects
are gastrointestinal upset and hepatocellular toxicity.
Although a loading dose of itraconazole has been sug­
gested when starting therapy, no difference has been
found with or without an initial loading dose.
Substitution with generic itraconazole has been shown
to reduce plasma itraconazole concentrations to the sub­
therapeutic range in people, and has led to recrudes­
cence of infection. A recent study in dogs found that
neither generic nor compounded itraconazole achieved
bioequivalence with branded itraconazole.
As with ketoconazole, itraconazole is an inhibitor of
CYP3A and has many potential drug interactions. It has
been shown to increase the concentrations of cyclo­
sporine, digoxin, and midazolam in people. Unlike keto­
conazole, itraconazole does not appear to be a significant
inhibitor of cortisol or testosterone synthesis at clinically
relevant doses. Itraconazole is available as an oral cap­
sule and solution.
Newer Triazoles
Voriconazole is a second‐generation triazole that is
structurally similar to fluconazole. It has become the
drug of choice for treatment of invasive aspergillosis in
humans. Despite its similarity to fluconazole, voricona­
zole is poorly water soluble and moderately protein
bound.
Hepatotoxicity, skin rash or eruptions, and peripheral
neuropathy have been reported. Like ketoconazole and
itraconazole, voriconazole is a substrate inhibitor of
CYP3A, and can increase plasma concentrations of
other drugs in humans. It is also teratogenic in animals
and should not be used during pregnancy. In dogs,
voriconazole undergoes extensive metabolism; it also
­
induces its own metabolism over time. The in vitro

1051

VetBooks.ir

1052

Section 9 Infectious Disease

potency of voriconazole against veterinary fungal iso­
lates appears to be favorable when compared to itracona­
zole. Voriconazole is available as an oral tablet or
solution, or as an IV preparation. The use of voricona­
zole has been reported in cats with unilateral orbital
aspergillosis; however, it has also been reported to cause
neurologic deficits in cats, including ataxia, hindlimb
paralysis, and visual abnormalities.
Posaconazole is a lipophilic second‐generation triazole
derived from itraconazole. It was approved for use in
people for prophylaxis of invasive Aspergillus and
Candida infections and for treatment of oropharyngeal
candidiasis. Posaconazole also appears to have efficacy
against Blastomyces, Histoplasma, and Coccidioides spp.
As with itraconazole, administration of posaconazole
with a meal appears to improve bioavailability; however,
like fluconazole, alterations in gastric acidity do not
appear to affect posaconazole absorption.
The most common adverse effects reported in human
patients are headache and gastrointestinal upset; hepa­
totoxicity and QT interval prolongation are reported
but much less common. Although posaconazole appears
to have a narrower drug interaction profile, inhibition
of CYP3A4 has been demonstrated in humans.
Posaconazole is available only in oral formulations.
Topical Azoles
Both clotrimazole and enilconazole are classified as imi­
dazoles within the azole class of drugs; however, both
drugs have minimal systemic bioavailability due to a high
first‐pass effect. These drugs are thus confined to topical
use, such as clotrimazole in otic suspensions for the
treatment of Malassezia otitis in dogs and cats. Both
clotrimazole and enilconazole are effective, when
instilled into the nasal passages, for treating sinonasal
aspergillosis in dogs; clotrimazole has also been reported
to be effective in cats with nasal aspergillosis. Although
some dogs require multiple treatments, more than 85%
of dogs can be cured with up to three treatments.

­Echinocandins
Echinocandins are a relatively new class of antifungal
medications; the first compound, caspofungin, was
approved by the FDA in 2001. Echinocandins inhibit
­glucan synthase and prevent the synthesis of beta‐1,3

glucan, an essential component of the cell wall in certain
fungi. In susceptible fungi, the integrity of the cell wall is
compromised, leading to cell lysis.
The clinical use of the echinocandins is limited
to Candida and Aspergillus spp. in human patients;
Cryptococcus neoformans and the zygomycetes are typi­
cally resistant. The mycelial forms of Blastomyces
­dermatitidis and Histoplasma capsulatum appear to be
susceptible to the echinocandins, although the yeast
forms are not, due to the predominance of alpha‐glucan,
which is not a target of echinocandins, in the yeast cell
wall. Echinocandins have poor oral bioavailability and
are only available in intravenous formulations. The side‐
effects associated with echinocandins are typically mini­
mal, with fever, gastrointestinal signs, phlebitis, and
headache being most commonly reported.

­Terbinafine
Terbinafine belongs to the allylamine group of antifungal
agents, and is most frequently used in people for the
treatment of dermatophytoses and toenail onychomyco­
sis. Its antifungal activity is mediated via noncompetitive
inhibition of squalene epoxidase, an enzyme involved in
fungal ergosterol synthesis, with more than 4000‐fold
selectivity for fungal versus mammalian P450 enzymes.
Terbinafine is very well absorbed from the gastrointesti­
nal tract and then rapidly diffuses from the bloodstream
into the dermis and epidermis. Terbinafine is highly
­lipophilic, which leads to its high concentration in hair
follicles, skin, nail plate, and adipose tissue, with levels in
the stratum corneum exceeding those in plasma by a fac­
tor of 75 within 12 days of therapy.
Terbinafine has shown high in vitro efficacy against
many dermatophytes, including Trichophyton and Tinea
spp. It has also been combined with echinocandins or
triazoles in a multimodal approach to systemic mycoses
in people. Side‐effects are generally limited to gastroin­
testinal upset and, rarely, hepatotoxicity. Terbinafine is
currently available in tablet form as well as a topical
cream or gel.
In dogs, terbinafine has in vitro activity against
Microsporum and Trichophyton isolates, with little
e vidence of acquired resistance during treatment.
­
Terbinafine appears to be equivalent or superior to keto­
conazole for the treatment of Malassezia dermatitis in
dogs, with a reduction in both yeast counts and pruritus.

­Further Reading
Foy DS, Trepanier LA. Antifungal treatment of small
animal veterinary patients. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 2010; 40(6): 1171–88.

Greene CE. Antifungal chemotherapy. In: Infectious
Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 4th edn. St Louis, MO:
Elsevier, 2012, pp. 579–88.

VetBooks.ir

115 Antifungal Therapy

Mawby DI, Whittemore JC, Genger S, Papich MG.
Bioequivalence of orally administered generic,
compounded, and innovator‐formulated itraconazole in
healthy dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2014; 28(1): 72–7.
Mazepa AS, Trepanier LA, Foy DS. Retrospective
comparison of the efficacy of fluconazole or itraconazole

for the treatment of systemic blastomycosis in dogs.
J Vet Intern Med 2011; 25(3): 440–5.
Quimby JM, Hoffman SB, Duke J, Lappin MR.
Adverse neurologic events associated with
voriconazole use in 3 cats. J Vet Intern Med 2010;
24(3): 647–9.

1053

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1055

Part 4

Special Topics

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1057

116
Nosocomial and Multidrug‐Resistant Infections
Jason W. Stull, VMD, MPVM, PhD, DACVPM1 and J. Scott Weese, DVM, DVSc, DACVIM (SAIM)2
1
2

Department of Veterinary Preventive Medicine, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA
Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada

Nosocomial infections, typically referred to as “hospital‐
associated (or healthcare-associated) infections” (HAIs),
are infections acquired by patients during hospitalization
and are an inherent risk in veterinary medicine. In human
hospitals, HAIs are a well‐recognized contributor to illness
and death, with substantial associated financial costs.
Although veterinary data for this field are limited, similar
(or even higher) HAI rates have been reported compared to
human studies. Between 2003 and 2008, 82% of veterinary
teaching hospitals in North America and Europe reported
at least one HAI outbreak. Many of these ­
outbreaks
required restricted patient admissions or ­hospital closure.
Animals suffering from HAIs may have an increased
hospital stay and suffer permanent health consequences
(including death). Some veterinary HA pathogens can be
transmitted to staff or pet owners, resulting in human
illness. A wide range of pathogens may be involved in
HAIs, but most of the focus is on the emerging epidemic
of multidrug‐resistant bacteria because of dramatic
increases in infections, limited antimicrobial options,
and potential public health consequences.
Perhaps most important to this topic is the assumption
in human medicine that 10–70% of all HAIs are preventable. The proportion of HAIs that are preventable in
­veterinary medicine is unknown, but likely to be similar.
The routine use of simple infection prevention practices
can reduce HAIs and related multidrug‐resistant
­organisms (MDROs).

­Identification of Hospital‐Associated
Infections
Early identification of HAIs is critical for effective
­disease control and prevention. It is not unusual for veterinary HAI outbreaks to go unnoticed because of a lack

of centralized data reporting or communication. Key elements of early HAI identification include a hospital‐­
specific surveillance program and routine use of
diagnostic culture and susceptibility data to establish
practice‐­specific levels of pathogen prevalence and antimicrobial resistance.
Surveillance programs allow for early recognition of
HAI transmission and outbreaks. They also provide
“benchmarking” data that can be used to identify changes
in disease rates (e.g., understanding the background
surgical site infection rate so that any increases can
­
be promptly investigated). These programs can also
­provide important information for better understanding
and responding to other disease occurrences, such as
MDROs. The specifics of a surveillance program will be
driven by the needs and disease risks of the practice.
There are three main types of surveillance: active, passive, and syndromic. Active surveillance involves collection of data specifically for infection control purposes.
This type of surveillance is expensive and time‐consuming and, given the small population of susceptible
patients and unclear response, not typically justifiable in
a veterinary hospital. As the prevalence of MDROs
increases in the animal population and more is known
about HAIs, active surveillance practices may become
useful in some situations. Passive surveillance involves
the use of data that are already available. For example, it
may be used to monitor surgical site infections by reviewing case records for surgical patients after a procedure or
collating susceptibility data from urinary E. coli to assess
empiric antimicrobial choices. Syndromic surveillance
involves detection of identifiable syndromes (e.g.,
­coughing, diarrhea). It is an easy tool for identification of
certain high‐risk hospitalized cases and can also identify
higher‐risk patients prior to admission, so that specific
infection control practices can be employed.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1058

Section 9 Infectious Disease

­Common Presentations and Risk
Factors for HAIs
In veterinary medicine, urinary tract infections (UTIs),
pneumonia, surgical site infections (SSIs), bloodstream
infections (BSIs), and gastrointestinal disease (infectious
diarrhea) are likely to be the most common presentations for HAIs.
Urinary Tract Infections
Catheter‐associated UTIs are one of the more common
HAIs in small animal veterinary medicine. Pathogens
involved may be either endogenous to the patient, arising from the rectum or perineum, or from the hospital
environment or people through contamination of the
drainage system or bag. Biofilms (a complex structure
of microorganisms and extracellular matrix) can be
­produced by bacteria on the surface of urinary catheters, resulting in poor antimicrobial penetration,
­antimicrobial resistance, and treatment failure. Catheter‐­
associated UTIs are best prevented through careful
attention to aseptic technique during placement and
maintenance of urinary catheters as well as by avoidance
of urinary catheterization unless necessary and at least
daily reassessment of whether a urinary catheter is still
required. Culture of catheters or urine from catheterized
patients in the absence of clinical or cytologic evidence
of disease is not recommended.
Pneumonia
Hospital‐associated pneumonia has been minimally
investigated in the veterinary field, in large part because
of the limited use of mechanical ventilation (a major contributor in human medicine). Recumbent position,
mechanical ventilation, use of endotracheal/nasogastric
tubes, and factors that increase aspiration pneumonia
(e.g., laryngeal or esophageal disorders and decreased
mentation or recumbency) likely increase HAI risk.
Recumbent, sedated, or debilitated patients may benefit
from having the cranial portion of the body elevated.

endogenous flora of the patient. Therefore, the pathogens responsible for SSIs will vary by type of surgery
(e.g., gram‐negative rods occurring in abdominal surgeries, staphylococci in orthopedic procedures). Methods
such as clipping the patient immediately before surgery
after induction, following strict aseptic technique,
­cleaning and care of clipper blades after each use, minimizing personnel flow in the operating room, and
­prudent use of antimicrobials are important in reducing
the likelihood of SSIs.
Bloodstream Infections
In human medicine, most BSIs are associated with intravascular devices, with duration of catheterization being
the most important risk factor. Despite this risk, studies
have not found a decrease in the incidence of catheter‐
related (CR) BSIs with prophylactic catheter changes (e.g.,
every three days). The current recommendation is for
catheters to be removed as soon as medically indicated,
but for routine changes to be avoided, since a catheter
that has remained free of complications for a few days may
pose a lower risk than a newly placed c­ atheter. A similar
approach is appropriate in veterinary medicine.
Veterinary studies have revealed that jugular and intravenous catheters are frequently contaminated with
enteric or environmental pathogens. Factors associated
with intravenous catheter contamination in dogs and
cats include longer duration of catheter placement and
patient immunosuppression. Contamination may occur
from the hands of people placing or handling the catheter, the patient’s own flora, or the hospital environment.
The use of aseptic technique, including appropriate skin
preparation, hand hygiene immediately before placement, use of gloves, and minimal contact with the catheter site, is important to reduce CR HAIs. Culture of
catheter insertion sites is not recommended since skin
bacteria are expected to be present. As HAI outbreaks
have been associated with contaminated materials used
in skin preparation, all containers holding disinfectant
and materials used for skin preparation should be routinely (i.e., daily to weekly) disinfected, sterilized or
­discarded, rather than continuously refilled.

Surgical Site Infections
Surgical site infections are an inherent risk of breaching
the body’s normal barriers and are estimated to occur in
approximately 2–7% of veterinary surgical patients.
Factors likely to increase SSI risk include longer duration
of surgery or anesthesia, inappropriate antimicrobial
therapy, greater contamination of the surgical site, endocrine disease, increased number of people in the operating room, and orthopedic surgeries and procedures with
an implant. For most SSIs, the source of pathogens is the

Infectious Diarrhea
In small animal veterinary facilities, gastrointestinal
HAIs may involve a number of pathogens, including
Salmonella spp. Given the high frequency with which
animals may subclinically shed gastrointestinal pathogens, efforts must be aimed at both early identification of
animals at increased risk for shedding pathogens linked
with HAIs (e.g., recent consumption of raw egg or meat
products) and routine use of infection control practices.

VetBooks.ir

116 Nosocomial and Multidrug‐Resistant Infections

­Pathogens of Concern
In veterinary medicine, current knowledge of many
aspects of the epidemiology of important MDROs and
HA pathogens is unclear. Based on reported veterinary
HA outbreaks or supposition from the human literature,
several important pathogens responsible for HAIs
(including MDROs) are identifiable (see later). Pathogens
involved in HAIs are often opportunistic and found in
healthy animals. The frequency of colonization with
each pathogen likely varies with geography, animal
species, and veterinary practice (in part influenced
­
by antimicrobial use/pressure). Environmentally stable
pathogens have a demonstrated clear “advantage,”
increasing the chance of transmission. Given the close
interaction between veterinary staff and patients, as well
as the often poor hand hygiene practices documented in
veterinary practices, human commensals with zoonotic
potential are important in veterinary HAIs. Finally,
increased resistance to antimicrobials is a common
­feature. The specific resistance profiles and treatment
options for common MDR pathogens have recently been
summarized.
Staphylococcus spp.
Staphylococcus pseudintermedius and, to a lesser extent,
S. aureus are frequently the cause of veterinary HAIs. As
both are often carried in the nasopharynx, on the skin
and in the gastrointestinal tracts of dogs and people
(respectively), this is expected given the roles of endogenous bacteria and hands of healthcare workers in HAIs.
The emergence of methicillin resistance in these species
(MRSP and MRSA) has had profound implications for
HAI prevention and control. Methicillin resistance is
mediated by the mecA gene, which confers resistance to
beta‐lactam antimicrobials (penicillins, cephalosporins,
and carbapenems); isolates are frequently resistant to
additional antimicrobial classes.
Methicillin‐resistant Staphylococcus pseudintermedius
(MRSP) has rapidly spread globally in canine populations, often with high levels of antimicrobial resistance,
something that is of tremendous concern as S. pseudintermedius is the leading opportunistic pathogen in
dogs (and to a lesser degree cats). Recent prior hospitalization and beta‐lactam antimicrobial administration
have been associated with MRSP infections, suggesting
nosocomial transmission may be a factor in MRSP
disease.
Methicillin‐resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is
less of an issue from a veterinary HAI standpoint,
although its role as an important human pathogen
increases concern for zoonotic transmission. Risk factors
for MRSA colonization or infection in companion

­animals include antimicrobial use, prior hospitalization,
ownership by veterinary or human healthcare workers/
students, and longer hospitalization (>3 days). A high
proportion of veterinarians and staff are colonized with
MRSA compared to the general public, likely due to
­deficiencies in standard infection control and hygiene
practices that allow for zoonotic transmission. As such,
they may serve as a source for HAIs in their patients if
infection control practices are not observed.
Escherichia coli
Escherichia coli is a common component of the commensal gastrointestinal microflora and is an important
pathogen. Many community and hospitalized companion animals shed MDR E. coli in their feces. Factors associated with dogs shedding or acquiring MDR E. coli
during hospitalization include duration of hospitalization (>3 days) and treatment with antimicrobials shortly
before or while hospitalized. Of particular concern is the
ability for some strains of E. coli to produce beta‐lactamase, notably the extended‐spectrum beta‐lactamase
(ESBL) producers, which provide resistance to a broad
range of beta‐lactam antimicrobials, including third‐
generation cephalosporins. Resistance to additional
­antimicrobial classes is not uncommon. ESBL‐producing
E. coli has been identified as the source of veterinary
HAIs, occurring as SSIs and CR UTIs.
Carbapenemase‐producing Enterobacteriaceae (or
carbapenem‐resistant Enterobacteriaceae; CRE) (including E. coli), conferring resistance to additional antimicrobial classes, have recently become a significant public
health concern. CR E. coli have been identified in small
animals, with suggested nosocomial transmission. This
currently appears to be a rare occurrence, but one that is
likely to increase as CREs increase in prevalence in the
human population.
Enterococcus spp.
Enterococci are commonly found in the gastrointestinal
tract of animals and humans. E. faecium and E. faecalis
are most often involved in HAIs, notably in compromised hosts. Enterococci are inherently resistant to a
number of antimicrobial classes, including cephalosporins, some penicillins, fluoroquinolones, clindamycin,
and trimethoprim, and may acquire resistance to other
antimicrobial classes. Vancomycin‐resistant enterococci
(VRE) are an increasing concern in human medicine. To
date, VRE appear to be rare in companion animals;
­however, other MDR enterococci are regularly recognized and have been identified in HAIs. Enterococci are
often identified as UTIs (including catheter‐associated)
although infections at other anatomic sites occur

1059

VetBooks.ir

1060

Section 9 Infectious Disease

(SSIs, BSIs, pneumonia). The high degree of antimicrobial resistance, ability to propagate for extended periods
in small animal hosts as a commensal, and environmental persistence make enterococci particularly challenging
when involved in HAIs.

Box 116.1 Key methods to manage multidrug‐
resistant infections and reduce the risk of hospital‐
associated infections
Reduce the prevalence of MDROs in patients
Prudent antimicrobial use
●● Therapy directed by culture and susceptibility testing
●● Withholding therapy (as appropriate) for patients
only colonized and not infected
●● Discontinue use of higher risk devices (e.g., urinary
and intravenous catheters) when no longer
medically required
●● Infection control practices
●●

Salmonella spp.
Salmonella has been identified as a source of sporadic
illness and hospital‐associated outbreaks in small animal
hospitals. A notable concern with Salmonella HAIs is
the occurrence of zoonotic transmission with accompanying human infections. Factors increasing the risk of
Salmonella shedding in small animals include consumption of raw meat diets and exposure to livestock. As with
E.coli, ESBL‐producing strains are a concern for antimicrobial resistance and have been identified in small
animals.
Acinetobacter spp and Pseudomonas spp.
As opportunistic pathogens in small animals and able to
persist in the environment for extended periods,
Acinetobacter and Pseudomonas are important in veterinary HAIs. Documented HAIs involving A. baumannii
include intravenous and urinary catheters, surgical drain
infections, SSIs, pneumonia, and BSIs. SSIs, including
cardiovascular device infections, have been attributed to
P. aeruginosa. Identification of hospital clusters of
Pseudomonas infections should prompt investigation of
potentially contaminated environmental, equipment
(e.g., endoscope) or consumable (e.g., catheter preparation supplies) sources.

­Management
Although complete prevention of HAIs and MDROs is
our goal, given the nature of medicine, bacterial adaptation, and numerous mechanisms for antimicrobial resistance, it is inevitable they will continue to occur. Methods
to manage MDR infections and reduce the risk of HAIs
and nosocomial transmission are paramount (Box 116.1).
Efforts should be directed toward prompt identification, appropriate therapy, and infection control practices. Establishing and maintaining an infection control
program is vital to integrating these efforts and protecting the health of pets and people.
Therapy
Antimicrobial therapy is an important part of the treatment of many MDROs and HAIs. Although available
antimicrobial choices may be limited, the general

Reduce within‐hospital exposure
●● Hand hygiene
●● Environmental cleaning and disinfection
●● Personal protective equipment (e.g., gloves, gowns)
●● Cohorting patients with similar infectious disease
risks
●● Isolation of known or suspected infectious cases
Prompt recognition and response
●● Culture and susceptibility testing
●● HAI surveillance (e.g., passive surveillance for HAIs,
reporting of pathogens and syndromes of interest)
●● Education of staff and clients
HAI, hospital‐associated infection; MDRO, multidrug‐resistant
organism.

­principles of therapy are the same as for antimicrobial‐­
sensitive pathogens: ensuring the appropriate drug (and
dose) is selected based on the patient and infection. As
infections caused by MDROs appear clinically identical
to those caused by antimicrobial‐susceptible bacteria,
culture and susceptibility testing are fundamental in this
process. Local therapy (e.g., topical therapy, antimicrobial‐impregnated materials, intraarticular injection) is
often overlooked, and in many cases can provide adequate drug levels for treatment and may be an alternative
for drugs that are not an option for systemic therapy.
However, the possibility of systemic absorption of locally
administered drugs must be considered.
In addition to treating MDROs, it is important to prevent their development. Prudent antimicrobial use will
help reduce the risk for HAIs at both the individual
patient and hospital population levels. Clinicians should
avoid using antimicrobials when a bacterial infection has
not been confirmed by culture. Antimicrobials used in
the initial treatment of an infection should be selected
based on the effectiveness against the most likely organisms causing the infection and penetration into the body
site affected. Guidelines are available to assist veterinarians in antimicrobial selection.

VetBooks.ir

116 Nosocomial and Multidrug‐Resistant Infections

Colonization versus Infection
Following exposure to an opportunistic pathogen,
animals may become colonized (pathogen multiplies
­
without tissue invasion/damage), infected (multiplies
with tissue damage and often signs of clinical disease),
both, or neither. In animals, decolonization therapy for
MDROs has not been shown to be effective and unsuccessful attempts result in promotion of further resistance. As such, therapy should be reserved for animals
with clinical disease, regardless of the MDRO involved.
Animals without clinical signs of disease, assuming they
are otherwise immunocompetent and expected to demonstrate clinical signs should infection occur, may be
carefully monitored. Staff and clients should be informed
of the colonization status of patients, as these patients
may nonetheless shed the pathogen, serving as a source
for HAIs or zoonotic infections.

fingers, backs of hands and base of the thumbs, as these
areas are often missed. Hand hygiene should occur
before and after every animal contact and after ­removing
gloves.
Appropriate PPE use reduces the risk of contamination
of personal clothing, reduces exposure of skin and
mucous membranes of veterinary staff to pathogens, and
reduces transmission of pathogens between patients by
veterinary personnel. The use of PPE is especially important when handling animals with known or suspected
MDROs. This includes the use of a barrier gown (disposable or laboratory coat that is not worn elsewhere) and
gloves. As animals with MDROs may be colonized or
contaminated at locations distant to the infected site,
these clothing precautions should be worn when
­having contact with any MDRO patient or its housing
environment.

Patient Housing

Cleaning and Disinfection

In order to protect other patients and clinic staff, attention to patient housing and animal flow is important in
managing patients with MDROs. Patient cohorting
entails housing together and maintaining a general flow
(e.g., assigning waiting and examination areas) of
patients that have similar infectious disease risks,
including risk of shedding infectious organisms as well
as vulnerability to infection. Additionally, animals
infected or suspected to be infected with MDROs should
be isolated. The specific protocols will vary with the
pathogen, severity of disease, and facility, but should
include use of personal protective equipment (PPE),
cleaning and disinfection, and restricted personnel
access. Materials and equipment used for isolation
patients should be dedicated to the patient during its
hospital stay, after which they should be cleaned and
disinfected.

Evidence suggests environmental contamination in
human hospitals increases the risk for HAIs and interventions that reduce environmental contamination
reduce HAIs. This connection is less well established in
veterinary medicine, but it is logical to assume that it
exists. Examples of fomites that have been identified
as reservoirs of HA pathogens include stethoscopes,
computer keyboards, thermometers, examination tables,
and floors. The role of these items in HAIs is not known
but it is prudent to minimize contamination.
Several key steps must be taken to ensure a disinfectant is effective, including ensuring the surface/item is
clean and the product is applied at the manufacturer’s
suggested dilution and contact time (amount of time the
disinfectant is in contact with the item before being
removed). Disinfectants should be selected based on a
number of criteria including the product’s spectrum of
activity, susceptibility to inactivation by organic matter,
and potential pathogens in the environment. Resources
are available to guide disinfectant selection (see
Chapter 117).
Antimicrobial resistance does not necessarily indicate
further resistance to environmental disinfectants,
although the consequences for inadequate removal/
decontamination are greater. As such, it is prudent to
consider the use of a “broad‐spectrum” disinfectant
(e.g., oxidizing agents), for contact surfaces of patients
with HAIs or MDROs.

Hand Hygiene and Contact Precautions
Hand hygiene and use of PPE, such as nonsterile gloves
and gowns, are simple techniques that can reduce the
risk of HAIs. A number of studies indicate that veterinarians and staff typically do a poor job at performing
hand hygiene between patients or using PPE when indicated; improvement in these areas is desperately needed.
Hand hygiene is described as the single most effective
and underutilized infection control measure. Use of
hand hygiene limits the spread of organisms between
patients and between patients and staff. Biocidal soap
and water and alcohol‐based hand sanitizers (AHS) are
most frequently used for this purpose. Individuals
should ensure hands have soap or AHS contact for at
least 15 seconds, paying attention to fingertips, between

Zoonotic Concerns
During their careers, many veterinarians report a major
animal‐related injury resulting in lost work or hospitalization. Although not responsible for the majority of

1061

VetBooks.ir

1062

Section 9 Infectious Disease

these injuries, HAIs such as MDROs (e.g., MRSA,
Salmonella) do occur. Educating staff and clients on
zoonotic disease risks and enforcing hospital infection
control protocols to reduce these risks will be beneficial
to the health of people and patients.

­Conclusion
Hospital‐associated infections are reported in veterinary
medicine and their frequency is likely to increase
with the rise in intensive care practices. Prolonged

­hospitalization and the use of invasive devices and procedures increase the risk of HAIs. All staff members
should be educated on the risks and signs associated
with HAIs so that cases can be detected early and managed appropriately. A multifaceted approach is necessary
to address HAIs and MDROs in small animal veterinary
medicine, including prudent antimicrobial use, strengthening s­ urveillance in companion animal species, improving infection control practices, instilling an infection
control culture amongst veterinary staff, and improving
healthcare worker and public education regarding
antimicrobials.

­Further Reading
Benedict KM, Morley PS, van Metre DC. Characteristics
of biosecurity and infection control programs at
veterinary teaching hospitals. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008;
233: 767–73.
Canadian Committee on Antibiotic Resistance. Infection
Prevention and Control Best Practices for Small Animal
Veterinary Clinics. www.wormsandgermsblog.com/
files/2008/04/CCAR‐Guidelines‐Final2.pdf (accessed
June 26, 2019).
Papich MG. Antibiotic treatment of resistant infections in
small animals. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2013; 43: 1091–107.

Stolle I, Prenger‐Berninghoff E, Stamm I, et al. Emergence
of OXA‐48 carbapenemase‐producing Escherichia coli
and Klebsiella pneumoniae in dogs. J Antimicrobial
Chemother 2013; 68: 2802–8.
Weese JS, Blondeau JM, Boothe D, et al. Antimicrobial use
guidelines for treatment of urinary tract disease in dogs
and cats: Antimicrobial guidelines working group of the
International Society for Companion Animal Infectious
Diseases. Vet Med Int 2011; 2011: 263768.

VetBooks.ir

1063

117
Management of Infectious Disease in Kennels and Multicat Environments:
Creating a Culture of Compliance
Frank Bossong, DVM
College of Veterinary Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA, USA

Dog kennels and multiple‐cat environments exist in
­various types of venues. Whether a boarding facility, a
cattery, dog breeding kennel, animal control shelter or
humane society, challenges arise in minimizing and
managing infectious disease in environments where
multiple individuals co‐habit in confined areas. Minimi­
zing the risks, understanding modes of transmission,
promoting prevention, taking a structured approach to
disinfection, and, most importantly, creating a culture of
compliance for established protocols can be helpful in
the prevention and control of infectious disease in these
settings. Not only will the health of the canine and feline
residents be promoted, but such an approach protects the
human caretaker from zoonotic disease transmission.

­Risks
Some of the major risks for the spread of infectious dis­
ease include poor facility design, overcrowding, intro­
duction of new individuals with undetermined health
status, untrained/noncompliant staff, and lack of policy,
procedures, and/or biologic risk management (BRM)
protocols for managing infectious disease.
Overcrowding increases exposure through direct con­
tact between animals and increases stress, which can
lead to decreased immunity. Stress can also lead to reac­
tivation of latent infection, which causes increased shed­
ding, and increased infection across the population. The
presence of younger individuals and others with naive
immune systems (not fully vaccinated) makes the popu­
lation more susceptible to disease outbreak. The housing
of animals according to immune status should be imple­
mented, with the naive individuals (young and/or unvac­
cinated) housed separately from the adults.
Minimum space requirements should be considered
for each facility. The Humane Society of the United

States and the Animal Welfare Act have set minimum
standards to follow. Dogs in group housing should have a
minimum of 4 ×4 feet of floor space per individual.
­Co‐housed cats should have at least 10.8 square feet per
cat and an additional 2.5 square feet for cats that are
­co‐housed together. Ventilation is also important, with
an optimum exchange rate of air inside a building
replaced with fresh outside air 8–15 times per hour. Safe
outside housing is ideal in terms of air circulation and
has the added benefit of sunlight and ultraviolet light, as
they reduce the number of microorganisms and can
inactivate viruses, bacteria, fungi, and mycoplasma. The
materials in the facility need to be nonporous to allow for
proper cleaning and disinfection of surfaces.

­Modes of Transmission
Understanding of the modes of transmission is helpful in
determining the preventive measures that need to be
taken. Aerosol transmission is affected by ventilation
and distance between individuals. Oral ingestion of con­
taminated food/water and oral contact with inanimate
objects (fomites) such as toys, cages, bedding, etc. are
two of the most common routes of disease transmission.
Direct contact or animal‐to‐animal contact (nose to
nose) is also common. Vector transfer of disease via
arthropods is another cause for concern. Environmental
transmission necessitates proper sanitation protocols.

­Prevention
Prevention is paramount to success in the management of
infectious disease outbreaks. The staff and supervisors of
facilities need to understand and identify the risks and then
develop infection control policies and procedures for the
facility and education and training protocols for the staff.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1064

Section 9 Infectious Disease

Upon intake to a facility, animals must be evaluated via
physical exam and checking of medical records in order
to identify any problem(s) that may be present and
develop a preventive health plan for each animal. Staff
need to be aware of the clinical signs to look for, which
diagnostic tests need to be run (e.g., FeLV/FIV test,
SNAP® Parvo Test) and what preventive measures need
to be taken (e.g., vaccination protocol followed). If a dis­
ease is diagnosed, it is neccessary to follow a protocol on
how to treat and where to house ill animals, and how to
monitor for additional spread in order to succeed in
managing an outbreak.
Numerous pathogens need to be addressed and under­
standing the agent, mode of excretion, incubation, shed­
ding, and carrier states is key to managing them. The
Koret Shelter Medicine website is one valuable resource
for providing specific profiles and protocols for address­
ing diseases (www.sheltermedicine.com).
Along with these management strategies, prevention
involves vaccination and diagnostic testing protocols
and the use of proper sanitation to prevent transmission.
Improving immune status of individuals should be
addressed via vaccination, good nutrition, and decreas­
ing stress. Prevention is also accomplished by screening
at a designated receiving area and establishing proper
isolation and quarantine areas. Staff should understand
that with most diseases, isolation of 14 days is a minimal
holding time for ill animals. Less than seven days is of
little benefit for most infectious diseases.

­Vaccination
Vaccination provides an additional safeguard to the
health and well‐being of cats and dogs. The 2017
American Animal Hospital Association (AAHA) Canine
Vaccine Guidelines and the 2015 World Small Animal
Veterinary Association (WSAVA) Guidelines for the
Vaccination of Dogs and Cats provide a comprehensive
look at which vaccines are core and noncore, and how
protocols may differ between canines seen in general
veterinary practice and those in shelter housing
(kenneled).
For felines, the 2013 American Association of Feline
Practitioners Feline Vaccine Advisory Panel Report is an
excellent resource for the core, noncore, and not recom­
mended feline vaccinations.
Timing can be critical. In shelters, core vaccines should
be given as soon as possible and if vaccination status of an
incoming animal is unknown, some might argue that it is
best to assume that it is unvaccinated. In boarding ken­
nels, proper timing of vaccination (such as Bordetella
bronchiseptica) well in advance of boarding an individual
is warranted. Understanding the role of maternal immunity

and how it affects vaccination protocol and proper follow‐
up of additional boosters in puppies and kittens is crucial
for adequate protection of these individuals.

­Cleaning and Disinfection
The importance of sanitation is often underestimated
and even though immunization for infectious disease is a
valuable tool, it is good to remember that one “cannot
vaccinate one’s way out of an outbreak.” If the pathogen
load is great enough, a vaccinated animal can still suc­
cumb to disease.
It is important to know which disinfectants are the
right choices for routine disinfection protocols and what
is appropriate when an outbreak occurs. Determine
whether broad‐spectrum activity or targeting of a spe­
cific isolated organism is needed and then choose the
appropriate disinfectant, correct concentration, applica­
tion, and contact time. It is important to know which dis­
infectants are needed to kill bacteria, enveloped viruses,
nonenveloped viruses, fungus/ringworm, parasite eggs,
and spores. These are listed from easiest to hardest to
kill. Disinfectant failure occurs for a number of reasons.
Often, the wrong choice is made for a given pathogen or
there is under‐ or overdilution of the product. Failure to
rid a surface of organic material, lack of adequate appli­
cation, wrong temperature, humidity and especially lack
of contact time (no less than 10 minutes with most disin­
fectants) are additional pitfalls to avoid. The establish­
ment of a “disinfection action plan” includes assessment,
cleaning, washing, disinfection, and evaluation. Washing
is considered to be the most crucial step in the disinfec­
tion process and can result in the removal of 99% of bac­
teria present in a contaminated area.
Hand washing cannot be overemphasized. Human
hands play a major role in the transmission of infectious
disease. A “bare below the elbows” policy allows all indi­
viduals an easier opportunity to wash the hands, wrists,
and forearms after contact with animals. Running water
and soap should be provided in as many areas of a facility
as possible, especially in isolation areas. Understanding
the limitations of hand sanitizers is important. These
alcohol‐based products do not kill nonenveloped viruses
like canine parvovirus and panleukopenia and are easily
deactivated in the presence of organic material on unclean
hands. However, the World Health Organization (WHO)
recommends that these alcohol‐based products are cur­
rently “the only means for rapidly and effectively inacti­
vating a wide array of potentially harmful microorganism
on hands.” Personal protective equipment (PPE) is also
important for staff at animal facilities as clothing is a
common fomite. Using gloves, lab jackets or a designated
uniform and proper disposal or decontamination of these

VetBooks.ir

117 Management of Infectious Disease in Kennels and Multicat Environments: Creating a Culture of Compliance

items are crucial to preventing the spread of pathogens.
This is especially important when handling sick animals
or when working in a designated isolation area.
Quaternary compounds are commonly used and some
of the brand names are misleading in terms of what
organisms they are effective against. The Center for Food
Security and Public Health (www.cfsph.iastate.edu) pro­
vides charts of both the characteristics and antimicrobial
spectrum of various products. These should be routinely
used as a reference when decisions about appropriate
disinfectant choice are needed. In general, quaternary
compounds are not effective against canine parvovirus
and panleukopenia, both nonenveloped viruses that can
have fatal consequences for individuals in kennels and
catteries respectively. The hydrogen peroxide‐based oxi­
dizing agents are effective against some of these microbes.
Bleach can be very effective but only if proper dilution,
length of efficacy after mixing, and proper application
protocols are followed. Concentrations greater than 1:32
can be harmful to mucous membranes, thus increasing
susceptibility to disease. When cleaning and disinfecting
cages, feline patients should be removed from the area
when deep cleaning is involved. It is considered a stand­
ard of care to remove dogs from kennel runs when they
are being sprayed down. Phenolic disinfectants (“Lysol”)
should not be used in catteries as they are toxic to felines.

­Managing Outbreaks
Recognizing an outbreak as early as possible provides
the best prevention. Controlling the outbreak requires
isolation, proper diagnosis, and treatment. In an out­
break situation, an isolation area can help prevent cross‐
infection between animals. Separate equipment needs
to be stored in this area and the correct PPE and proto­
cols need to be followed by staff. Protective outer equip­
ment should be used when cleaning, and it should be
cleaned and changed daily. Disposable shoe covers are
used when heavy infection load is suspected and thrown
away after use.

­Culture of Compliance
One of the biggest risks to proper disease control in ken­
nels and multicat facilities is the lack of an established
policy and procedure and the lack of staff compliance
with established protocols. Staff need to be aware that
their hands and fomites like clothing and equipment may
be the biggest risk to the spread of disease in a facility.
Outbreaks can be avoided and/or their impact minimized
if good protocols exist. However, if there is no compliance
from the staff, even the best protocols will be ineffective.

Many protocols are ready to follow and the staff has the
ability to perform them. Their motivation to do so, on the
other hand, may or may not result in compliance.
The idea of establishing an “infection control culture”
may be fundamental in providing effective infectious dis­
ease control. What people “read, hear, see, and talk about
on a regular basis” are what characterize the idea of “cul­
ture.” The “read” component would be the establishment
of a written infection control manual which would be
used to train new staff and which existing staff could refer
to when needed. The “hear” component comes from
supervisors in terms of staff updates about protocol
changes and encouraging conversation about the protocol
during regular staff meetings. Posters about hand washing
and use of hand sanitizers, for example, help as a visual
reminder. Additionally, supervisors and senior staff can
serve as an example to follow, further supporting the “see”
component of the equation. Giving the staff adequate
time to perform hand hygiene, proper cleaning and disin­
fection, changing PPE and other tasks demonstrates the
importance that is placed on these practices, and thereby
contributes to the infection control culture. The concept
of compliance is a critical factor here. As per the
Compendium of Veterinary Precautions, “a written check­
list, which specifies the frequency of cleaning, disinfection
procedures, products to be used, and the staff responsible,
should be developed for each area of the facility…”.

­Protection from Zoonotic Pathogens
The emergence of new or evolving pathogens in kennels
and catteries will remain a challenge to managing d
­ isease.
For example, in kennels, Streptococcus zooepidemicus is
one such pathogen and clinical signs are similar to those
of kennel cough. The bacterium is able to spread between
dogs as outbreaks at kennels often affect large numbers
of animal within a short time. No vaccine exists but good
husbandry and isolation of infected individuals are a
must. Again, early detection, isolation, and disinfection
provide the best management practice and have been
found to be fundamental for the control of S. zooepidemicus outbreaks. Good hygiene standards will also
minimize the risk of transmission of S. zooepidemicus to
dog handlers.

­Conclusion
When following effective protocols for managing infec­
tious disease in kennels and multicat environments, the
outcome is not only reduced transmission from animal
to animal but also the reduction of potential zoonotic
transmission. Again, S. zooepidemicus provides an

1065

VetBooks.ir

1066

Section 9 Infectious Disease

excellent example. In order to improve control of this
disease, it is crucial to raise awareness, to ensure that
cases are recognized early. This will allow the imple­
mentation of suitable protocols to minimize the spread
of infection along with measures to protect staff from
zoonotic infection. The National Association of State
Public Health Veterinarians has produced the
Compendium of Veterinary Standard Precautions
(www.nasphv.org), which provides a resource for PPE,

environmental infection control, and isolation of
­animals with infectious diseases. Extensive resources
are readily available to enhance the management of
infectious disease in kennels and multicat environ­
ments. With the establishment of an infection control
culture as well as a culture of compliance, the spread of
infectious disease can be minimized, thus protecting
the health of cats and dogs as well as their human
caretakers.

­Further Reading
Miller L, Hurley K. Infectious Disease Management in
Animal Shelters. Ames, IA: Wiley‐Blackwell, 2009.
Miller L, Zawistowski S. Vaccination strategies in
the animal shelter environment. In: Shelter Medicine for
Veterin­arians and Staff. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing,
2004.
Newbury S, Blinn, M, Bushby P, et al. Guidelines for
Standards of Care in Animal Shelters. www.sheltervet.
org/assets/docs/shelter‐standards‐oct2011‐wforward.
pdf (accessed June 26, 2019).

Priestnall S, Erles KE. Streptococcus zooepidemicus: an
emerging canine pathogen. Vet J 2011; 188: 142–8.
Scherk MA, Ford RB, Gaskell R, et al. AAFP Feline Vaccine
Advisory Panel Report. J Feline Med Surg 2013; 15: 785.
www.wsava.org/sites/default/files/WSAVA%20Vaccination
%20Guidelines%202015%20Full%20Version.pdf
www.catvets.com/guidelines/practice‐guidelines/feline‐
vaccination‐guidelines
https://www.aaha.org/aaha-guidelines/vaccination-canineconfiguration/vaccination-canine/

VetBooks.ir

1067

Section 10

Renal and Genitourinary Disease

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1069

118
Disorders of Sodium and Water Homeostasis
Julien Guillaumin, DVM, DACVECC1 and Stephen DiBartola, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)2
1
2

Department of Clinical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA

Sodium (Na) and water disorders traditionally have been
viewed by veterinarians as difficult concepts. An appreciation of the basic physiology underlying these concepts
will facilitate their understanding. The objectives of this
chapter are to review the pathophysiology of changes in
volume and composition of the body fluid compartments associated with hyponatremia and hypernatremia
as well as a clinical approach to fluid therapy that takes
into account these changes in sodium concentration.

­Water Balance Made Easy
Imagine two compartments separated by a semipermeable membrane. Each compartment has the same osmolality (number of solute particles per kilogram of solvent).
If solute (without water) is added to compartment #1
without changing the volume of the compartment, the
concentration of osmoles in that compartment will
increase transiently. The increase in osmolality in compartment #1 will result in movement of water (by osmosis) from compartment #2 to compartment #1 until the
osmolality of the two compartments is equalized. The
final osmolality will be the same in both compartments,
and higher than the initial osmolality.
The same concept will apply if the volume of water or
number of sodium ions in body fluids is changed: water
will flow from one compartment to the other in order to
maintain the same osmolality in both compartments.
Thus, there are only four ways to change serum sodium
concentration: adding free water, removing free water,
adding sodium, or removing sodium.
Hyponatremia is the most common sodium disturbance
in small animals. It can result from an excess of free water
(e.g., excessive water consumption, intravenous fluid therapy with hypotonic fluids, antidiuretic hormone [ADH]

secretion) or from loss of sodium (in excess of water),
which is rare because sodium usually is followed by
water. Rare examples include salt‐losing nephropathy and
cerebral salt‐wasting syndrome. Hyponatremia usually
means that an excessive amount of water is present in body
fluids, and the generalization “hyponatremia means too
much water” applies in most situations. Treatment of
hyponatremia requires understanding and resolution of
the primary process. Conversely, the generalization
“hypernatremia means not enough water” also is true most
of the time. Hypernatremia may arise either as a consequence of loss of free water (i.e., evaporation from the skin
or ­respiratory tract) or hypotonic fluid, or by the addition
of sodium (e.g., intravenous fluid therapy with 0.9% saline
or hypertonic saline). Treatment of hypernatremia mainly
is based on slow volume replacement to avoid detrimental
transcellular shifts of water, as will be ­discussed later.

­Sodium and Water Disturbances:
A Little Physiology Goes a Long Way
The Darrow–Yannet diagram (Figure 118.1) illustrates
the partition of total body water (TBW) into compartments. Although some variation exists due to species,
age or sex, it is estimated that:
●●
●●

total body water is 60% of body weight (BW)
total body water is divided into two compartments:
–– intracellular fluid (ICF): approximately 2/3 of
TBW – 40% of body weight
–– extracellular fluid (ECF): approximately 1/3 of
TBW – 20% of body weight
–– ECF is further subdivided into the interstitial compartment (3/4 of ECF) and the intravascular compartment (IV) (1/4 of ECF).

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1070

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

­Osmoregulation and Volume
Regulation

ECF
ICF

Int

IV

B
A

Intracellular fluid
compartment

Extracellular fluid
compartment

Figure 118.1 Partition of total body water (TBW) into body
compartments. See text for details.

To understand changes in serum sodium concentration,
it is important to remember that movement of water
between ICF and ECF (arrow A on Figure 118.1)
depends on osmolality, whereas movement of water
within the ECF (arrow B on Figure 118.1) depends on
Starling’s forces, which will not be reviewed here. An
estimation of osmolarity is given by the following
equation:
Plasma osmolarity mOsm / L 2 Na K
BUN mg/dL / 2.8 glucose mg/dL /18
It is noteworthy that osmolality is a function of the
number of solute particles and not their molecular
weight. If using international units (mmol/L) for BUN
or glucose, the dividing factors shown above are not
necessary. The dividing factors convert conventional
units into international units by dividing the conventional units by molecular weight (i.e., 28 g/mol for urea
or 180 g/mol for glucose) and multiplying by 10 to convert deciliters (dL) to liters (L). A very abundant molecule such as albumin (mean plasma concentration of
4.5 g/dL) has a minimal effect on osmolality because its
molecular weight is very high (66 000 Da equivalent to a
molar mass of 66 000 g/mol), which makes the particle
number relatively low. Albumin contributes only
approximately 0.75 mOsm/kg to plasma osmolality. By
the same token, colloid osmotic pressure refers to the
osmolality due to proteins, and contributes approximately 1–2 mOsm/kg. The osmolarity calculated by the
equation above and expressed in mOsm/L is always
lower than the osmolality measured by freezing point
depression osmometry and expressed in mOsm/kg.
The so‐called osmolal gap is the contribution of
osmoles other than sodium, potassium, urea, and glucose and usually is <10 mOsm/kg. If the osmolal gap is
increased, it may be due to a large quantity of unmeasured osmoles such as mannitol or ethylene glycol and
its metabolites.

Serum sodium concentration is regulated by changes in
water balance, and not by changes in sodium or volume.
Similarly, it is important to understand the difference
between plasma osmolality and serum sodium concentration, as well as their regulation. Plasma osmolality is
regulated by changes in water excretion and intake mediated by ADH secretion and thirst, whereas sodium balance is regulated by changes in sodium excretion via
skin, urine, fecal, and respiratory losses. Overall, there is
no predictable relationship between serum sodium concentration and ECF volume. However, serum sodium
concentration and serum osmolality vary in parallel,
except when a large number of effective osmoles is present (e.g., glucose). (Effective osmoles are those that do
not move across a semipermeable membrane and thus
have the potential to initiate water movement by
osmosis.)
Serum osmolality is regulated by hypothalamic osmoreceptors that trigger ADH release and stimulate thirst.
Antidiuretic hormone secretion in response to changes
in osmolality is very sensitive, and a change of just 1% in
serum sodium concentration (1–2 mEq/L) will stimulate
ADH release. This very sensitive trigger means that a
small change, even of 1 mEq/L, in serum sodium concentration can be abnormal for an individual patient despite
being within the reference range for a patient population.
Antidiuretic hormone secretion increases water reabsorption in the collecting tubules of the kidneys. In addition to hyperosmolality sensed by osmoreceptors, ADH
secretion also is triggered by hypovolemia when a
decrease in ECF volume is sensed by the baroreceptors
(actually stretch receptors) situated in the aortic arch
and carotid sinus.
Multiple receptors and effectors are involved in volume regulation. The most pertinent to sodium regulation are the natriuretic peptides and ADH. Natriuretic
peptides (e.g. atrial natriuretic peptide [ANP] and brain
natriuretic peptide [BNP]) are released by the atria in
response to hypervolemia and promote renal sodium
excretion. Antidiuretic hormone release has been
described above. The renin‐angiotensin‐aldosterone
system (RAAS), although a very potent volume regulator, does not lead to changes in serum sodium concentration. The RAAS endpoint is the release of aldosterone,
which triggers isotonic fluid reabsorption in the kidneys
in response to hypovolemia. Thus, aldosterone release
does not lead to a change in serum sodium concentration. However, some cross‐talk occurs between the
RAAS and ADH secretion, with angiotensin II triggering
ADH release.

VetBooks.ir

118 Disorders of Sodium and Water Homeostasis

Thirst is a commonly overlooked modifier of serum
sodium concentration. Thirst is triggered by a variety of
factors, including hypovolemia and increased plasma
osmolality. Thirst mainly is regulated centrally, with some
input from the cerebral cortex which influences nonessential intake (i.e., social drinking in humans), and also by the
sensation of a dry mouth. The sensation of thirst is so powerful that normal subjects do not become hypernatremic
despite intake of a large amount of sodium as long as they
have access to enough water to drink. This is true even in
patients with central diabetes insipidus (CDI), which
explains the fact that such patients usually are presented
with signs of polydipsia and polyuria with normal serum
sodium concentration unless they lack access to water
(e.g., freezing of the water source or a spilled water bowl).
Hypovolemia triggers both isotonic (via aldosterone)
and hypotonic (via ADH) fluid reabsorption. Theoretically,
hypotonic fluid reabsorption would generate a hypoosmolar state which would turn off ADH release, in order to
maintain plasma osmolality. However, although ADH
release due to changes in osmolality is very sensitive,
ADH release in response to hypovolemia is very powerful, and restoration of volume will proceed at the expense
of osmoregulation (i.e., hyponatremia will ensue). From
an evolutionary perspective, it likely was advantageous to
survival of the animal to preserve volume over normal
osmolality.

­Hyponatremia
Causes of Hyponatremia
Hyponatremia is a common electrolyte disorder in critically ill and hospitalized patients. It can be divided into
three categories, based on osmolality and volume status
(Table 118.1).
Pseudohyponatremia may occur when serum sodium
concentration is determined by flame photometry, an

obsolete technique by which serum sodium concentration is measured in a defined plasma volume (water and
solids such as proteins and lipids). If there is a high concentration of lipids or proteins, the measured serum
sodium concentration will be artificially low. This also is
true if the serum sodium concentration is measured by
indirect potentiometry, which is common in reference
laboratories. This does not occur if an ion‐selective electrode (i.e., direct potentiometry) is used, which is commonly used in point‐of‐care instruments.
Most hyponatremic patients fall into the hypovolemic,
hypoosmolar category, with the notable exception of
patients suffering from diabetes mellitus (see later).
Hypovolemia causes reduction of effective circulating
volume, triggering ADH secretion and free water retention. Hypovolemia occurs after gastrointestinal losses
(i.e., vomiting and diarrhea), renal losses, hypoadrenocorticism, and other causes of hypovolemia.
Patients in congestive heart failure (CHF) or advanced
liver failure with ascites also have decreased effective circulating volume although they have excessive total body
fluid volume and are hyponatremic. In CHF, decreased
“effective stroke volume” secondary, for example, to valvular disease triggers ADH release and thirst, leading to
hyponatremia despite hypervolemia. The same is true in
the liver failure patient, where portal hypertension leads
to ascites and decreased venous return, stimulating ADH
release and water retention.
Patients suffering from diabetes mellitus can have normoosmolar hyponatremia. In diabetes mellitus, the
hyperosmolality resulting from a high blood glucose
concentration induces a shift of water from the ICF compartment to the ECF compartment and results in serum
sodium concentration dilution. This is the primary reason why hyponatremia occurs in diabetes mellitus, contrary to the common belief that it is due to a loss of
sodium. Actually, osmotic diuresis leads to loss of water
in excess of sodium, and potentially to hypernatremia.

Table 118.1 Categories of hyponatremia
Hypoosmolar
Hypovolemic

Normovolemic

Hypervolemic

Addison’s disease
Salt‐losing nephropathy
Cerebral salt wasting
Hypovolemic states:
Gastrointestinal loss
Third space loss
Shock
Diuretics
Renal insufficiency

Syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion
Hypotonic fluid administration
Hypothyroidism
Glucocorticoid insufficiency
Psychogenic polydipsia
Reset osmostat

Acute/chronic renal failure
Nephrotic syndrome
Congestive heart failure
Hepatic cirrhosis
Accidental ingestion/injection of water

1071

VetBooks.ir

1072

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

A correction factor can be applied to correct the serum
sodium concentration in diabetic patients. Traditionally,
that correction factor has been reported to be 1.6–
1.7 mEq/L, such that for each 100 g/dL increase in blood
glucose concentration above normal, the serum sodium
concentration will decrease by 1.6–1.7 mEq/L. This correction factor has been challenged in human medicine,
and the correction factor may be closer to 2.4 mEq/L,
and also the association between sodium and glucose
concentrations is nonlinear, with a correction factor that
can be up to 4.0 mEq/L if blood glucose concentration is
above 400 mg/dL. The appropriate correction factor for
dogs and cats is unknown.
For example, a patient with a blood glucose concentration of 1100 g/dL and serum sodium concentration
between 105 and 125 mEq/L would have a “corrected
serum sodium” concentration of 145 mEq/L (i.e., normal) if a correction factor of 2–4 mEq/L is used. This
patient therefore is actually not suffering from hyponatremia. Alternatively, the same patient with a measured
serum sodium concentration of 135 mEq/L would have a
“corrected serum sodium” concentration between 155
and 175 mEq/L. Thus, such a patient actually is suffering
from free water loss and should be treated accordingly.
Similarly, when monitoring the changes in serum sodium
concentration in diabetes mellitus, the “corrected serum
sodium” concentration should be used to judge the risk
of overly rapid osmotic shifts of water, because these
shifts are due to changes in osmolality and should take
into account the blood glucose concentration.
The syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion
(SIADH) is a common disorder in critically ill human
patients and also has been described in dogs. It is ­common

in neurologic or oncologic patients as well as after major
surgery (Table 118.2). The syndrome refers to secretion
of ADH that is inappropriate for the physiologic state
(i.e., not secondary to hypovolemia or hyperosmolality).
It is characterized clinically by normovolemia, low serum
sodium concentration, and decreased urine output. The
urine osmolality is high and urine sodium concentration
is >20 mEq/L, indicating that the patient is not in a
sodium‐retaining state (i.e., not hypovolemic) and
that the ADH secretion is in fact inappropriate (see
Table 118.2). The decreased urine output will not respond
to fluid administration, which is the first indication for
the clinician faced with a patient with decreased urination, and measurements of urine sodium concentration
and osmolality are necessary for the diagnosis of SIADH.
The usual treatment for SIADH is fluid restriction and
treatment of the primary cause, allowing the body to
reset its ADH trigger (usually within 24–72 hours). Most
criticalists will treat patients with SIADH using a low
dosage (e.g., 0.2–0.5 mg/kg) of furosemide.
Clinical Manifestations of Hyponatremia
It is not possible to predict serum sodium concentration
based on history and physical examination. Measurement
of serum sodium concentration is needed as well as some
other clinicopathologic data to rule out pseudohyponatremia. Clinical signs of hyponatremia are nonspecific
(e.g., nausea, vomiting), and related to dysfunction of the
central nervous system, such as lethargy, disorientation,
and diminished reflexes. Most human patients do not
manifest clinical signs until serum sodium concentration
is below 125 mEq/L, although rapid decrease in serum

Table 118.2 Syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion summary
Identify appropriate trigger
Postoperative nausea
●● Pain or stress
●● Neoplasia (common)
●● Pulmonary disease
●● Neurologic disease
●● Trauma
●● Drugs (e.g., NSAIDs, narcotics,
vincristine)
●●

Treatment
Stop/decrease fluid therapy
●● Treat primary trigger
●● May provide small dose of
furosemide
●●

Diagnosis
Plasma hypoosmolality
a
●● Normovolemia (i.e., absence of hypovolemia)
●● Increased urine specific gravity/osmolality (>100 mOsm/kg)
●● Urine sodium concentration >20–40 mEq/L indicating absence of an RAAS trigger (i.e.,
absence of hypovolemia)b
●●

Notes
Low urine output not responsive to fluid therapy
●● Age is a risk factor in humans
●● Case reports of SIADH have been published in veterinary medicine
●●

NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug; RAAS, renin‐angiotensin‐aldosterone system; SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate ADH.
a
Spot urine sodium concentration can be influenced by administration of steroids or diuretics, osmotic diuresis (e.g., glucosuria, mannitol
administration, postobstructive diuresis), chronic kidney disease and bicarbonaturia (e.g., proximal renal tubular acidosis).
b
A weight gain is common in SIADH (author’s personal observation).

VetBooks.ir

118 Disorders of Sodium and Water Homeostasis

sodium concentration can lead to clinical signs such
as seizures, coma, respiratory arrest or brainstem
herniation.
Consequences of Chronic Hyponatremia
Maintenance of (relatively) constant serum sodium
concentration and plasma osmolality is essential for
­
maintenance of cell volume, as explained above. This is
especially relevant for brain volume. If hyponatremia
develops acutely (i.e., a few hours) due to rapid, massive
ingestion of water, for example, an osmotic gradient will
develop and water will move rapidly into the brain,
increasing brain cell volume and creating severe acute
brain edema and eventually death. If a similar degree of
hyponatremia develops over several days, the brain cells
will release electrolytes (e.g., sodium and potassium) and
idiogenic osmoles (also known as osmolytes). Loss of
these idiogenic osmoles, such as amino acids (e.g., glutamine, glutamate, taurine), polyols (e.g., myoinositol),
and methylamines (e.g., phosphocreatinine) creates an
osmotic effect that shifts free water back out of brain
cells and slowly allows them to reequilibrate their volume, although it does not completely correct brain
hypoosmolality. It takes hours to days for these osmolytes
to be effective.
This concept is very important in the correction of
hyponatremia. Actually, the major in‐hospital deleterious consequence of chronic hyponatremia is mismanagement of the problem. If too rapid, the increase in
serum sodium concentration provokes osmotic water
movement out of the cells and brain cell shrinkage. Brain
shrinkage can cause vascular rupture, leading to cerebral
bleeding, and be responsible for acute neurologic signs
such as seizures, impaired mental state, and even death.
In addition to the immediate changes, overly rapid correction of hyponatremia (as well as rapid hypernatremia)
may cause a delayed syndrome, called osmotic demyelination syndrome (ODS) or central pontine demyelination (CPD). This syndrome is characterized by
irreversible neurologic damage including ataxia, paresis,
dysphagia or coma and has been described in veterinary
medicine.
Principles of Management of Hyponatremia
The goal of correction of chronic severe hyponatremia
or hypernatremia is to minimize the change in serum
sodium concentration to 0.5 mEq/L/h or a maximum of
10–12 mEq/L per day.
Acute hyponatremia can be corrected relatively quickly
(1–2 mEq/L/h or more rapidly), if the clinician is certain
the change is acute (e.g., acute water or salt intoxication,
iatrogenic hypo‐ or hypernatremia). Furthermore, severe

clinical signs (e.g., seizures) due to hyponatremia also
can be corrected rapidly, with the goal of increasing
serum sodium by 3–7 mEq/L in 1–2 hours and stopping
clinical manifestations such as seizures, before resuming
a slower rate of sodium correction. The rate of correction of hyponatremia should be decreased as soon as
severe clinical signs have resolved (usually when serum
sodium concentration is above 125–130 mEq/L).
When presented with a hyponatremic patient, it is very
important for the clinician to review causes of hyponatremia, because treating the underlying cause of hyponatremia is the most important part of correcting it. The
indiscriminate use of 0.9% NaCl or 3% NaCl is not warranted in all cases of hyponatremia.
History and physical examination, focused on assessment of volume status, are important. Volume status,
plasma osmolality, blood glucose concentration, assessment of adrenal function, urine osmolality and urine
sodium concentration will help assess the cause of
hyponatremia. Urine electrolyte concentrations and
urine osmolality are of paramount importance to discriminate between unrecognized low effective circulating volume (i.e., occult hypovolemia) and SIADH (see
Table 118.2).
The majority of patients with hyponatremia have an
associated depletion of ECF volume (i.e., loss of total
body sodium). Such patients require appropriate volume
replacement with isotonic fluids. Although 0.9% NaCl
can be used, a balanced electrolyte solution (e.g., lactated
Ringer’s solution, Plasmalyte® 148) is more physiologic
than 0.9% NaCl and will avoid the hyperchloremia and
mild metabolic acidosis associated with administration
of a large volume of 0.9% NaCl. Patients with hypoadrenocorticism should be treated with fluid therapy and
mineralocorticosteroid replacement.
Only patients with symptomatic hyponatremia without evidence of hypovolemia should be treated with 0.9%
NaCl and diuretics such as furosemide, combined with
water restriction. This approach is used primarily in
patients with liver failure. The combination of mannitol
and furosemide for treatment of symptomatic hyponatremia also has been described. Patients with CHF
should be treated with furosemide alone.
Sodium Deficit Calculation

The next step in management of the patient is calculation of the sodium deficit. Most clinicians use the following equation:
Sodium deficit

body weight in kg 0.6
normal Na patient Na

Eqn 1

The sodium deficit (in mEq) should be replaced over
several hours with a goal of 0.5 mEq/L/h. Sodium
­

1073

VetBooks.ir

1074

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

­replacement can be accomplished using 0.9% NaCl ([Na]=
154 mEq/L), 3% NaCl ([Na]= 513 mEq/L), 7.5% NaCl
([Na]= 1300 mEq/L) or 23.4% NaCl ([Na]= 4000 mEq/L).
For example, a 10 kg dog has a serum sodium concentration of 100 mEq/L and it is the clinician’s goal to
increase it to 140 mEq/L over 80 hours at a rate of
0.5 mEq/L per hour. Using Equation 1, we can calculate:
Sodium deficit 10 0.6

140 100

Sodium deficit 240 mEq
This 240 mEq of sodium should be replaced over 80
hours or at a rate of 3 mEq/hour. Using 3% NaCl, this corresponds to an infusion rate of 6 mL/h or 19.3 mL/h if
0.9% NaCl is used.
This formula is very basic and necessitates a good
understanding of how to replace the sodium deficit. A
number of clinicians use the following equation which
provides a rate of infusion in mL/h that depends on the
sodium goal, the fluid used, and the speed of correction:
Rate of infusion mL/h
0.6 body weight kg
desired Na Na measured 1000
/ Na content of the fluid mEq / L hours
In the example of a 10 kg dog with a sodium deficit of
240 mEq corrected over 80 hours with 3% NaCl, this rate
of infusion becomes:
Rate of infusion mL / h
0.6 10 40 1000 / 513 80
Rate of infusion mL / h

240000 / 41040

Rate of infusion mL / h

5.85

Some clinicians recommend the use of the Adrogué–
Madias equation that calculates the change in sodium
with the infusion of a liter of a given fluid. This equation
can be used for both hyponatremia and hypernatremia:
Change in serum Na Na K in 1 L of solution
patient Na / 0.6 body weight kg 1
In our case example above (10 kg dog with a serum
sodium of 100 mEq/L) using 3% NaCl, this becomes:
Change in serum Na

513 100 / 0.6 10 1

Change in serum Na 413 / 7
Change in serum Na 59 mEq
One liter of 3% NaCl will increase the patient’s serum
sodium concentration up to 159 (= 100 + 59) mEq/L. The
goal being 140 mEq/L, the clinician will use 678 mL given

over 80 hours, or an infusion rate of 8.5 mL/h. Please
note that the result is slightly different than that determined by the first two equations.
For asymptomatic patients, complications may arise
from the correction of hyponatremia, usually due to
overzealous correction of hyponatremia and brain
shrinkage. Careful calculation and monitoring of serum
sodium concentration (up to every hour) are warranted
to avoid such complications. If complications arise,
administration of hypotonic fluids is indicated.

­Hypernatremia
Hypernatremia reflects a relative excess of sodium compared to water, arising either by loss of water or from
addition of salt, the latter being less common (i.e., thirst
prevents development of hypernatremia after ingestion
of salt as long as the animal has access to drinking water).
Loss of water can be a consequence of pure water loss or
hypotonic fluid loss (i.e., more water than salt).
Causes of Hypernatremia
Hypernatremia can be classified according to volume
status, and in unusual circumstances according to osmolality (Table 118.3).
Hypernatremia typically is associated with water loss
in excess of sodium (most common) or a salt gain (occasionally, almost always with concurrent restriction of
access to water). For example, although fluid losses in
diarrhea can be isosmotic overall, the combined sodium
and potassium concentration of diarrhea fluid is lower
than that of plasma (typically around 40–100 mEq/L of
sodium and potassium combined). Thus, more free
water is lost than sodium and the patient becomes hypernatremic, a very common clinical scenario. The same
applies for renal losses. Loss of free water by osmotic
diuresis or ADH dysregulation also is common. Usually,
ADH will be released, thirst will be stimulated, and
hypernatremia and hyperosmolality will be corrected.
Clinical Manifestations of Hypernatremia
The clinical signs of hypernatremia usually are vague,
and neurologic in nature, including lethargy, confusion,
and decreased mentation. Acute hypernatremia (e.g.,
ingestion of a large amount of salt water or hypertonic
saline administration) can lead to seizures and death due
to acute brain shrinkage. As stated earlier, if the thirst
mechanism is intact and water is readily available, the
animal will ingest water and not become hypernatremic.
Most patients presented with severe, chronic hypernatremia have a neurologic problem that has either altered

VetBooks.ir

118 Disorders of Sodium and Water Homeostasis

Table 118.3 Causes of hypernatremia
Hypoosmolara

Hyperosmolar

Hypovolemia

Normovolemia

Hypervolemia

Renal losses
Gastrointestinal losses (vomiting or
diarrhea)
Burns
Osmotic diuresis
b
●● Diabetes mellitus
b
●● Diabetic ketoacidosis
b
●● Hyperosmolar nonketotic syndrome
●● Mannitol infusion
●● Postobstructive diuresis

Hypodypsia (very rare)
Diabetes insipidus (DI)
(with decreased water
intake)
●● Central DI
●● Congenital
nephrogenic DI
●● Acquired
nephrogenic DI
Fever
Decreased access to water

Hypoproteinemia
(hypolipidemia)

Salt intoxication
Iatrogenic
●● Sea water ingestion
Hypertonic saline infusion
Sodium bicarbonate
infusion
Primary hyperaldosteronism
Hyperadrenocorticism
●●

a

Pseudohypernatremia may occur when serum sodium concentration is measured by flame photometry, an obsolete technique, or indirect
potentiometry, which is common in reference laboratories. These concerns are not relevant if an ion‐selective electrode (direct potentiometry) is
used to measure serum sodium concentration.
b
Use corrected sodium concentration (previously discussed).

their thirst mechanism or prevented their ability to
obtain and independently drink water. In patients with
decreased access to water, intense thirst may be the only
clinical sign, and it may subside with chronicity.
Consequences of Chronic Hypernatremia
Similarly (although in the opposite direction) to what
happens in chronic hyponatremia, chronic hypernatremia induces increased production of osmolytes, leading to normalization of brain cell volume. This explains
why only acute or subacute hypernatremia leads to
important clinical signs. Also, clinical signs may arise
after acute normalization of serum sodium concentration in patients with chronic hypernatremia, because
rapid lowering of the serum sodium concentration may
cause brain edema and associated clinical signs. In such
cases, administration of hypertonic fluid and mannitol
may be warranted.
Principles of Management of Hypernatremia
A thorough history and complete physical examination,
including questions about access to water and water consumption, and careful assessment of volume status are
the starting points. Ruling out diabetes mellitus is easy
and inexpensive. Determination of urine osmolality is
important to assess the body’s response to ADH.
Concentrated urine suggests extrarenal (usually gastrointestinal) water loss, whereas hypoosmolar urine indicates that the kidney is the source of free water loss,
usually secondary to diabetes insipidus.

Although usually easily identified, understanding and
addressing the underlying cause of hypernatremia are
important. Correcting hyperosmolality usually requires
slow free water administration. As mentioned earlier,
chronic hypernatremia must be corrected slowly to avoid
adverse cerebral fluid shifts. The recommended rate for
correction of hypernatremia is identical to the correction of hyponatremia, with a maximum rate of
10–12 mEq/L per day, and a goal of 0.5–1 mEq/L per
hour. Correction of hypernatremia is achieved by free
water replacement.
Water Deficit Calculations

Several equations exist, but the classic water deficit
equation is:
Water deficit 0.6 body weight kg
Normal Na 1

Plasma Na /

For example, for a 10 kg patient with a normal serum
sodium concentration of 145 mEq/L and a current serum
sodium concentration of 175 mEq/L:
Water deficit 0.6 10
175 / 145 1 1.2 L 1200 mL
This formula estimates the amount of free water required
to return this patient’s serum sodium concentration to
normal (i.e., 145 mEq/L). In chronic hypernatremia, the
serum sodium concentration should be corrected no
more rapidly than 0.5–1 mEq/L/h. The patient described
earlier should receive the 1200 mL over 30–60 hours,
with a free water fluid rate of of 20–40 mL/h.

1075

VetBooks.ir

1076

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

As mentioned earlier, the Adrogué–Madias formula
that calculates the change in serum sodium concentration with infusion of a liter of a given fluid also can be
used:
Change in serum sodium concentration Na
K content in 1 Lof solution Na measured
/ 0.6 body weight kg 1
In the example of a 10 kg dog and using 5% dextrose:
Change in serum Na

0 175 / 0.6 10 1

Change in serum Na

175 / 7

Change in serum Na

25

This formula indicates that 1 L of 5% dextrose in water
will decrease the serum sodium concentration by
25 mEq/L. To decrease it to normal (i.e., 145 mEq/L)
from 175 mEq/L, 1.2 L of 5% dextrose in water will be
necessary, given over 30–60 hours (at a rate of 0.5–1 mEq/
L/h) and thus the infusion rate should be 20–40 mL/h.
The water deficit formula has been challenged for several reasons and may underestimate the true water deficit by as much as 50%. First, it assumes that total body
water remains unchanged during hyponatremic states.
Also, it does not account for low solute fluid losses (i.e.,
hypotonic fluids), such as urine and gastrointestinal
secretions (i.e., it only accounts for free water loss).
Likewise, it does not account for any ongoing hypotonic
losses. The Adrogué–Madias equation results in the
same volume of free water, and thus also has been challenged. The important clinical implication is that serial
monitoring (q4–6h) is necessary to reevaluate serum
sodium concentration and serum osmolality, and adjust
the fluid infusion rate, which is invariably necessary.
Ongoing losses of hypotonic fluid also can persist and
make the calculation unpredictable. Some clinicians
(personal communication, Dr Steve Haskins) use the
quick rule of thumb that “3.7–mL/kg/h of free water will
decrease the serum sodium concentration by 1 mEq/L
per hour” and reassess the serum sodium concentration
after 4–6 hours. For the example above, the animal would
have received 37 mL/h.
As mentioned previously, acute changes in serum
sodium concentration (e.g., accidental sodium loading in
parenteral fluids) can be corrected more rapidly. This is
also true for patients with severe clinical signs due to
chronic changes in serum sodium concentration, when
the serum sodium concentration can be corrected rapidly until clinical signs resolve, before adopting a more
chronic approach.
The approach described earlier does not account for
any isotonic fluid losses or for the patient’s maintenance
fluid requirement. If 0.45% NaCl is used (sodium con-

centration of 77 mEq/L), the rate should be adjusted
because only half of this solution represents free water.
The patient above should receive 36–71 mL/h, which
represents a substantial volume and potentially could
worsen brain edema. Thus, the lowest tonicity fluid (and
hence volume) is always recommended.
If 5% dextrose in water is contraindicated (e.g., hyperglycemic patients) and only if a central venous catheter is
in place, some clinicians have advocated using intravascular sterile water. When administered through a central
intravenous catheter, sterile water does not cause clinically relevant intravascular hemolysis.
Shock Resuscitation of the Chronically
Hypernatremic Patient

Resuscitation of volume‐depleted hypernatremic
patients, or those with concomitant isotonic fluid losses,
should be done carefully, with the sodium content of the
fluid matching the animal’s serum sodium concentration
within 10 mEq/L to avoid decreasing the serum sodium
concentration too rapidly. Consider again the 10 kg dog
with a serum sodium concentration of 175 mEq/L, and
add the clinical situation of hypovolemic shock.
If lactated Ringer’s solution (LRS) is used and the dog
requires administration of 1 L of LRS over a one‐hour
period, we can calculate the impact of 1 L of LRS on the
patient’s serum sodium concentration. LRS has a sodium
concentration of 132 mEq/L, so 75% (i.e., 132/175) of the
solution is isotonic to the patient’s plasma and 25% is free
water. With the administration of 1000 mL of LRS, the
patient actually will receive the equivalent of 250 mL of
free water, decreasing its serum sodium concentration
from 175 to 168 over one hour and possibly leading to
cellular swelling, brain edema, seizures, and coma. The
use of a fluid isotonic to the patient is necessary for shock
resuscitation of a chronically hypernatremic patient. If
LRS is used, the addition of 10 mL of 23.4% NaCl (4 mEq/
mL of Na) to a liter of LRS will create a balanced electrolyte solution with a sodium concentration of 172 mEq/L
(= 132 + 10 × 4) that will be very close to the patient’s
serum sodium concentration of 175 mEq/L. Once shock
is treated, the clinician can focus on the free water deficit. A similar approach also can be used for shock resuscitation of the chronically hyponatremic patient.

­Conclusion
A good understanding of sodium and water balance is
necessary to appropriately identify and treat chronic and
acute changes in serum sodium concentration in small
animal patients. The proper approach is always the one
of the conscientious clinician: a thorough history and
complete physical examination, appropriate diagnostic

VetBooks.ir

118 Disorders of Sodium and Water Homeostasis

tests (including serum sodium concentration and urine
electrolyte concentrations if needed), appropriate calculation of sodium (or water) deficit, and careful monitoring of changes in the serum sodium concentration and

osmolality in order to avoid deleterious effects of treatment. With these concepts in mind, sodium and water
balance becomes both exciting and challenging at the
same time.

­Further Reading
Adrogué HJ, Madias NE. Hypernatremia. N Engl J Med
2000; 342(20): 1493–9.
Cheuvront SN, Kenefick RW, Sollanek KJ, Ely BR, Sawka
MN. Water‐deficit equation: systematic analysis and
improvement. Am J Clin Nutr 2013; 97(1): 79–85.
DiBartola SP. Disorders of sodium and water:
hypernatremia and hyponatremia. In: Fluid,
Electrolyte, and Acid–Base Disorders in Small Animal

Practice, 4th edn. St Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders,
2011, pp. 47–79.
Hillier TA, Abbott RD, Barrett EJ. Hyponatremia:
Evaluating the correction factor for hyperglycemia. Am J
Med 1999; 106(4): 399–403.
Worthley LI. Hyperosmolar coma treated with intravenous
sterile water. A study of three cases. Arch Intern Med
1986; 146(5): 945–7.

1077

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1079

119
Disorders of Phosphorus and Magnesium
Rosanne Jepson, BVSc, MVetMed, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM), DECVIM-CA, PGCertVetEd, FHEA, MRCVS
Royal Veterinary College, University of London, London, UK

­Phosphorus
Phosphorus is vital for many physiologic roles within the
body, including skeletal development and structure, cell
metabolism and acting as a urinary and intracellular
buffer. Disorders of phosphorus homeostasis are identi­
fied with relative frequency in clinical practice and war­
rant consideration of their underlying etiology, careful
monitoring and, in certain circumstances, will require
therapeutic intervention.
Phosphorus can be found in the body in two forms:
organic and inorganic (orthophosphoric and pyrophos­
phoric acid). Approximately 85%, of total body phospho­
rus is found in an organic form as hydroxyapatite
(Ca10(PO4)6OH2) in bone and as fluorapatite (Ca5(PO4)3F)
in teeth. Only 14% of total body phosphorus is found
intracellularly and 1% within the extracellular fluid (ECF)
compartment.
Phosphorus is the principal anion in cells where it is a
component of phospholipids and phosphoproteins and
incorporated in the structure of nucleic acids and nucle­
otides. Phospholipids (e.g., phosphatidylcholine, phos­
phatidylserine) are an important part of the lipid bilayer
of cell membranes and are required for platelet aggrega­
tion. Phosphorus can also be found in cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP), which is required for intracel­
lular signaling pathways and is incorporated in the high‐
energy phosphate bonds of adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) and guanosine triphosphate (GTP). Within red
blood cells, phosphorus is found in 2,3 diphosphoglycer­
ate (2,3 DPG) which is responsible for the release of oxy­
gen from hemoglobin at the tissue level.
Intracellular organic phosphorus can be readily con­
verted to the inorganic form. Rapid translocation
between the intracellular fluid and the ECF space can
occur, resulting in substantial alteration in ECF concen­
trations. In the ECF, 70% of plasma phosphorus is in an

organic form circulating as phospholipids. The remain­
ing 30% of plasma phosphate exists in an inorganic form
where it may be protein bound (10%), complexed to
sodium, calcium and magnesium (5%) or circulating free
as anions (85%; HPO42‐, H2PO4‐).
Regulation of Phosphorus
Homeostasis of calcium and phosphorus is intrinsically
linked with many of the hormones recognized in the
control of calcium also important in the regulation of
phosphorus. Traditionally, it was considered that cal­
cium was tightly regulated and that phosphorus concen­
trations were maintained in a reciprocal arrangement.
However, it is now appreciated that independent regula­
tion of phosphorus is also important.
Phosphorus homeostasis involves three major body
organ systems: intestines, bone, and kidneys (Figure 119.1).
Plasma phosphorus concentration is the composite effect
of dietary phosphorus intake, gastrointestinal absorption,
cellular translocation, and renal excretion. In a neutral
state of phosphorus balance, daily dietary intake of phos­
phorus will be countered by renal excretion such that total
body phosphorus concentrations vary little.
The main hormones traditionally cited in the regula­
tion of phosphorus are parathyroid hormone (PTH) and
calcitriol (1,25(OH)2 cholecalciferol) (Figure 119.2).
Recently, further important hormones referred to as
phosphotonins have been identified. Phosphotonins,
such as fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), play an
important role regulating renal handling of phosphorus.
In a similar manner to PTH, FGF23 increases renal tubu­
lar excretion of phosphorus. However, FGF23 has an
opposing action to PTH by inhibiting production of cal­
citriol and therefore indirectly reducing release of phos­
phorus from bone and decreasing absorption of
phosphorus from the intestinal tract.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

VetBooks.ir

1080

Dietary
intake

Skeletal
pool

Intestinal
absorption

Extracellular
pool

Dietary phosphorus is the main source of phosphorus
for the body. Efficient absorption of phosphorus occurs in
the small intestine. Phosphorus absorbed from the intes­
tine enters the extracellular pool, with a small quantity
excreted back to the intestine within digestive secretions.
The skeletal and extracellular phosphorus pools are in a
constant state of flux, allowing maintenance of phospho­
rus concentrations. Excess phosphorus absorbed from
dietary intake, in health, is balanced by renal excretion in
order to maintain total body phosphorus concentrations.
Regulation of phosphorus is intrinsically linked to the
regulation of calcium. However, phosphorus itself has a
number of direct regulatory effects.

Digestive
secretions

Increased phosphorus concentrations, by the law of
mass action, result in a relative decline in ionized cal­
cium concentration, driving production of PTH from
the parathyroid gland. Phosphorus can also have a
direct stimulatory effect on the parathyroid glandm
increasing production of PTH.
●● PTH acts on the kidney to decrease absorption of
phosphate. Given that a driving factor for the produc­
tion of PTH is a decrease in calcium concentration,
●●

Fecal
excretion

Renal
Excretion

Figure 119.1 Phosphorus homeostasis in the body.

–

Ca2+

PO4–

Parathyroid
gland

–
1, 25 (OH)2 Vit D

+

(1) +

Osteoclastic
activity

(3) +

+
PTH

+

Bone

+
–

(2)

(6) +

+

Intestines

FGF23

Kidney
(5)

1, 25 (OH)2 Vit D actions

PTH actions:

(4) +

FGF23 actions:

Increased release of
calcium and phosphorus

Figure 119.2 Hormonal regulation of
phosphorus in health. 1,25 (OH)2 Vit D,
calcitriol; Ca2+, calcium; FGF23;
fibroblast growth factor 23; PO4‐,
phosphate; PTH, parathyroid
hormone.

VetBooks.ir

119 Disorders of Phosphorus and Magnesium

PTH also increases renal absorption of calcium and
stimulates production of calcitriol. The net effect of
PTH on the kidney is therefore a reduction in plasma
phosphate and an increase in plasma calcium.
●● Increased phosphorus concentration also directly stim­
ulates osteocytes to produce the phosphotonin FGF23.
●● FGF23 acts on the kidney in a similar manner to PTH,
decreasing tubular absorption of phosphorus.
●● Calcitriol increases absorption of both calcium and
phosphorus from the small intestine. This process is
facilitated indirectly by PTH, which increases renal
production of calcitriol. FGF23 has an opposing action,
inhibiting calcitriol production and therefore decreas­
ing absorption of phosphorus from the intestinal tract.
●● Calcitriol and PTH also increase reabsorption of cal­
cium and phosphorus from bone.
Meat, bone, and fish are food sources high in phospho­
rus and dietary intake is therefore a major source of
phosphorus for the body. Typical commercial canine and
feline diets have a phosphorus concentration of 0.8–1.6%
on a dry matter basis with a calcium to phosphorus ratio
of 1.2–2.1. Most organic phosphate is hydrolyzed in the
gastrointestinal tract to inorganic phosphate for absorp­
tion. Phosphate is absorbed via paracellular pathways in
all regions of the small intestine. However, approximately
30% of intestinal absorption is active and occurs in the
duodenum, utilizing a sodium‐phosphorus co‐trans­
porter (NaPi2b). Expression and insertion of the NaPi2b
co‐transporter are under the control of calcitriol. A
decrease in intestinal phosphate or an increase in calci­
triol will increase intestinal absorption of phosphate.
Once absorbed, inorganic phosphate within the extra­
cellular pool is exchangeable with the skeletal stores
under the influence of both PTH and calcitriol. However,
because proportionally only a very small amount of
phosphorus is found in the ECF, measurement of plasma
phosphorus concentrations does not always provide a
good reflection of total body phosphorus.
Inorganic plasma phosphate that is not bound to pro­
tein is freely filtered at the glomerulus. Approximately
85% of filtered phosphate is reabsorbed by active trans­
port in the proximal tubule, with a small amount also
absorbed in the distal nephron. However, during periods
of low dietary intake, efficiency can increase until almost
100% of filtered phosphate is reabsorbed. Active trans­
port occurs via sodium‐phosphate co‐transporters
(NaPi2a and NaPi2c) located in the brush border of
proximal tubular cells. Expression of the NaPi2a co‐
transporter is under the control of PTH, FGF23, and
intestinal phosphate absorption (Box 119.1).
Laboratory Assessment of Phosphorus
Circulating inorganic phosphorus (Pi), which can be
either free or complexed to calcium, magnesium or

Box 119.1 Regulation of phosphate handling by
the kidney
In periods of phosphate excess, increase in PTH concentration favors internalization and lysosomal degradation
of the NaPi2a co‐transporter, thus limiting phosphate
reabsorption and increasing phosphate excretion in the
urine. Conversely, in periods of hypophosphatemia,
decrease in PTH concentrations has a permissive role,
favoring insertion and maintenance of the NaPi2a co‐
transporter in the proximal tubular brush border and
increasing phosphate reabsorption. PTH is therefore a
phosphaturic hormone promoting excretion of phosphate in the urine.
FGF23, produced by osteocytes in response to
increased phosphorus concentration, also acts as a phosphaturic factor. FGF23 in conjunction with its co‐factor
klotho decreases expression and activity of NaPi2a co‐
transporter in the proximal tubular cells, thus decreasing
tubular reabsorption and increasing renal excretion of
phosphorus.
Other factors which can modulate and increase renal
tubular phosphate reabsorption include growth hormone, thyroid hormone, insulin, insulin‐like growth factor 1 (IGF‐1) and 1,25 (OH)2 cholecalciferol. Reabsorption
can be reduced by parathyroid hormone‐related protein
(PTHrP), glucocorticoids, calcitonin, and atrial natriuretic
peptide.

sodium, is the component routinely quantified by diag­
nostic laboratories. Serum phosphate concentrations are
slightly higher than plasma phosphate concentrations
due to release of phosphate from cells and platelets dur­
ing the clotting process. Normal phosphate reference
intervals will be laboratory dependent but values of
approximately 2.5–5.5 mg/dL (0.8–1.8 mmol/L) are
reported for dogs and 2.5–6.0 mg/dL (0.8–1.9 mmol/L)
for cats.
It is widely recognized that young animals demon­
strate elevated plasma phosphorus concentrations. This
is likely to be the consequence of increased growth hor­
mone facilitating renal tubular reabsorption of phos­
phate and also increased concentrations of calcitriol. In
puppies up to 8 weeks of age, plasma phosphate concen­
trations up to 10.8 mg/dL (3.4 mmol/L) can be consid­
ered normal. However, an age‐related difference in
phosphorus concentrations can be present until 1 year
of age. This difference is more marked in the dog than
the cat.
Phosphate concentrations can be factitiously increased
by lipemia, hyperproteinemia, and hemolysis and can be
increased postprandially, particularly after a high‐pro­
tein meal. Patients should therefore ideally be fasted for

1081

VetBooks.ir

1082

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

8–12 hours prior to measurement. A number of drugs
may influence plasma phosphate concentrations either
as a desired therapeutic effect (e.g., intestinal phosphate
binders) or as a secondary consequence of their adminis­
tration (e.g., antacids including sucralfate, insulin, and
dextrose).
Hypophosphatemia
Hypophosphatemia can be defined as a plasma phospho­
rus concentration <2.5 mg/dL (0.8 mmol/L) and can
occur as a result of three main mechanisms: increased
renal excretion, reduced intake or intracellular move­
ment of phosphorus. As only ~1% of total body phos­
phorus is present in the ECF compartment, transcellular
movement can result in marked change in plasma phos­
phorus concentrations which may not always accurately
reflect total body phosphorus.
Clinical Signs

Patients with mild hypophosphatemia can be asympto­
matic or show nonspecific signs of weakness, lethargy,
and inappetence. However, severe hypophosphatemia
can result in more dramatic clinical consequences
including anemia, cardiac arrhythmias, depression,
coma, seizures, rhabdomyolysis, and respiratory com­
promise. At plasma phosphorus concentrations <1 mg/
dL (0.3 mmol/L), red cell hemolysis becomes a signifi­
cant clinical concern due to increased fragility and
decreased ATP availability.
In total body phosphate depletion, reduction in phos­
pholipid production, loss of cell membrane integrity,
decreased cellular enzyme and energy production (ATP),
and loss of ion gradients maintained by Na+K+ATPases
affect cellular function. This change in cellular function
is not restricted to red blood cells and can cause abnor­
mal membrane potentials, resulting in cardiac arrhyth­
mias and neurologic dysfunction. Leukocytes may
demonstrate reduced chemotactic, bactericidal, and
phagocytic activity, and platelet function may also be
impaired. Decreased production of 2,3 DPG can result in
decreased release of oxygen from hemoglobin, causing
tissue hypoxia. Decreased muscle contractility, particu­
larly affecting the diaphragm, can lead to ventilatory
compromise or in extreme hypophosphatemia,
­disruption of myocytes can result in rhabdomyolysis.
Inappetence, nausea, and vomiting may occur as a con­
sequence of ileus.
Conditions associated with hypophosphatemia are
outlined in Box 119.2. Mild hypophosphatemia may be
identified in patients at diagnosis of diabetes mellitus as
a consequence of increased muscle and fat catabolism
and diuresis. However, in the diabetic patient and in par­
ticular patients with diabetic ketoacidosis, the period of

Box 119.2 Causes of hypophosphatemia
Increased renal excretion
–– Diabetes mellitus*
–– Primary hyperparathyroidism*
–– Diuretic administration (carbonic anhydrase
inhibitors)
–– Renal tubular disorders, e.g., Fanconi syndrome
–– Eclampsia
–– Hyperadrenocorticism
–– Hyperaldosteronism
–– Early stages of hypercalcemia of malignancy
●● Decreased phosphorus intake
–– Vomiting and diarrhea
–– Malabsorption, e.g., primary intestinal disease
–– Administration of phosphate binders
–– Vitamin D deficiency (dietary imbalance, rickets)
●● Transcellular shifts
–– Insulin administration and treatment of diabetic
ketoacidosis*
–– Parenteral glucose administration*
–– Refeeding syndrome/total parenteral nutrition
–– Respiratory alkalosis/hyperventilation
–– Bicarbonate administration
–– Hypothermia
–– Sepsis
●●

* Commonly identified in clinical practice.

greatest concern with regard to hypophosphatemia is
during initiation of therapy. Intravenous fluid therapy,
insulin, and bicarbonate administration can all cause
intracellular translocation of phosphate. Total body
phosphate concentrations may be normal or reduced,
but during the acute phase of therapy, severe hypophos­
phatemia can develop. Plasma phosphate concentrations
should be closely monitored during treatment and
appropriate intravenous supplementation started in
order to prevent secondary consequences of severe
hypophosphatemia such as hemolysis.
Primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPTH) is a relatively
uncommon condition in clinical practice. Clinical signs
in hyperparathyroidism are often occult and when iden­
tified, usually relate to the presence of hypercalcemia or
the secondary development of urolithiasis. However,
plasma phosphate concentrations within the lower half
or below normal reference interval are reported in
30–100% of dogs with PHPTH as a result of PTH‐medi­
ated inhibition of renal tubular phosphate reabsorption.
Primary hyperparathyroidism is rare in cats and
hypophosphatemia is an inconsistent finding.
Hypophosphatemia as a consequence of low dietary
intake is uncommon unless there has been a period
of prolonged anorexia or dietary deficiency. Rarely,

VetBooks.ir

119 Disorders of Phosphorus and Magnesium

hypophosphatemia may be identified secondary to hypo­
vitaminosis D (rickets or osteomalacia). Malabsorptive
conditions, for example inflammatory bowel disease or
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, or those patients with
vomiting and/or diarrhea may have increased intestinal
phosphate loss. In such patients, mild hypophosphatemia
can be identified but it is uncommon for marked defi­
ciencies to be identified. Oral administration of antacid
medications such as sucralfate, or intestinal phosphate
binders, can effectively complex dietary phosphate
within the intestine. Whilst during periods of hyper­
phosphatemia this may be the desired effect, inappro­
priate or overzealous administration can result in
hypophosphatemia.
After a sustained period of anorexia, reintroduction of
food without adequate phosphorus supplementation
and, in particular, introduction of a high‐calorie, carbo­
hydrate‐dense diet can result in refeeding syndrome.
During periods of inadequate nutrition, phosphate may
redistribute to the ECF in order to maintain normal
plasma phosphate concentrations and hence cell mem­
brane potentials. With refeeding, increased glucose and
insulin concentrations potentiate the translocation of
phosphate to the intracellular compartment with a
resultant decrease in ECF phosphate concentration.
Hypophosphatemia in this situation can be extreme and
result in hemolysis, rhabdomyolysis, seizures, and neu­
rologic disorders. Refeeding syndrome may be of par­
ticular concern for anorexic cats with primary or
secondary hepatic lipidosis.
Treatment of Hypophosphatemia

Treatment of hypophosphatemia requires thorough
assessment of the patient in order to identify and, where
possible, rectify the underlying etiology. For patients
where only mild hypophosphatemia is identified and fur­
ther decrease is unlikely, treatment of the underlying
condition, ensuring adequate nutritional intake and con­
tinued monitoring, may be sufficient.
However, phosphorus supplementation is recom­
mended for all patients with clinical signs or hemato­
logic abnormalities (e.g., hemolysis) associated with
hypophosphatemia. Supplementation should also be
considered prophylactically in those patients that are at
high risk for developing severe hypophosphatemia, such
as patients with diabetic ketoacidosis or those at risk of
refeeding syndrome. In these situations, supplementa­
tion can be provided intravenously with either sodium
phosphate or potassium phosphate as a continuous rate
infusion (CRI) at 0.01–0.06 mmol/kg/h.
During intravenous phosphorus supplementation, cal­
cium and phosphorus concentrations should be carefully
monitored q6–8h and CRI dose adjusted in order to
initially reach low normal phosphate concentrations
­

(>2.0 mg/dL, >0.6 mmol/L) and subsequently to bring
phosphate concentrations to the lower end of the normal
reference interval. Due to concern regarding precipita­
tion of calcium phosphate, phosphorus‐containing fluids
should be diluted in saline for administration. Response
to supplementation is individual but gradual correction
can usually be achieved over a period of hours to days.
Patients should be closely monitored for the develop­
ment of hypocalcemia, tetany, and hyperphosphatemia.
­ uring
Hyperphosphatemia may be of particular concern d
the initial phase of supplementation when pathophysio­
logic mechanisms that have been activated to ensure
maximal phosphate retention and reduction in renal
tubular excretion during a period of phosphorus reple­
tion have not yet adapted. In patients receiving phospho­
rus supplementation, if the calcium:phosphorus product
exceeds 60–70 mg2/dL2 (4.8–5.6 mmol2/L2), soft tissue
mineralization and renal failure become a concern. In
patients with diabetic ketoacidosis where there is evi­
dence of both hypokalemia and hypophosphatemia,
supplementation with potassium phosphate may be
­
preferred. In this situation, approximately quarter of
potassium supplementation can be administered as
potassium phosphate with the remainder as potassium
chloride.
Hyperphosphatemia
Hyperphosphatemia can occur as a consequence of three
main mechanisms: impaired renal excretion, excessive
intestinal absorption, and transcellular shift from tissue/
bone to the ECF (Box 119.3).
Clinical signs as a direct consequence of hyperphos­
phatemia are rarely observed but can relate to relative
hypocalcemia, such as weakness, neuromuscular tetany,
and seizures. Hyperphosphatemia may also contribute
to the risk of soft tissue mineralization if the
calcium:phosphorus product exceeds 60–70 mg2/dL2
(4.8–5.6 mmol2/L2).
Impaired renal function, as a consequence of either
chronic kidney disease (CKD) or acute kidney injury
(AKI), is the most common clinical cause of hyperphos­
phatemia. Reduction in glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
and loss of functioning nephrons result in decreased
excretion of phosphorus by the kidney. In the early stages
of CKD, initial phosphorus retention is countered by
increased production of FGF23, reduction in calcitriol
concentrations and, in later stages, increased PTH pro­
duction. These compensatory mechanisms initially main­
tain plasma phosphate concentrations within the reference
interval by promoting tubular phosphate excretion in
remaining nephrons. However, with p
­ rogressive loss of
nephrons and decline in GFR, the compensatory mecha­
nisms are exceeded and hyperphosphatemia ensues.

1083

VetBooks.ir

1084

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

Box 119.3 Causes of hyperphosphatemia
Impaired renal excretion
–– Renal*
○○ Prerenal causes, e.g., hypoadrenocorticism
○○ Renal causes, e.g., chronic kidney disease or
acute kidney injury
○○ Postrenal causes, e.g., uroabdomen, urinary tract
obstruction
–– Hypoparathyroidism
–– Hyperthyroidism
–– (Acromegaly)
●● Increased phosphorus intake
–– Gastrointestinal absorption
○○ Vitamin
D toxicosis: rodenticide poisoning,
e.g., cholecalciferol; psoriasis creams, e.g.,
calcipotriene
○○ Phosphate‐containing enemas
–– Intravenous
○○ Administration of phosphorus‐containing fluids
●● Transcellular shifts
–– Cellular breakdown
○○ Tumor lysis syndrome
○○ Hemolysis
○○ Rhabdomyolysis
○○ Tissue trauma or hypoxia
●● Physiologic
–– Young animal*
–– Postprandial*
●● Laboratory error
–– Hyperlipemia
–– Hyperproteinemia
–– Hemolysis
●●

* Commonly identified in clinical practice.

In both dogs and cats, the prevalence of hyperphos­
phatemia increases with advancing stages of CKD. A study
in cats demonstrated that 20% of cats with compensated
CKD, 49% with uremic CKD and 100% with end‐stage
CKD were hyperphosphatemic. Findings were similar in a
group of dogs: 18% with International Renal Interest
Society (IRIS) stage 1, 40% stage 2, 92% stage 3, 100% stage
4. In AKI, decline in renal function can occur without suf­
ficient time for adequate compensatory mechanisms to
develop. Severe hyperphosphatemia may therefore be
identified in AKI and may be proportionally greater for
the degree of reduction in GFR than identified with CKD.
Any prerenal or postrenal causes of reduced GFR, for
example hypoadrenocorticism or uroabdomen/urinary
tract obstruction respectively, which decrease filtration
fraction and renal excretion of phosphorus, can result in
hyperphosphatemia.

Studies suggest that up to 43% of cats with hyperthy­
roidism are hyperphosphatemic at diagnosis. In cats that
remain nonazotemic, with successful treatment and
return of euthyroidism, phosphorus concentrations return
to normal. The exact cause of hyperphosphatemia in feline
hyperthyroidism has not been fully elucidated. Thyroxine
is known to directly increase renal tubular absorption of
phosphate. In addition, increased bone isoenzyme alka­
line phosphatase and osteocalcin as a marker of osteoblas­
tic activity suggest that altered bone metabolism may
contribute. However, in those cats that are revealed to be
azotemic after return of euthyroidism, phosphate concen­
trations do not significantly change and in such patients
reduced renal function may also be contributing.
Growth hormone can directly increase renal tubular
absorption of phosphate and therefore may theoretically
contribute to hyperphosphatemia in acromegaly.
However, recent studies evaluating the clinicopathologic
abnormaltities in larger cohorts of cats with acromegaly
have not confirmed this finding.
In dogs with hypoparathyroidism, reduction in PTH
concentration favors insertion of renal tubular NaPi2a
co‐transporters and therefore reabsorption of phospho­
rus. Studies suggest that ~30–100% of dogs with
hypoparathyroidism demonstrate hyperphosphatemia.
Hyperphosphatemia has also been reported in cats with
idiopathic hypoparathyroidism although this is a rare
condition. However, clinical signs in primary hypopar­
athyroidism usually relate to marked hypocalcemia
rather than any concurrent hyperphosphatemia.
Increased intestinal absorption of phosphorus is an
uncommon clinical cause of hyperphosphatemia. Ingestion
of excess vitamin D, either in rodenticides containing chole­
calciferol or from psoriasis creams containing calcipotriene,
can cause increased release of calcium and phosphorus from
bone and absorption from the intestinal tract. Absorption of
phosphorus from phosphate‐containing enemas has been
reported to cause hyperphosphatemia in dogs and cats.
Phosphorus is found at high concentrations intracel­
lularly. Any process that results in marked cell destruc­
tion has the potential to increase plasma phosphate
concentrations. For example, hyperphosphatemia is one
of a number of electrolyte abnormalities identified dur­
ing tumor lysis syndrome (hyperphosphatemia, hypocal­
cemia, hyperkalemia, hyperuricemia, oliguric AKI).
Administration of chemotherapy to a patient with a large
tumor burden, that is highly sensitive to the chemothera­
peutic agent or radiation dose administered, results in
rapid lysis of tumoral cells and release of intracellular
phosphorus to the ECF. Acute tumor lysis syndrome has
previously been reported in dogs and cats with lympho­
sarcoma. A similar situation can occur during hemolysis,
with release of phosphorus from red blood cells or dur­
ing rhabdomyolysis, tissue infarction or severe crush

VetBooks.ir

119 Disorders of Phosphorus and Magnesium

injuries. In rhabdomyolysis, marked myoglobinuria may
cause AKI and therefore reduced renal function may also
contribute to hyperphosphatemia.
Treatment of Hyperphosphatemia

Similar to the management of hypophosphatemia, the
first step in the management of hyperphosphatemia is
determining and, when possible, correcting the underly­
ing etiology. Renal excretion of phosphorus should be
optimized with correction of any prerenal or postrenal
component. Intravenous fluid therapy to correct hypov­
olemia and/or dehydration and to provide mild expan­
sion of ECF may improve renal excretion of phosphorus.
In patients with AKI, dialysis may offer a way to correct
electrolyte imbalances including hyperphosphatemia.
However, in those patients with CKD, restricting intes­
tinal absorption of phosphate can control hyperphos­
phatemia. In early CKD (IRIS stage 2), this can be
achieved using a phosphate‐restricted diet. However,
with advancing CKD, addition of intestinal phosphate
binders may be required to achieve phosphate targets,
such as aluminum hydroxide, calcium carbonate +/‐ chi­
tosan, calcium acetate, lanthanum carbonate, and seve­
lamer hydrochloride. Dietary phosphate restriction is
achieved by feeding a low‐protein, low‐phosphorus diet.
Intestinal phosphate binders complex with dietary phos­
phate, producing an insoluble, nonabsorbable com­
pound, which is excreted in the feces. For maximum
efficacy, phosphate binders should therefore be adminis­
tered with every meal and used in conjunction with
phosphate‐restricted diets.
Aluminum hydroxide is a commonly used and well‐
tolerated phosphate binder in canine and feline patients
with CKD (30–100 mg/kg/day). Side‐effects can include
constipation and in human patients with end‐stage kid­
ney disease or undergoing hemodialysis, aluminum tox­
icity and neurotoxicity are reported. Caution is warranted
when using calcium‐containing phosphate binders, such
as calcium carbonate, due to the potential for develop­
ment of hypercalcemia, an elevated calcium phosphorus
product and dystrophic mineralization. Side‐effects of
calcium‐containing phosphate binders can also include
nausea and constipation. Sevelamer hydrochloride (30–
40 mg/kg PO q8h) is a resin‐based phosphate binder that
contains neither aluminum nor calcium. Sevelamer
binds to the mucosal surface of the intestine, allowing
extended periods of phosphate binding. However, its
expense, gastrointestinal side‐effects, and potential to
bind other substances (e.g., vitamins, bile acids and cho­
lesterol) may make it a less desired product. Lanthanum
carbonate (dogs 6.25–12.5 mg/kg PO q12h; cats 400–
800 mg/cat/day divided according to feeding schedule) is
another nonaluminum, noncalcium‐based phosphate
binder, which is capable of binding phosphate at both

low and high pH, being effective therefore in both the
stomach and small intestine. Lanthanum undergoes bil­
iary excretion and therefore should not accumulate in
patients with compromised renal function.
Interventions to control hyperphosphatemia should be
carefully monitored by serial measurement of plasma
phosphate concentrations. For patients with CKD, the
IRIS provides stage‐specific targets for phosphate con­
trol. The effect of either introducing a phosphate‐
restricted diet or phosphate binder or altering dosage of
a phosphate binder in patients with CKD can be rela­
tively slow in onset due to whole‐body phosphate reten­
tion. Assessment of plasma phosphate concentration
after ~2–4 weeks is therefore likely to be adequate.

­Magnesium
Until recently, magnesium has received relatively little
attention in small animal medicine. However, magne­
sium is known to play a vital part in many cellular func­
tions and the clinical consequences of alteration in
magnesium homeostasis are receiving increased recog­
nition in small animal patients, particularly within a crit­
ical care setting.
Distribution in the Body
Greater than 99% of the body’s magnesium is located
intracellularly, with less than 1% found within the ECF.
Of the intracellular stores, ~70% is present in bone, ~20%
in muscle, and ~10% other soft tissues. Within the ECF,
~55% of magnesium is ionized or free and considered the
biologically active component, with a further 20–30%
protein bound and 15–20% complexed to anions (e.g.,
phosphate or bicarbonate). The relatively smaller pro­
portion of protein‐bound magnesium in comparison to
calcium means that magnesium concentrations are less
likely to be influenced by changes in albumin
concentration.
Biologic Importance of Magnesium
Magnesium is required in the mitochondria of cells for
oxidative phosphorylation and for anaerobic metabolism
of glucose. It also plays a role in the synthesis and degra­
dation of DNA, ribosomal binding to RNA, nucleotide
synthesis, and production of intracellular messengers
such as cAMP.
Magnesium is an important regulator of intracellular
calcium cycling in both smooth and cardiac myocytes
and is therefore important for cardiac excitability, con­
traction, and conduction mechanisms. In vascular
smooth muscle, intracellular magnesium concentrations

1085

VetBooks.ir

1086

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

may contribute to peripheral vascular resistance;
increased intracellular smooth muscle magnesium con­
centrations enhance vasorelaxation whilst conversely
decreased concentrations facilitate vasoconstriction.
Magnesium is important in neuromuscular transmis­
sion and severe magnesium deficiency results in
increased neuronal excitability and neuromuscular
transmission. The classic neuromuscular clinical signs of
hypomagnesemia are more frequently appreciated in
large animal internal medicine where severe muscle tet­
any and seizure are identified in cattle with “grass
staggers.”
Magnesium is also a vital co‐factor for ATP. Given that
ATP is the critical energy source for many cellular ion
pumps, such as Na+K+ATPase, HCO3‐ATPase, and
Ca2+ATPase, variation in magnesium availability may
influence the concentration of intracellular electrolytes
such as calcium and potassium.
Regulation of Magnesium
Magnesium homeostasis is incompletely understood
but, in a similar manner to calcium and phosphorus,
gastrointestinal absorption, renal reabsorption/excre­
tion, and exchange with skeletal stores are important
factors in maintaining total body and extracellular mag­
nesium concentrations. Absorption of magnesium in the
intestine primarily occurs in the ileum, with further
absorption in the jejunum and colon. Intestinal absorp­
tion of magnesium is via either a passive paracellular or
active transcellular route. Active transport of magne­
sium in the gut is likely to involve specific magnesium
transport proteins, including those from the transient
receptor potential (TRP) family such asTRPM6 and
TRPM7. Magnesium is freely filtered at the glomerulus
but in contrast to other electrolytes, the primary site for
reabsorption is the loop of Henle (60–70%), with lesser
contributions in the proximal tubule (15%) and distal
convoluted tubule (10–15%).
Hormonal regulation of magnesium absorption in the
intestine and kidney likely occurs but remains incom­
pletely understood. Parathyroid hormone, calcitonin,
glucagon, antidiuretic hormone, aldosterone, and insulin
can all increase absorption of magnesium whilst prosta­
glandin E2, hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia, and acido­
sis may all reduce magnesium reabsorption.
Laboratory Assessment of Magnesium
Making an assessment of total body hypomagnesemia
can be challenging due to the high proportion of magne­
sium that is present within an intracellular location.
Currently there is no consensus with regard to the opti­
mal methodology to assess total body magnesium status.

Quantification of either total or ionized magnesium
concentrations can be performed. However, total serum
or plasma magnesium concentrations do not correlate
well with signs of hypomagnesemia and may not corre­
late with ionized concentrations. Other factors such as
albumin concentrations, sample handling, and acid–base
status may influence measured total serum magnesium
concentrations. As ionized magnesium equilibrates rap­
idly across cell membranes, it may be a more representa­
tive measure of intracellular magnesium but uncertainty
exists as to whether it provides a true reflection of total
body magnesium. Quantification of magnesium within
red or white blood cells or muscle tissue, and assessment
of renal handling of magnesium (e.g., 24‐hour urinary
excretion or evaluation of magnesium retention) may
give further information regarding magnesium status
but these methodologies are not routinely available as
clinical diagnostic tests.
In those patients where clinical signs are compatible
with hypomagnesemia, a low total or ionized magne­
sium concentration will provide support that clinical
signs may be attributable to hypomagnesemia. However,
it should be appreciated that intracellular hypomagne­
semia can be present with normal serum total or ionized
magnesium concentrations.
Hypomagnesemia
A number of clinical causes of hypomagnesemia can be
identified (Box 119.4) reflecting increased gastrointesti­
nal loss, reduced intestinal absorption, redistribution
between the intracellular and extracellular compart­
ments, or increased renal excretion. The clinical conse­
quences of hypomagnesemia can include electrolyte and
neuromuscular abnormalities and cardiac arrhythmias.
However, with mild hypomagnesemia, clinical signs can
be vague and attributable to general illness.
In human medicine, hypomagnesemia is a commonly
reported electrolyte abnormality in critical care popula­
tions and is an independent risk factor for mortality.
Studies suggest that in veterinary medicine, between
28% and 50% of cats and dogs in a critical care setting
also demonstrate hypomagnesemia but information
regarding any association with survival, morbidity or
mortality is lacking. Other aspects of illness often identi­
fied in a critical care setting (e.g., sepsis) or associated
treatments (e.g., blood transfusions due to citrate admin­
istration, intravenous fluid therapy, insulin administra­
tion) may increase a patient’s predisposition to develop
hypomagnesemia.
Hypomagnesemia has perhaps received most attention
for the role it plays in concurrent electrolyte distur­
bances. Magnesium facilitates potassium leaving the
intracellular compartment and enhances renal loss of

VetBooks.ir

119 Disorders of Phosphorus and Magnesium

Box 119.4 Common clinical conditions associated
with hypomagnesemia
Gastrointestinal loss
–– Anorexia
–– Malabsorption/severe diarrhea
–– Short bowel syndrome
●● Renal loss
–– Diabetes mellitus/diabetic ketoacidosis
–– Chronic kidney disease
–– Renal tubular acidosis
–– Drugs: loop diuretics
–– Renal transplantation
●● Miscellaneous
–– Eclampsia
–– Redistribution
○○ Severe pancreatitis
○○ Sepsis
○○ Refeeding syndrome
○○ Catecholamine excess (pheochromocytoma)
○○ Large‐volume resuscitation with magnesium‐
replete fluid
●●

potassium such that hypomagnesemia and hypokalemia
occur simultaneously. Clinical signs in this situation usu­
ally reflect hypokalemia but potassium deficiency may
prove refractory to therapy until magnesium levels have
also been corrected. Hypocalcemia has also been
reported in conjunction with hypomagnesemia.
In human patients, magnesium deficiency has been
reported to contribute to the development and severity
of atrial fibrillation, supraventricular tachycardia, and
ventricular tachyarrhythmias. Information regarding
hypomagnesemia in dogs and cats with cardiac disease
is limited and the clinical importance is therefore uncer­
tain. However, certain drugs commonly used in cardiac
patients such as digoxin and loop diuretics increase
magnesium loss. Patients with cardiac disease that
develop hypomagnesemia may be at risk of cardiac
arrhythmias, decreased cardiac contractility, and refrac­
tory hypokalemia. Consideration could therefore be
given to assessment of magnesium concentrations in
these situations.
Magnesium deficiency due to reduced dietary intake is
unlikely, particularly if commercial diets are being fed,
but could occur in patients with prolonged anorexia or
severe gastrointestinal disease such as chronic diarrhea,
malabsorptive disease, and short bowel syndrome.
Hypomagnesemia has previously been reported in dogs
with protein‐losing enteropathy (PLE) and as a compo­
nent of refeeding syndrome when increased cellular
demand occurs in addition to chronic depletion second­
ary to prior anorexia.

Hypomagnesemia has also been reported in associa­
tion with a number of endocrine conditions, for exam­
ple, in cats with hyperthyroidism, diabetes mellitus, and
diabetic ketoacidosis. However, the clinical significance
of these associations is still uncertain and a study evalu­
ating magnesium concentrations in dogs with diabetes
mellitus did not find an association.
Hypomanesemia may be identified in lactating bitches
although is rarely clinically significant in the healthy
bitch. The prevalence of hypomagnesemia in bitches
with eclampsia has been reported to be 44%.
Treatment of Hypomagnesemia

Magnesium supplementation should be considered
when a patient’s clinical signs are attributable to
hypomagnesemia. Supplementation may also be indi­
cated in those patients with refractory hypokalemia or
hypocalcemia despite appropriate potassium and cal­
cium supplementation respectively.
Intravenous magnesium supplementation is usually
provided as magnesium sulfate or magnesium chloride.
Typical dosages reported are 0.03–0.04 mEq/kg/h
administered as a CRI diluted in 5% dextrose or 0.9%
saline. Magnesium salt concentrations >20% should not
be administered and magnesium salt solutions are not
compatible with calcium‐ or bicarbonate‐containing flu­
ids. Careful monitoring should be performed during
administration to avoid inadvertent overdosage and sup­
plementation continued until low normal concentrations
have been achieved and maintenance magnesium
requirements can be provided via the patient’s daily die­
tary intake. Caution should be exercised when providing
magnesium supplementation, particularly in those
patients with reduced renal function where risk of devel­
opment of hypermagnesemia is increased. The value of
chronic supplementation is uncertain in veterinary med­
icine but oral supplementation with magnesium oxide
(1–2 mEq/kg/day) has been reported.
Reports of magnesium supplementation in the veteri­
nary literature have also included patients with tetanus
where supplemental magnesium may aid in reducing
muscle spasm and sedative requirements, and in patients
with cardiac arrhythmias where hypomagnesmia is
deemed contributory.
Hypermagnesemia
The kidney excretes excess magnesium. Hyperm­
agnesemia may occur with any marked reduction in
GFR. It is rare for dogs and cats to demonstrate clinical
signs associated with mild to moderate hypermagne­
semia. Clinical signs reported with severe hypermagne­
semia can include depression, weakness, lethargy, flaccid
paralysis, and decreased reflexes. Hypotension may be

1087

VetBooks.ir

1088

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

documented secondary to decreased total peripheral
resistance. Bradycardia may be identified associated with
prolongation of the QRS complex and an increased P‐Q
interval. Untreated, severe hypermagnesemia will result
in ventricular fibrillation, asystole, and death.
Iatrogenic hypermagnesemia has been reported in
human medicine in children associated with excessive use
of magnesium‐containing laxative agents and antacids. In
veterinary medicine, iatrogenic hypermagnesemia has
been reported in a dog and a cat due to oversupplementa­
tion. These patients demonstrated magnesium concentra­
tions 7–9 times the normal reference interval and clinical
signs including hypotension and bradycardia. This empha­
sizes the need for careful dose calculation and monitoring

during magnesium supplementation. Increased magne­
sium concentrations have also been reported in dogs
with hypoadrenocorticism and after surgery/anaesthesia
although these changes were not clinically significant.
Treatment of hypermagnesemia depends on severity
and should involve discontinuation of any supplementa­
tion being provided. Saline diuresis and administration
of loop diuretics may increase magnesium renal excre­
tion. In an acute situation with arrhythmias secondary to
hypermagnesemia, calcium gluconate should be admin­
istered (50–150 mg/kg) as a bolus over 20–30 minutes to
reverse cardiac toxicity. In human medicine, in certain
clinical situations, dialysis may also be used for correc­
tion of hypermagnesemia.

­Further Reading
Bateman S. Disorders of magnesium: magnesium deficit
and excess. In: DiBartola SP, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte and
Acid–Base Disorders. St Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders,
2012, pp. 211–19.
DiBartola SP, Willard MD. 2012. Disorders of phosphorus:
hypophosphatemia and hyperphosphatemia. In: DiBartola
SP, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte and Acid–Base Disorders. St
Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2012, pp. 195–211.
Foster JD. Update on mineral and bone disorders in
chronic kidney disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2016; 46(6): 1131–49.
Hardcastle MR, Dittmer KE. Fibroblast growth factor 23: a
new dimension to diseases of calcium‐phosphorus
metabolism. Vet Pathol 2015; 52: 770–84.

Simmonds EE, Alwood AJ, Costello MF. Magnesium
sulfate as an adjunct therapy in the management of
severe generalized tetanus in a dog. J Vet Emerg Crit
Care 2011; 21(5): 542–6.
van den Broek D, Chang Y, Elliott J, Jepson R. Prognostic
importance of plasma total magnesium in a cohort of
cats with azotemic chronic kidney disease. J Vet Intern
Med 2018; 32: 1359–71.
Williams TL, Elliott J, Syme HM. Calcium and phosphate
homeostasis in hyperthyroid cats: associations with
development of azotaemia and survival time. J Small
Anim Pract 2012; 53(10): 561–71.

VetBooks.ir

1089

120
Acute Kidney Injury
Adam E. Eatroff, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)
ACCESS Specialty Animal Hospitals, Culver City, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Acute kidney injury (AKI) has classically been categorized into hemodynamic (prerenal), renal parenchymal
(intrinsic), and postrenal etiologies. Hemodynamic
causes include decreases in renal perfusion and/or excessive vasoconstriction, and are characterized as rapidly
reversible if the inciting cause is eliminated shortly after
occurrence. It is questionable whether hemodynamic
changes resulting in azotemia represent true renal injury
or an appropriate physiologic attempt to conserve fluid
volume as a response to a reduced effective circulating
blood volume. Neurohumoral responses to reductions in
effective circulating volume result in a reduction in renal
blood flow and, thus, glomerular filtration rate (GFR) as
a means of conserving fluid volume. Regardless of
whether the hemodynamic changes represent pathology
or physiology, it is generally accepted that prolonged
ischemia can contribute to renal parenchymal injury.
Intrinsic causes of AKI include infectious diseases,
toxins, and systemic diseases with renal manifestations.
Removal of the inciting cause of parenchymal injury is
often the only means of directly addressing this type of
insult. Postrenal AKI is due to obstruction or diversion
of urine flow, including urethral obstruction, bilateral
ureteral obstruction or unilateral obstruction with a
nonfunctional contralateral kidney, or rupture of any
portion of the urinary tract. Restoration of urine flow
may rapidly reduce the concentrations of circulating uremic toxins. However, prolonged obstruction of urine
flow may lead to renal parenchymal injury.
During the diagnostic evaluation for AKI, it is important to recognize that (1) the classic etiologies of AKI frequently produce insults that encompass more than one of
the hemodynamic, intrinsic, or postrenal processes and
(2) an etiologic cause of AKI is frequently not identified.

Table 120.1 provides an extensive, but not exhaustive, list
of etiologies for canine and feline AKI.
The pathophysiologic process of AKI is often multifactorial, with overlapping ischemic, inflammatory, toxic,
and septic components. Classically, the clinical course of
AKI proceeds through four phases. These phases are
defined by experimental models of ischemic acute kidney injury and may not be representative of the multifactorial nature of the disease.
The initiation phase is characterized by the first stages
of renal injury. Intervention at this phase may prevent
progression to more severe injury, but injury at this stage
occurs on a subcellular level and may not be biochemically evident. During the extension phase, cellular injury
progresses to cell death. At this stage, biochemical
derangements and clinical manifestations of disease
manifest. During the maintenance phase, both cell death
and regeneration occur simultaneously, and the potential
for and length of recovery from this phase may be determined by the balance between these processes. Removal
of the initiating cause at this stage does not alter the
existing damage, but may allow for the balance to shift in
favor of parenchymal regeneration. The recovery phase is
characterized by improvement in GFR and tubular function; this final phase may last weeks to months.

­Epidemiology
The epidemiology of AKI has not been thoroughly
characterized in veterinary medicine. The difficulty in
establishing the population characteristics of this disease is primarily related to the lack of a standard definition for AKI and the wide spectrum of disease (ranging
from clinically undetectable, subcellular damage to fulminant, excretory failure). This problem previously

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1090

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

Table 120.1 List of etiologies for canine and feline acute kidney injury
Nephrotoxins
Antimicrobial agents
Aminoglycosides
Aztreonam
Carbapenems
Cephalosporins
Penicillins
Polymyxins
Quinolones
Rifampin
Sulfonamides
Tetracyclines
Vancomycin

Antifungal agents
Amphotericin B

Antineoplastic drugs
Cisplatin and carboplatin
Doxorubicin
Methotrexate

Antiviral agents
Aciclovir
Foscarnet

Antiprotozoal agents
Dapsone
Pentamidine
Sulfadiazine
Thiacetarsamide
Trimethoprim‐sulfamethoxazole

Immunosuppressive
drugs
Azathioprine
Calcineurin inhibitors
(e.g., ciclosporin,
tacrlimus)
Interleukin‐2

Miscellaneous therapeutic agents
Acetaminophen
Allopurinol
Angiotensin enzyme converting
inhibitors
Antidepressants
Apomorphine
Cimetidine
Deferoxamine
Dextran‐40
Diuretics
epsilon‐Aminocaproic acid
EDTA
Lipid‐lowering drugs
Lithium
Methoxyflurane
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
Penicillamine
Phosphorus‐containing urinary acidifiers
Streptokinase
Tricyclic antidepressants
Vitamin D analogs

Endogenous compounds
Hemoglobin
Myoglobin (e.g., trauma/
rhabdomyolysis)

Heavy metals
Antimony
Arsenic
Bismuth salts
Cadmium
Chromium
Copper
Gold
Lead
Mercury
Nickel
Silver
Thallium
Uranium

Organic compounds
Carbon tetrachloride and other
chlorinated hydrocarbons
Chloroform
Ethylene glycol
Herbicides
Pesticides
Solvents

Miscellaneous nontherapeutic
agents
Bee venom
Diphosphonate
Calcium antagonists
Gallium nitrate
Grapes or raisins
Illicit drugs
Lilies
Mushrooms
Radiocontrast agents
Snake venom
Sodium fluoride
Superphosphate fertilizer
Vitamin D‐containing rodenticides,
“Jerky treats”

Infectious
Bacterial/fungal
Pyelonephritis
Leptospirosis
Borreliosis
Feline infectious
peritonitis
Babesiosis
Leishmaniasis
Bacterial
endocarditis

Immune‐mediated
inflammatory
Acute
glomerulonephritis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Renal transplant rejection
Vasculitis
Systemic inflammatory
response syndrome
Sepsis
Disseminated intravascular coagulation

Obstructive
Ureteral obstruction
Urethral obstruction

Nonnephrotoxic insults
Decreased cardiac output/
ischemia
Volume depletion
Congestive heart failure
Arrhythmias
Cardiac arrest
Cardiac tamponade
Fluid overload
Deep anesthesia/extensive
surgery
Renal vessel thrombosis
Hyperviscosity – polycythemia
Hepatorenal syndrome

Miscellaneous
Lymphoma
Blood transfusion reactions
Heatstroke/hyperthermia
Malignant hypertension
Neoplasia
Hypercalcemia

VetBooks.ir

120 Acute Kidney Injury

existed in human medicine, but has largely been overcome by the development of standardized classification
schemes. The most widely accepted schemes are the
Risk Injury Failure End Stage Kidney Disease (RIFLE)
scheme, the Acute Kidney Injury Network (AKIN), and
the Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes
(KDIGO) Clinical Practice Guideline for Acute Kidney
Injury. Both sets of criteria appear to perform equally
well when both sensitivity for detection of AKI and
­predictive ability of adverse outcomes are evaluated
and, therefore, these schemes have become accepted
within the human nephrology community as the
standard means of defining AKI for epidemiologic
­
characterization.
There is considerable difficulty, however, with application of these criteria to veterinary AKI because both
RIFLE and AKIN schemes primarily rely on relative
changes in serum or plasma creatinine concentrations.
In contrast to human medicine, in which most cases of
AKI are hospital acquired and as such, relative changes
in serum or plasma creatinine concentrations are more
easily measured, most cases of veterinary AKI currently recognized are community acquired, and a baseline serum or plasma creatinine concentration is not
available. Additional criteria for identification and
staging of AKI exist within these schemes, but these
criteria also have limitations (e.g., lack of baseline value
for GFR and practical considerations of indwelling urinary collection system for monitoring of urine output).
Nonetheless, recently published retrospective data collected from hospitalized dogs, utilizing a scheme similar to AKIN (Table 120.2), suggest that an association
between small changes in plasma creatinine concentration (≥0.3 mg/dL) and mortality may exist.
Due to the limitations associated with defining and
staging AKI based on relative changes in serum or
plasma creatinine, Cowgill recently proposed a veterinary staging scheme based primarily on absolute serum
or plasma creatinine concentrations (Table 120.3). This
proposed scheme is being validated in a prospective
study that is currently under way.
Table 120.2 Veterinary Acute Kidney Injury (VAKI) staging scheme
for dogs
VAKI stage

Criteria

Stage 0

Creatinine increase <150% from baseline

Stage 1

Creatinine increase of 150–199% from baseline
OR
Creatinine increase of 0.3 mg/dL from baseline

Stage 2

Creatinine increase of 200–299% from baseline

Stage 3

Creatinine increase of ≥300% from baseline
OR
An absolute creatinine value of >4.0 mg/dL

Table 120.3 International Renal Interest Society grading scheme
for acute kidney injury (AKI) (dogs and cats)
Grade

Creatinine Clinical description

Grade I

<1.6

Nonazotemic AKI
– Documented AKI: historical, clinical,
laboratory, or imaging evidence of
acute kidney injury, clinical oliguria/
anuria, volume responsivenessa and/or
– Progressive nonazotemic increase in
serum creatinine ≥0.3 mg/dL
(≥26.4 μmol/L) within 48 hours
–M
 easured oliguria (<1 mL/kg/h) or
anuria over 6 hours

Grade II

1.6–2.5

Mild AKI
–D
 ocumented AKI and static or
progressive azotemia
–P
 rogressive azotemic increase in
serum creatinine ≥0.3 mg/dL
(≥26.4 μmol/L) within 48 hours, or
volume responsivenessb
– Measured oliguria (<1 mL/kg/h) or
anuria over 6 hours

Grade III 2.6–5.0
Grade IV 5.0–10.0
Grade V

>10.0

Moderate to severe AKI
– Documented AKI and increasing
severities of azotemia and functional
failure

a

Volume responsive is an increase in urine production to >1 mL/kg/h
over 6 hours and/or decrease in serum creatinine to baseline over
48 hours.
b
Each grade of acute kidney injury is further substaged on the basis of
current urine production as oliguric (O) or nonoliguric (NO) and on
the requirement for renal replacement therapy (RRT).

­Signalment
To date, there are no studies that document an age, sex, or
breed predisposition for acute kidney injury. Within certain etiologies, however, predispositions based on signalment may exist. For example, epidemiologic studies have
shown an increased risk for positive Leptospira serology in
male dogs and herding dogs, hounds, working dogs, and
mixed breed dogs. German shepherds, in particular, appear
to be overrepresented for leptospirosis manifesting clinical
signs. Risk factors for AKI based on signalment and etiology may be more readily identified once a standard definition/classification scheme for AKI has been established.

­History and Clinical Signs
Common historical findings include lethargy, vomiting,
diarrhea, and anorexia, but these signs are nonspecific
and may be the result of a variety of extrarenal diseases.
Oliguria, anuria, or polyuria may be reported. When a
patient is polyuric, compensatory polydipsia may be
­present, or water intake may be reduced due to anorexia.

1091

VetBooks.ir

1092

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

When patients are severely affected, reports of seizures,
syncope, and dyspnea may overshadow more classic presenting signs associated with AKI.
Physical examination yields few findings specific to
AKI, aside from enlarged, painful kidneys. Renomegaly
and renal angina are inconsistently present, however,
and for some cases in which underlying chronic kidney
disease is present, the kidneys are small. Dehydration is a
common finding at the time of initial presentation.
However, inaccurate assessment of hydration status by
physical examination parameters is common, and many
euhydrated and overhydrated patients are erroneously
categorized as dehydrated. Other findings may include
halitosis, oral ulceration, tongue tip necrosis, scleral
injection, bradycardia, cutaneous bruising, peripheral
edema, and melena/diarrhea. These findings may be secondary to uremia or associated with the primary disease
process resulting in AKI (e.g., disseminated intravascular
coagulation [DIC], vasculitis). Hypothermia is a frequent
finding and, in the absence of circulatory shock, is typically associated with alteration of the hypothalamic thermoregulatory set point. Normothermia or hyperthermia
may be suggestive of an infectious, inflammatory, or
immune‐mediated etiology.

­Diagnosis
Acute kidney injury is typically diagnosed on the basis of
a combination of history, physical examination findings,
and the results of laboratory and imaging tests. For some
patients that present with azotemia and clinical signs
associated with uremia, discrimination between AKI,
chronic kidney disease, or an acute kidney injury superimposed on chronic kidney disease may be difficult. For
many cases in which the chronicity of disease is not readily apparent, previous laboratory work is not available for
establishment of baseline renal function and imaging
discloses no renal abnormalities. Therefore, subtle findings in the clinical history, physical examination, and
laboratory work may prove vital in determining chronicity, which has a large influence on the appropriate diagnostic, therapeutic, and prognostic algorithms.
Laboratory Tests
The complete blood count may show hemoconcentration or anemia secondary to gastrointestinal (GI) blood
loss, hemolysis, or hemodilution. The platelet count may
be normal or low, although platelet count alone should
not be used to determine functionality of primary
­hemostasis, as uremia and various infectious diseases
(e.g., leptospirosis) induce a thrombocytopathy. An
infectious or immune-mediated etiology should be
­suspected when severe leukocytosis is present.

The serum/plasma biochemistry panel may show
changes specific to renal dysfunction (e.g., azotemia and
hyperphosphatemia) or changes associated with multisystemic disease. The severity of azotemia depends on
the etiology and duration of AKI. The ratio of blood urea
nitrogen to creatinine can be high from GI bleeding or
dehydration, or it can be low in early stages of AKI. The
degree of hyperphosphatemia typically mirrors that of
hypercreatinemia with a few exceptions (e.g., acute ethylene glycol intoxication, juvenile growing animal,
refeeding syndrome). Ionized calcium concentrations
are normal or low (provided that hypercalcemia is not a
cause of AKI). Ethylene glycol intoxication causes a profound ionized hypocalcemia, due to both severe hyperphosphatemia and chelation of calcium by oxalate.
The anion gap is usually high secondary to retained
organic and inorganic acids, but can be normal early in
the course of disease, or if hypoalbuminemia is present.
A high anion gap without (or prior to) the presence of
azotemia is supportive of intoxication in cases of suspected ethylene glycol exposure. The anion gap is calculated by the formula:
Anion gap

Na

K

HCO3 Cl

where Na+ = sodium, K+ = potassium, HCO3 = bicarbonate, and Cl– = chloride. The normal anion gap is approximately 12–26 mEq/L, with the average anion gap being
5 mEq/L higher in cats than dogs.
Urinalysis can provide information regarding the etiology and severity of AKI. Care must be taken, however, to
examine urine shortly after collection to avoid artifactual
changes in biochemical and cellular composition. The
urine specific gravity is frequently isosthenuric (1.007–
1.015) in cases of intrinsic failure. A urine dipstick may
reveal any combination of glucosuria (without hyperglycemia), proteinuria, bilirubinuria, and hemoglobinuria,
depending on the underlying etiology. Glucosuria is frequently present in cases of leptospirosis and AKI associated with jerky treat ingestion. Proteinuria is frequently
present, but qualitative (dipstick) and quantitative
(protein:creatinine ratio) severity can vary within a specific etiology. The urine pH is usually acidic, unless there is
a concurrent bacterial urinary tract infection. Careful
microscopic assessment of urine sediment may disclose
dysmorphic red blood cells (suggestive of glomerular disease), pyuria (suggestive of nephritis), or casts (most frequently granular, but red and white blood cell casts are
uncommonly observed). In human medicine, eosinouria
has historically been associated with acute interstitial
nephritis (secondary to a drug reaction). However, more
recent publications have shown that this finding lacks
the satisfactory test characteristics to make it useful in the
identification of this specific etiology. Calcium oxalate
crystals if present in large numbers are supportive of

VetBooks.ir

120 Acute Kidney Injury

­ethylene glycol intoxication, although a few oxalate crystals may be present in the urine of healthy patients (crystalluria is a common in vitro artifact that is secondary to
prolonged storage of urine prior to analysis). An in‐house
variation of a Romanowsky stain is frequently useful for
detailed assessment of red and white blood cell morphology, as well as for the identification of bacteria. A bacterial
urine culture is important to confirm the presence of a urinary tract infection and to guide antimicrobial therapy.
Imaging
Survey abdominal radiographs may show a normal renal
silhouette or renomegaly, but hydronephrosis cannot be
detected by radiography. Nephroliths or ureteroliths
may be apparent, provided they are above the limit of
detection. Although radiography and ultrasonography
are typically complementary (ureteral calculi that may be
obscured by gas or ingesta during ultrasonography frequently can be detected by radiography), ultrasonography typically provides more information.
Abdominal ultrasonography usually shows normal or
enlarged kidneys with normal parenchymal architecture.
Perirenal fluid is commonly seen with a variety of etiologies. It is important to note, however, that many (especially geriatric) patients with AKI may have underlying
chronic kidney disease, which may manifest as ultrasonographic changes such as decreased corticomedullary definition, cysts, infarcts, small size, and irregular
renal contour. The presence of ultrasonographic changes
consistent with chronic kidney disease does not preclude
the possibility of an acute injury superimposed on
chronic kidney disease. Likewise, normal ultrasonographic renal architecture does not rule out the possibility of chronic kidney disease.
Oxalate crystal deposition in the kidneys increases the
echogenicity with ethylene glycol intoxication, making
the renal cortices and, to a lesser extent, the medulla
hyperechoic. Obstruction is characterized by renal pelvic dilation or hydronephrosis. Historically, pyelonephritis has been associated with renal pelvic dilation.
However, this ultrasonographic sign is associated with a
variety of other lesions and is not pathognomonic for
renal infection. An intravenous pyelogram can aid in the
identification of pelvic, ureteral, and cystic disease processes, especially obstructive renal lesions that are not
readily apparent with survey radiography or ultrasound.
In addition, it can provide information regarding renal
function in the contralateral kidney (i.e., if uptake of
radiocontrast is not detectable in the renal parenchyma
or collecting system, the likelihood of a substantial GFR
in that kidney is low). If the GFR in an obstructed kidney
is below a certain threshold, an intravenous pyelogram
will result in inadequate study quality due to poor uptake
of contrast. Antegrade pyelography may be a better

choice for ­ureteroliths, as this technique does not rely on
an adequate GFR for proper distribution of contrast
material. Computed tomography or magnetic resonance
imaging can add information about renal architecture
and better characterize obstruction, but are infrequently
utilized.
Other Diagnostic Modalities
Measurement of GFR (e.g., iohexol clearance, endogenous creatinine clearance, scintigraphy) can be expensive and some techniques are not readily available. These
studies have limited applicability in the initial treatment
of AKI, as the degree of impairment in GFR is almost
always detectable by surrogate markers, such as serum or
plasma creatinine concentration. Typically, following a
diagnosis of AKI with serum or plasma creatinine and
urea concentrations, no additional tests are useful in
confirming that renal impairment is present or further
characterizing the degree of impairment.
Leptospira serology detects antibodies produced in
response to organism or vaccine exposure. There are
multiple limitations to the application of this test. While
there is considerable cross‐reactivity among different
Leptospira serovars, most available assays test a maximum of seven serovars and, due to the large number
(>250) of potentially pathogenic serovars, this limitation
may lead to false‐negative test results. Titers may also be
negative within the first 7–10 days of illness; a fourfold
rise after 2–4 weeks is used to confirm exposure when
initial titers are negative. A single titer of 1:800 or greater,
with appropriate clinical signs and in the absence of
recent vaccination, is also suggestive of Leptospira spp.
exposure. However, there is a high degree of discordance
in interpretation of leptospirosis among different commercial laboratories, potentially affecting interpretation
of borderline results. A strong clinical suspicion for leptospirosis must be present with titers in excess of 1:800
for serovar Autumnalis, as titers often increase parallel
to vaccinal serovars and with other diseases. While the
microscopic agglutination test remains the gold standard
for leptospira serology, new antibody detection kits are
now commercially available that allow more rapid and
inexpensive detection of circulating antibodies. These
newer assays do not disinguish serovars.
Polymerase chain reaction assays for both blood and
urine have been developed for rapid, early diagnosis in
dogs, but data on their clinical utility are lacking.
Serologic tests for other infectious diseases known to
cause AKI, such as Rocky Mountain spotted fever
(Rickettsia rickettsii), Ehrlichia canis, Lyme disease
(Borrelia burgdorferi), Babesia spp., or Leishmania spp.,
may be useful in certain areas or when there are other
consistent clinical or pathologic signs, although a positive titer does not prove causality of AKI.

1093

VetBooks.ir

1094

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

Cytology of tissue acquired by fine needle aspirates has
limited utility in cases of AKI, but can aid in detection of
an infiltrative etiology. Cytology for the diagnosis of
renal lymphosarcoma may produce false‐negative
results. Therefore, for cases in which lymphosarcoma is
suspected, histopathologic assessment of tissue may be
necessary to rule out this etiology. Diagnosis of amyloidosis and feline infectious peritonitis requires special
cytologic techniques (e.g., Congo red staining or coronavirus immunocytochemistry, respectively), and these
diagnostic techniques have not been rigorously assessed.
The risk of bleeding secondary to fine needle aspiration
of the kidneys is low but possible, especially when platelet dysfunction is present.
Histopathologic samples can be obtained by percutaneous, ultrasonographically guided needle biopsy, laparoscopy, or surgical wedge biopsy. Histopathology may
confirm a suspected etiology (e.g., ethylene glycol intoxication, renal lymphosarcoma) or it may disclose nonspecific findings. When AKI cannot be clinically distinguished
from end‐stage chronic kidney disease, histopathology

(particularly Masson’s trichrome stain) can aid in assessment of the severity of fibrosis and provide insight into
the potential for renal recovery. The risk of significant
hemorrhage secondary to renal biopsy is high when
­uremia is severe and platelet dysfunction is present.
Ethylene glycol intoxication is an emergency situation
requiring immediate, specific therapy, which makes
accurate and timely diagnosis crucial. Commercially
available in‐house test kits are available.

­Therapy
Treatment of AKI is primarily aimed at addressing the
underlying cause (if it can be identified and treated) and
supportive measures to minimize the clinical sequelae of
uremia. This section provides treatment recommendations for cases of severe AKI, in which severe uremic
manifestations and abnormalities of acid–base, electrolyte, and fluid balance dominate the clinical picture.
Specific doses for many of the drugs discussed are listed

Table 120.4 Indications, doses, adverse effects, and comments for drugs frequently used in cases of acute kidney injury
Drug

Indication

Dose

Adverse effects

Furosemide

Fluid overload,
oliguria/anuria,
hyperkalemia

Ototoxicity; volume depletion
2–5 mg/kg IV bolus, may be
repeated up 3–5 times; 0.5–1 mg/ (unlikely if patient is
monitored)
kg/h CRI if urine production
increased following bolus

Regular
insulin

Hyperkalemia

0.5 units/kg IV or IM, may be
repeated q4–6h provided
hypoglycemia is avoided

Hypoglycemia

Hypokalemic effect modest and
transient; IV dextrose must be
administered concurrent with and
following insulin administration

Dextrose

Hyperkalemia;
avoidance of
hypoglycemia
following insulin
administration

IV bolus of 2 g/unit of insulin
administered; bolus followed by
CRI (dextrose concentration and
administration rate are
dependent on serial blood
glucose concentrations, patient’s
fluid status, and accessibility of
central line)

Hyperglycemia,
hyperosmolarity,
hyponatremia, phlebitis with
high dextrose concentrations

Dextrose should be diluted to avoid
phlebitis; frequent changes in
dextrose CRI often necessary based
on serial blood glucose
measurements

Calcium
gluconate
(10%)

Hyperkalemia;
symptomatic
hypocalcemia

0.5–1.5 mL/kg of 10% solution
or 50–150 mg/kg IV slowly, to
effect, while monitoring ECG,
may be repeated

ECG should be monitored during
Worsening bradycardia and
ECG changes; hypercalcemia; administration; will not affect
extracellular potassium
soft tissue mineralization
concentration; effective in rapidly
normalizing ECG, but results
transient; administration of large
volumes may contribute to soft
tissue mineralization

Sodium
bicarbonate

Severe acidemia 1/4 to 1/3 of the base deficit
over 30–60 min followed by an
additional 1/4 over the next 4–6
hours; additional dosing based
on serial blood gas analyses

Paradoxic central nervous
system acidosis;
hypernatremia; fluid overload;
hypochloremia; may cause or
exacerbate hypokalemia if
patient is polyuric; may
exacerbate hypocalcemia

CRI, continuous rate infusion; ECG, electrocardiogram; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous.

Comments

Results are frequently not
satisfactory in cases of severe AKI,
but adverse effects minimal so use
in anuric AKI

Requires close monitoring of blood
gases and electrolytes for effective
treatment and avoidance of adverse
effects

VetBooks.ir

120 Acute Kidney Injury

in Table 120.4. While renal replacement therapy (dialysis)
is referenced, it is discussed in greater detail in
Chapter 126.
Fluid Therapy
To ensure adequate tissue perfusion, extracellular fluid
deficits should be corrected with a balanced polyionic
solution. Ultimately, the type of fluid administered must
be guided by monitoring of serum or plasma concentration of electrolytes because the degree of solute and free
water balance varies widely in patients with AKI.
Colloidal support may also be considered to reduce the
total amount of fluid administered, if oliguria or anuria is
suspected, although no benefit over crystalloid therapy
has been documented in human or veterinary medicine.
Goal‐directed therapy to restore surrogate markers of
perfusion (e.g., blood pressure, venous lactate concentration, venous oxygen saturation) should be employed
with endpoints set to be reached within 24 hours. If oliguria or anuria persists despite achievement of normal
surrogate markers of perfusion, additional fluid administration is more likely to result in fluid overload than
urine production. Avoidance of fluid overload (typically
defined as fluid accumulation >10% of baseline body
weight) is essential, as there is ample evidence documenting the association between fluid overload and
worse clinical outcomes.
Maintenance fluid administration (both volume and
composition) should be guided by the volume and composition of urine produced, as well as ongoing sensible losses
(vomitus, diarrhea, and yield from gastric suction) and
insensible loss (respiration, formed stool). Urine volume
can be determined by a variety of methods, including:
indwelling urinary catheter and closed collection
system
●● collection of naturally voided urine
●● metabolic cage
●● weighing cage bedding and litter pans (1 mL of
urine = 1 g)
●● using body weight prior to and immediately following
urination.
●●

Urine production can be categorized as anuria (none to
negligible amount), oliguria (<0.5 mL/kg/h), or polyuria
(>2 mL/kg/h). Insensible losses can be estimated between
12 and 29 mL/kg/day and are dependent on a variety of
factors, such as species, patient activity, and body
­temperature. Careful attention must be given to serial
changes in the patient’s body weight, as peracute fluctuations in weight are most likely due to changes in fluid balance rather than changes in lean muscle or fat content.
Once the patient’s fluid deficit has been corrected, care
must be taken to maintain a neutral fluid balance, as well
as normal surrogate markers of perfusion. Consideration

of the fluid load with enteral and parenteral nutrition
and medication, as well as intravenous catheter flushes,
is essential to avoidance of fluid overload, and the fluid
volume administered with these treatments should be
incorporated into the fluid plan. High‐maintenance fluid
rates have been historically advocated for cases of AKI
based on the rationale that high‐volume fluid administration beyond that which is necessary to restore normal
volume status will improve GFR. However, there is no
evidence supporting this claim and, in the author’s experience, this practice is often futile in restoring GFR and
frequently results in fluid overload.
Maintenance fluid therapy for an anuric, euhydrated
patient should consist of replacement of insensible losses
only. Frequently, this fluid requirement is achieved in
excess by administration of medications, nutrition, and
catheter flushes alone and the administration of these
treatments may promote fluid overload. If the patient is
diagnosed with fluid overload, all fluid therapy should be
withheld. Fluid overload with concurrent oliguria or
anuria is a clear indication for dialysis.
Monitoring fluid status is an ongoing process that
must be repeated frequently. Efforts should be made to
adhere to objective monitoring parameters (e.g., body
weight, venous lactate concentration, urine production)
of fluid status because subjective parameters, (e.g., skin
turgor, saliva production) are inaccurate and often
affected by variables other than hydration status. Body
weight should be measured at least twice daily to assess
for trends in fluid accumulation or deficit. Central
venous pressure measurement has traditionally been
recommended as a surrogate marker of cardiac preload,
and thus fluid status. However, a thorough understanding of the limitations of this technique is necessary for
appropriate interpretation, as the correlation between
central venous pressure and clinical manifestations of
fluid overload is increasingly recognized as flawed.
Diuretics
The use of diuretics in the treatment of AKI is a controversial topic in both human and veterinary medicine.
Many of the benefits of the most commonly used diuretics in veterinary AKI, furosemide and mannitol, have
only been theorized or demonstrated in experimental
models of AKI. In fact, there is little or no clinical evidence in human or veterinary medicine that diuretics
improve outcome in established AKI. It has been postulated that the ability to respond to diuretics is a marker of
less severe renal injury associated with a better prognosis. However, an increase in urine output after diuretic
administration does not necessarily coincide with an
increase in uremic solute excretion and, therefore, does
not preclude the need for dialysis if severe uremia or
acid–base and electrolyte abnormalities persist.

1095

VetBooks.ir

1096

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

In veterinary medicine, because dialysis is not readily
available, diuretic administration plays a large role in volume management. Conversion from an oliguric or ­anuric
state to normal urine production or polyuria may
enhance the clinician’s ability to prevent or manage fluid
overload and thus allow administration of necessary parenteral medications and nutrition that would otherwise
contribute to fluid overload. No class of diuretics has
been proven to be superior to another. However, the use
of loop diuretics predominates in both human and veterinary AKI due to the relatively high efficacy and safety
margin of these drugs, compared to the osmotic diuretics. For this reason, the author does not recommend the
use of mannitol as a diuretic for AKI.
Acid–Base Balance
Metabolic acidosis is a frequent complication in AKI of
varying severities, and is due to the damaged nephron’s
inability to excrete hydrogen ions and reabsorb bicarbonate ions, as well as lactic acidosis secondary to compromised tissue perfusion (i.e., either volume deficit or
excess). Once perfusion has been restored, provision of
supplemental alkali, usually in the form of parenteral
sodium bicarbonate, should be considered if severe acidemia (pH <7.2, bicarbonate <12 mmol) persists. The
bicarbonate dosage can be calculated from the formula:
0.3 body weight kg base deficit
bicarbonate mEq / L
where the base deficit = 24 mEq/L – (patient ­bicarbonate
concentration). One‐fourth to one‐third of the dose
should be given intravenously as a slow bolus, and an
additional one‐fourth over the next 4–6 hours.
Subsequent doses should be based on serial venous
blood gas analyses.
Bicarbonate administration to a hypoventilating
patient can further increase the partial pressure of carbon dioxide and can lead to paradoxical central nervous
system (CNS) acidosis. This phenomenon is due to the
ability of carbon dioxide to diffuse across the blood–
brain barrier, while the charged bicarbonate molecule
diffuses across this barrier less readily. An additional
drawback to parenteral sodium bicarbonate administration is that most formulations have high osmolality (e.g.,
8.4% solution = 1 mEq/mL = 2000 mosm/L). Therefore,
this solution must be diluted prior to administration, and
the total volume administered must be factored into the
fluid therapy plan. Provision of bicarbonate during dialysis is as effective in restoring extracellular acid–base status as sodium bicarbonate infusion, and has the added
advantage of avoiding the fluid load necessary with the
latter treatment. While there is no evidence in the form

of randomized controlled trials supporting supplementation of alkali in human AKI, it is recommended in veterinary AKI when dialysis is not available.
Electrolyte Balance
Hyperkalemia can be an immediately life‐threatening
complication of AKI and is secondary to a decline in
renal excretory function. Excitable cells become refractory to repolarization, thus resulting in decreased
­conduction of both cardiac and neuromuscular tissue.
Typical electrocardiographic changes include bradycardia, tall T‐waves, shortened QT intervals, wide QRS
complexes, and small, wide, or absent P‐waves. Severe
hyperkalemia can lead to sine waves, ventricular fibrillation, or standstill. There are a variety of pharmacologic
treatments available for emergent hyperkalemia, but
these therapies act to translocate potassium to the intracellular space or increase the resting membrane potential to allow repolarization of excitable cells, rather than
enhance excretion of potassium. The efficacy of these
treatments is typically modest and transient. Only
­provision of dialysis or restoration of native renal excretory function can significantly reduce the potassium
burden in fulminant AKI.
Expansion of the extracellular space with a nonpotassium‐containing fluid (e.g., 0.9% sodium chloride) may
be sufficient to at least partially correct hyperkalemia.
This maneuver should be implemented in cases of
­suspected volume depletion, but should be used with
caution or not at all if a patient is anuric or has volume
overload.
Administration of regular insulin is a common pharmacologic treatment for hyperkalemia. Insulin upregulates synthesis of subunits of the Na+/K+ATPase pump,
recruits the pump to the plasma cell membrane, and
activates those pumps already located in the plasma
membrane to stimulate intracellular translocation of
potassium. The potassium‐lowering effect of regular
insulin may be observed within 20 minutes, but the effect
is typically modest (decline of 1–2 mmol/L) and transient (redosing is frequently necessary within 4–6 hours).
A potentially catastrophic adverse effect associated with
regular insulin administration is hypoglycemia, so dextrose must be administered concurrently with regular
insulin. If fluid overload is not present, the administration of a continuous rate infusion of dextrose, following
the initial bolus, is recommended. Frequent assessment
of blood glucose concentrations is imperative, as dextrose is metabolized more rapidly than insulin, and
redosing of dextrose is often required.
Calcium salts are frequently administered intravenously to increase the threshold potential of polarized

VetBooks.ir

120 Acute Kidney Injury

cells, thus allowing depolarization at high extracellular
potassium concentrations. The membrane‐stabilizing
effects of calcium salts are rapid and dramatic but the
beneficial effects are even more transient than those of
regular insulin. Readministration is typically necessary
within 1–4 hours. The patient should be monitored
with an electrocardiogram during administration to
identify worsening bradycardia, a shortened QT interval, a widened T‐wave, or alterations in the ST amplitude. If any of these changes are recognized, the calcium
infusion should be discontinued. Calcium gluconate is
favored over calcium chloride, due to the severe
extravasation injuries that can occur with calcium
chloride administration. It should be noted, however,
that calcium gluconate can also cause extravasation
injuries (albeit less severe), so care must be taken
to ensure intravenous catheter patency prior to
administration.
Lastly, theoretical concerns regarding promotion of
calcium‐phosphorus/phosphate precipitation and soft
tissue mineralization exist with repeated administration
of calcium salts.
Alternative treatments for hyperkalemia exist, but
each has limitations in efficacy and side‐effects, compared with provision of dialysis. These treatments
include beta‐2 agonist drugs, polystyrene sodium sulfonate, sodium bicarbonate, and loop diuretics.
While ionized hypocalcemia occurs frequently in AKI,
clinical signs (e.g., tetany) associated with this problem
are rare. When manifestations of hypocalcemia do occur,
the minimum dose of supplemental calcium that controls clinical signs should be used to minimize precipitation with phosphorus. As with the treatment of
hyperkalemia, the electrocardiogram should be monitored closely during infusion.
Additional electrolyte abnormalities may be present or
develop during the course of disease, the most common
of which are hyponatremia and hyperphosphatemia.
Hyponatremia may be the result of gastrointestinal or
urinary losses, with or without the contribution of
decreased excretion of free water. Hyponatremia, if
severe (<120 mmol/L), may result in neurologic sequelae.
Hyperphosphatemia contributes to acidosis and renal
secondary hyperparathyroidism. However, the use of
phosphate‐binding drugs has not been shown to improve
outcome in human or veterinary cases of AKI.
Furthermore, administration of aluminum hydroxide
(the most commonly used phosphate‐binding drug in
veterinary medicine) may result in acute aluminum
intoxication, which manifests as encephalopathy, a condition which may not be readily recognizable in a patient
severely affected with AKI. Therefore, aluminum‐containing phosphate‐binding drugs should be used with
caution in cases of AKI.

Nutritional Support
Nutritional support is an important component of supportive care for AKI. Enteral feeding is the preferred
method of nutrient delivery, but is often limited by
vomiting and ileus. For those patients that are not vomiting, esophageal, gastric, and jejunal feeding devices
can be used. If vomiting cannot be controlled, partial or
total parenteral nutrition should be considered. In
patients which are anuric or oliguric, the volume and
osmolality of nutritional product, whether administered enterally or parenterally, must be taken into consideration and may constitute a relative contraindication
unless there is a method of excess fluid and solute
removal (e.g., dialysis).
The optimal dietary composition for veterinary AKI
patients has not been determined. The author is unaware of any particular diet that is appropriate in all scenarios of AKI. Rather, each individual patient should be
evaluated for the following factors, as each may influence the choice of diet to be fed: degree of uremia, availability of dialysis, volume status and volume of urine
produced, electrolyte balance, and availability of
assisted feeding (e.g., esophagostomy or gastrostomy
tube). Patients with severe uremia may benefit from a
protein‐restricted diet because a reduced protein content may decrease the endogenous production of uremic toxins. However, a negative protein balance may
hinder renal repair/recovery. Patients treated with dialysis may actually require more protein than patients
with extrarenal disease, due to loss of amino acids in
dialysate. Patients with feeding tubes that are prone to
volume overload should be fed the most calorically
dense diet that will pass through the tube to minimize
the amount of fluid administered. Some commercially
available recovery diets have caloric contents of approximately 2 kcal/mL and easily pass through most 14 Fr
red rubber catheters or feeding tubes. These diets typically have a high protein and potassium content, the latter of which may be problematic in hyperkalemic
patients. There are multiple appropriate, commercially
available diets from which to select, depending on the
individual patient’s clinical status.
However, a common misconception among veterinary personnel is that commercial renal diets, formulated and marketed for patients with chronic kidney
disease, are also appropriate for patients with AKI.
While these diets have reduced protein content, which
may be desirable in certain situations, they require dilution and blending with water, which reduces their
caloric density and increases the amount of fluid that
must be administered with each feeding. Furthermore,
these diets have a low sodium content, which is reduced
even further when they are diluted with water. Many

1097

VetBooks.ir

1098

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

patients with AKI are hyponatremic due to gastrointestinal and renal losses, so administration of large
­volumes of hypotonic enteral fluid in the form of a
diluted renal diet may exacerbate hyponatremia and
cause severe neurologic sequelae. Lastly, many feline
commercial renal diets have a high potassium content
which, as with recovery diets, can be problematic for
hyperkalemic patients. For these reasons, the author
typically refrains from administration of renal diets to
tube‐fed patients with AKI. Consideration is given to
transition to a renal diet once renal recovery is presumed to be complete and it has been confidently
established that the patient has residual chronic kidney
disease.
Renal Replacement Therapy/Dialysis
Renal replacement therapy (referred to as dialysis) is discussed (in the context of AKI, as well as other disease
states) in Chapter 126. Dialysis is the most efficient
means of managing uremic, acid–base, electrolyte, and
fluid‐related sequelae of AKI. In fulminant cases, available pharmacologic therapies are, at best, incompletely
effective at reversing the aforementioned complications,
and their effects are transient. The cost and limited
­availability of dialysis, however, make it impractical for
many owners and veterinarians.
Additional Treatment Considerations
Antiemetic therapy is recommended for all patients with
severe AKI, regardless of whether they are vomiting.
Metoclopramide is frequently used for this purpose, but
reduced clearance associated with compromised renal
function, and resultant adverse effects (primarily neurologic) must be considered. Furthermore, metoclopramide was found to be inferior to the 5‐HT3 antagonist
ondansetron in prevention of vomiting and nausea in
uremic human patients.
The use of antisecretory drugs (e.g., H2 receptor
antagonists, proton pump inhibitors) has historically
been recommended for patients with AKI. Although
uremic gastritis and stress‐related mucosal disease are
concerns in human AKI patients, gastric acid output
and intragastric pH are not compatible with a hypersecretory state. Nonetheless, due to the high incidence of
hemorrhage from the gastrointestinal tract in human
AKI patients (presumably related to a combination of
uremic injury and stress‐related mucosal disease) and
its association with mortality, antisecretory drugs
should be considered in high‐risk patients. A recent
metaanalysis showed superiority of proton pump inhibitors versus H2 receptor antagonists in the prevention
of stress‐related mucosal bleeding. These results, in
combination with the potential for accumulation of H2

receptor antagonists in patients with diminished renal
function, favor the use of proton pump inhibitors.
Sucralfate is frequently used for gastroprotection, but
human data show that even short‐term administration
of this drug to patients with AKI can result in toxic aluminum concentrations.
Some human physicians advocate the use of diltiazem
in the treatment of posttransplant AKI and the prevention of AKI following cardiovascular surgery, and there
are data describing its use in dogs with AKI secondary to
leptospirosis. While results of the canine study suggested
a favorable trend with the use of diltiazem, evidence is
insufficient to recommend its routine use.
Dopamine is a pharmacologic treatment for AKI that
has fallen into and out of favor with both human and
veterinary nephrologists. Stimulation of intrarenal
dopamine receptors (DA‐1, DA‐2) results in vasodilation and natriuresis and diuresis, which have historically been regarded as favorable events in AKI. However,
it is unclear whether reduced renal blood flow is a significant contributor to the initiation and maintenance
of AKI. Furthermore, at higher doses, dopamine has
inotropic and chronotropic cardiac effects that result in
increased cardiac output, which may not be desirable if
cardiac output is otherwise sufficient. Because of the
difficulty in selecting appropriate dosing strategies for
individual patients that target the desired receptors,
dopamine is not currently recommended for the treatment of AKI. The use of fenoldopam, a selective DA‐1
agonist, may favor activation of intrarenal dopamine
receptors over adrenergic receptors, which may result
in more desirable outcomes. However, there is currently insufficient evidence to recommend the routine
use of fenoldopam for its vasodilatory and natriuretic
effects.

­Prognosis
The approximate mortality rate for AKI in cats and dogs
is 50%; this figure is unchanged when assessing cats and
dogs treated with intermittent hemodialysis. If it is
acknowledged that patients treated with dialysis are
more likely to have a greater severity of renal dysfunction
and more complications associated with AKI, it can be
deduced that dialysis offers a survival benefit in these
cases. In those that survive, approximately 50% recover
normal renal function.
Certain subsets of patients have better prognoses.
Dogs with leptospirosis have survival rates approaching
80–90%. Patients with polyuria typically have a better
outcome than those with oliguria or anuria. Azotemic
AKI caused by ethylene glycol intoxication, however,
has a poor prognosis, with approximately 80% of dogs
requiring dialysis for the remainder of their lives.

VetBooks.ir

120 Acute Kidney Injury

­Further Reading
D’Anjou MA, Bedard A, Dunn ME. Clinical significance of
renal pelvic dilatation on ultrasound in dogs and cats.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2011; 52: 88–94.
Eatroff AE, Langston CE, Chalhoub S, et al. Long‐term
outcome of cats and dogs with acute kidney injury
treated with intermittent hemodialysis: 135 cases
(1997–2010). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 241: 1471–8.
Segev E, Kass P, Francey T, et al. A novel clinical scoring
sytem for outcome prediction in dogs with acute kidney

injury managed by hemodialysis. J Vet Intern Med 2009;
22: 301–8.
Thoen ME, Kerl ME. Characterization of acute kidney
injury in hospitalized dogs and evaluation of a veterinary
acute kidney injury staging system. J Vet Emerg Crit
Care 2011; 21: 648–57.
Worwag S, Langston CE. Acute intrinsic renal failure in
cats: 32 cases (1997–2004). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008;
232: 728–32.

1099

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1101

121
Glomerular Disease
Shelly L. Vaden, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM)
College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Glomerular disease is a leading cause of renal disease in
dogs but appears to be less common in cats. Accordingly,
most of the content of this chapter is in reference to dogs.
Historically, glomerular diseases have been classified
as being either primary or secondary. Primary glomerular diseases arise in the kidney and secondary diseases
occur when the glomeruli are injured as part of a systemic disorder. Secondary glomerular injury is generally
the result of damage that is either sustained following
immune complex deposition (e.g., membranous glomerulonephritis, membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, proliferative glomerulonephritis) or due to systemic
factors affecting the glomeruli (e.g., amyloidosis, focal
segmental glomerulosclerosis, minimal change disease).
Recently, an alternative approach to classification has
been suggested in veterinary medicine where, on the basis
of renal biopsy evaluation, three broad categories of disease are used: amyloidosis, immune complex‐mediated
glomerulonephritis (ICGN), and non‐ICGN. This system
should greatly facilitate the clinical management of dogs
and cats with glomerular disease by separating out those
that might benefit the most from a thorough search for a
systemic disorder and therapy with ­immunosuppressive
drugs. In a study of renal biopsies from 501 dogs with glomerular disease, 48% had ICGN and 15% had amyloidosis, leaving 37% with a variety of non‐ICGN.
Because of the strong association between glomerular
injury and immune complex deposition or systemic
inflammation, glomerular diseases are often linked to systemic disease processes – specifically neoplastic, infectious, or noninfectious inflammatory (NIN) disorders.
Published studies have suggested that approximately 50%
of dogs with glomerular disease have an identifiable NIN.
The categorization of biopsies from the previously mentioned 501 dogs suggests that as many as 63% of dogs with

glomerular disease have undergone renal damage secondary to a disorder occurring elsewhere in the body. A NIN
disorder may not be obvious at first presentation because
it is either resolved or occult. Because occult NIN disorders may become overt months after initial presentation
for proteinuria, continued observation and scrutiny of the
dog and cat with glomerular disease are necessary.
Familial glomerulopathies have been reported in several breeds of dogs and can cross most of the before
mentioned categories (Table 121.1).
Hereditary nephritis is the result of defective collagen
synthesis and has been reported in bull terriers, English
cocker spaniels, Dalmatians, Samoyed, and mixed breed
dogs. An inherited podocytopathy is the cause of familial
protein‐losing nephropathy of soft‐coated wheaten terriers.
Shar‐peis develop familial renal amyloidosis following episodes of recurrent fever and swollen joints. The etiopathogenesis of many of the remaining disorders is unknown.

­Signalment
Glomerular diseases can develop at any age but may be
more common in middle‐aged to older dogs. The
reported average from 876 dogs in six different studies
was 7.4 years of age. In general, male and female dogs are
nearly equally represented among dogs with glomerular
disease. The average age and gender predilection seen
with specific glomerular diseases will vary somewhat
from the overall averages.
Any breed can be affected by glomerular disease.
However, Labrador retrievers, golden retrievers, and
Yorkshire terriers may be predisposed based on reported
higher incidence of glomerular disease in these breeds;
however, it is also possible that this increased representation
reflects the popularity of these breeds. Amyloidosis may be
overrepresented in Chinese shar‐peis and English bulldogs.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1102

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

Table 121.1 Select breeds of dogs with familial glomerulopathies
Breed

Glomerular disease(s)

Beagle

Amyloidosis, primary glomerulopathy

Bernese mountain dog

Mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis

Bull mastiff

Glomerulosclerosis

Bull terrier

Hereditary nephritis

Dalmatian

Hereditary nephritis

Doberman pinscher

Glomerulosclerosis, cystic glomerular
atrophy

English cocker spaniel

Hereditary nephritis

English foxhound

Amyloidosis

Greyhound

Glomerular vasculopathy and necrosis

Newfoundland

Glomerulosclerosis

Pembroke Welsh corgi

Glomerulosclerosis, cystic glomerular
atrophy

Rottweiler

Atrophic glomerulopathy

Samoyed

Hereditary nephritis

Shar‐pei

Amyloidosis

Soft‐coated wheaten
terrier

Podocytopathy

­History and Clinical Signs
Dogs and cats with glomerular disease can present with
a variety of clinical signs, determined by the severity of
proteinuria or renal disease and the presence or absence
of any systemic disorders. They may be asymptomatic,
have nonspecific signs (e.g., anorexia, weight loss, lethargy)
or have signs of more advanced renal disease (e.g., polyuria, polydipsia, vomiting, diarrhea, halitosis). Animals
with severe urinary protein loss may develop nephrotic
syndrome and have evidence of fluid retention (e.g.,
abdominal enlargement consistent with ascites, peripheral edema). Animals also may develop clinical signs
from thromboembolism (e.g., dyspnea, loss of limb function), or hypertension (e.g., acute blindness, or recent
onset of neurologic signs or cardiac murmur). When glomerular disease is suspected, the history should include
questions about the environment, possible exposure to
infectious diseases as well as relevant drug or dietary
exposure.
Complete physical examinations should be performed
on dogs and cats with suspected glomerular disease,
including body condition score, retinal and rectal examinations. Physical examination is often unremarkable.
Poor body condition or poor hair coat may be nonspecific evidence of systemic disease. Animals with advanced
renal disease may have oral ulcerations, pale mucous
membranes, or dehydration. Subcutaneous edema or

ascites, or both, are sometimes noted and consistent
with nephrotic syndrome. Occasionally, there is physical
evidence of thromboembolic disease, such as dyspnea or
a decreased or absent peripheral pulse. Evidence of a
predisposing inflammatory, infectious, or neoplastic
process may be detected during the physical examination. The kidneys of affected animals are variable in size.
Animals with chronic kidney disease often have small,
firm, irregularly shaped kidneys, whereas those with less
severe or long‐standing disease often have normal‐sized
or, occasionally, enlarged kidneys.

­Diagnosis
When proteinuria is detected, there are three key elements that need to be assessed: localization, persistence,
and magnitude. Although proteinuria is the hallmark
of glomerular disease, it can also occur secondary to
prerenal, postrenal or renal tubular causes. The magnitude of proteinuria is generally assessed via the urine
protein:creatinine ratio (UPC). Persistent renal proteinuria that is of high magnitude (i.e., UPC >2) is most
likely of glomerular origin; however, there is no range of
numbers that is diagnostic for any one renal disease and
the overlap in expected ranges is too broad to be clinically reliable. In fact, glomerular lesions have been seen
in dogs without proteinuria. Urine albumin can also
be used to assess proteinuria. Microalbuminuria may
develop before the UPC is increased. It therefore seems
reasonable to conclude that a dog or cat with persistent
microalbuminuria of increasing magnitude should be
assessed as having an injurious process to the glomerular
filtration barrier and may eventually develop overt
proteinuria.
Once glomerular disease is suspected, a comprehensive diagnostic evaluation is recommended for all dogs
and cats which includes urinalysis, serial UPC measurements, completed blood count, biochemical profile, and
blood pressure measurement. Urine culture is warranted
if there is pyuria, hematuria, bacteriuria, dilute urine
(e.g., urine specific gravity <1.025) or concurrent diseases which might predispose the patient to urinary tract
infection (e.g., hyperadrenocorticism). Animals with
potential exposure to infectious diseases should undergo
the appropriate testing. Any concominant extrarenal
disease should be evaluated further (e.g., aspriation
cytology of cutaneous masses, appropriate testing for
hyperadrenocorticism). If proteinuria is of high magnitude (i.e., UPC >3.5), associated with hypoalbuminemia,
azotemia, or hypertension, or progressive or nonresponsive to treatment, additional diagnostics including
but not limited to abdominal ultrasound, thoracic
­radiographs, more extensive evaluation for infectious

VetBooks.ir

121 Glomerular Disease

diseases, and assessment of the coagulation system are
indicated.
The results of this comprehensive evaluation will
vary considerably in affected animals. Hypoproteinemia
due to hypoalbuminemia develops in many dogs and
cats with glomerular disease but is more likely in animals with heavy proteinuria. Azotemia, hyperphosphatemia, and metabolic acidosis, consistent with renal
failure, may be present in animals with severe disease,
although as many as 50% of affected animals will be
nonazotemic. Nonregenerative anemia, secondary to
renal failure or a systemic disease, is observed in many
affected animals.
Other hematologic abnormalities also may reflect concurrent and possibly underlying systemic diseases.
Thrombocytosis and hyperfibrinogenemia are common
findings in dogs with glomerular disease. The nephrotic
syndrome of hypoalbuminemia, proteinuria, hypercholesterolemia, and edema, although pathognomonic for
glomerular disease, will only be present in a small proportion of dogs with glomerular disease (i.e., 10–15%).
Because fluid retention can sometimes be cavitary, thoracic radiographs and abdominal ultrasound can be used
to help detect edema. However, incomplete nephrotic
syndrome (i.e., without edema or ascites) occurs in about
half of affected dogs. The nephritic syndrome is a term
that has primarily been used in people to describe a set
of signs that develop secondary to renal inflammation,
generally acute, that extends into the glomeruli. In people, this syndrome is characterized by hematuria and
red blood cell (RBC) casts with one or more of the following: subnephrotic proteinuria, edema, hypertension,
azotemia, oliguria. Although the nephritic syndrome has
not been fully characterized in dogs, perhaps because of
the probable low prevalence of acute glomerulonephritides in dogs, it is possible that dogs with acute inflammatory glomerular diseases (e.g., Lyme nephritis) may
present with a nephritic‐like syndrome. Isosthenuria is a
variable finding in dogs and cats with glomerular disease
and as many as 40% of affected dogs with glomerular disease will maintain renal concentrating ability, achieving
urine specific gravities in excess of 1.035.
The finding of concurrent renal azotemia, concentrated urine, and proteinuria is indicative of glomerular
disease. Cylindruria is common in dogs with glomerular
disease; casts are most often hyaline but can be granular, waxy, or fatty. When affected animals are imaged,
the kidneys may appear normal or small and irregular;
some animals may have abnormally enlarged kidneys.
Increased echogenicity of the cortex and loss of corticomedullary distinction may also be noted during
abdominal ultrasound. The renal pelvis may be mildly
dilated if polyuria is present or if fluids are being
administered.

Renal biopsy should be considered under certain circumstances: proteinuria is of high magnitude (UPC >3.5,
with or without concurrent hypoalbuminemia), progressive, or unresponsive to standard therapy; immunosuppressive therapy is being considered; medical
con­traindications to biopsy are not present; the renal
biopsy can be collected, prepared and interpreted by
experienced personnel; and, the sample can be submitted for evaluation using standard light microscopy but
also electron microscopy and immunofluorescence.
Medical contraindications to biopsy include advanced
chronic kidney disease (i.e., IRIS stage 4), coagulopathy,
cystic disease, hydronephrosis, pyelonephritis, perirenal
abscess, uncontrolled hypertension, severe anemia, and
pregnancy.
Electron microscopy is essential if a renal biopsy is to
be evaluated and was required to confirm or rule out
ICGN in 27.4% and 23.1% of biopsies, respectively, from
one study. Light microscopy alone was 94% sensitive and
77% specific in identifying ICGN when specimens were
evaluated by highly experienced nephropathologists; it is
unlikely that pathologists without nephropathology
training would achieve these same results.

­Therapy
Standard Therapy
Standard therapy is the foundation for the care that
should given to all dogs with glomerular disease, regardless of the inciting cause, and includes inhibition of
the renin‐angiotensin‐aldosterone system (RAAS), and
management of dietary intake, hypercoagulability, systemic hypertension, and body fluid volume (Box 121.1).
Evidence suggests that UPC >1.0 is associated with
negative patient outcomes and when the UPC is reduced
to <0.5, the outcome is improved. Therefore, it is recommended that standard therapies be considered when the
UPC is persistently >0.5. However, standard therapy
rarely leads to complete resolution of the renal lesions.
Inhibition of RAAS

Hemodynamic forces influence the transglomerular movement of proteins. The RAAS can be therapeuti­cally targeted to alter renal hemodynamics, leading to a reduction
in proteinuria. Decreased efferent glomerular arteriolar
resistance leads to decreased glomerular transcapillary
hydraulic pressure, which ideally leads to a reduction in
proteinuria. Other proposed mechanisms include reduced
loss of glomerular heparan sulfate, decreased size of the
glomerular capillary endot­helial pores, improved lipoprotein metabolism, slowed ­glomerular mesangial growth and
proliferation, and i­nhibition of bradykinin degradation.

1103

VetBooks.ir

1104

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

Box 121.1 Management of glomerular disease in dogs
Inhibition of renin‐angiotensin‐aldosterone system
Angiotensin‐converting enzyme inhibitors (e.g., enalapril, benazapril)
Angiotensin receptor blockers (e.g., telmisartan)
Aldosterone receptor blockers (e.g., spironolactone)
Modified dietary intake
Increased n‐3 polyunsaturated fatty acids
Modified protein content
Reduced sodium chloride
Antithrombotic therapy
Aspirin
Clopidogrel
Antihypertensive therapy
Angiotensin‐converting enzyme inhibitors (e.g., enalapril, benazapril)
Angiotensin receptor blockers (e.g., telmisartan)
Calcium channel blocker (i.e., amlodipine)
Manage body fluid volume
Careful fluid therapy when fluid deficit present
Diuretics for fluid excesses that are contributing to respiratory distress
Immunosuppressive therapy for immune complex‐
mediated glomerulonephritis

Angiotensin‐converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi; e.g.,
enalapril, benazapril), angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB;
e.g., telmisartan), and aldosterone receptor blockers (e.g.,
spironolactone) are the agents that target RAAS.
For most dogs with glomerular‐range proteinuria,
an ACEi is the initial agent used. Typically, an ACEi is
given once daily initially, but more than half of the dogs
will eventually need twice‐daily administration and perhaps additional dosage escalations. Although worsening
azotemia is a concern regarding the use of ACEi, severe
worsening (i.e., >30% increase from baseline) due to
ACEi administration alone seems uncommon and dogs
that are dehydrated may be at highest risk. Less is known
about the use of an ARB in dogs with glomerular disease
although they have been extensively studied in people.
The ARB that has historically been used in dogs with glomerular disease is losartan, although it has not always
been effective. Recently, telmisartan has been shown to
be very effective in some dogs and may prove useful as
the initial line of therapy. Telmisartan has a more profound effect on lowering blood pressure than ACEis and
should be used carefully in dogs that have low basal blood
pressures (e.g., systolic <140 mmHg).

Because neither an ACEi nor an ARB as a single agent
provides complete blockade of the RAAS, there may be
an added benefit to combined therapy; however, this
approach should be used with caution as it has been
associated with a higher risk of kidney failure and death
in people. Serum aldosterone increases over time (i.e.,
aldosterone escape) in people treated even with maximal
dosages of ACEi and ARB; prolonged hyperaldosteronism may have adverse effects on the heart, systemic
blood vessels, and glomeruli. People with hyperaldosteronism may have a greater reduction in proteinuria when
an aldosterone receptor antagonist is added to their therapy. Spironolactone has been used most commonly in
dogs; however, there are few data that support the efficacy of this drug in dogs in the management of glomerular disease. Spironolactone should only be effective if
serum aldosterone concentrations are increased. This
drug could be tried in animals that have high serum
aldosterone concentrations and persistent proteinuria in
spite of treatment with an ACEi, ARB or both, with the
understanding that its efficacy in reducing proteinuria
has not been established.
All dogs that are being treated for glomerular disease
via RAAS inhibition should be monitored at least quarterly by a minimum of UPC, urinalysis, systemic arterial
blood pressure and serum albumin, creatinine and potassium concentrations. The UPC, serum creatinine, serum
potassium, and blood pressure should be evaluated 1–2
weeks after an ACEi or ARB has been added or altered.
The desired therapeutic effect is a reduction in proteinuria without a severe worsening of renal function (i.e.,
>30% increase in serum creatinine), a critical increase in
serum potassium or the unlikely development of hypotension. Changes in the magnitude of urine protein are most
accurately measured by assessing trends in the UPC over
time. Day‐to‐day variations in the UPC occur in most
dogs with glomerular proteinuria, with greater variation
occurring in dogs with UPC >4. Consideration should be
given to either averaging 2–3 serial UPC or measuring a
UPC in urine that has been pooled from 2–3 collections.
The target for reduction is a UPC of <0.5 without inappropriate worsening of renal function; however, when
that is not possible, a partial response with a reduction in
the UPC of 50% or more is the alternative target.
Dogs with serum potassium concentrations of >6 mEq/L
should be monitored closely and therapy should be modified when serum potassium concentrations are >6.5 mEq/L.
Before modifying treatment, pseudohyperkalemia, due to
the high potassium content of some blood cells which may
occur in dogs with glomerular disease, should be eliminated as a cause by measuring the potassium concentration in lithium heparin plasma. True hyperkalemia can be
managed by reducing the ACEi or ARB drug dosage, discontinuing spironolactone ­administration, or by feeding

VetBooks.ir

121 Glomerular Disease

diets that are reduced in potassium or administering an
intestinal potassium binder (e.g., kayexelate). If the target
reduction in UPC is not achieved and the dog does not
have the before mentioned adverse effects, the dosages
may be increased every 4–6 weeks.
Modified Dietary Intake

Modification of dietary intake has a central role in the
management of all dogs with kidney disease and has
been associated with delaying spontaneous progression
of kidney disease and reducing the magnitude of proteinuria. It is well known that fat content of a diet can affect
renal outcome. Most commercially available renal diets
are modified with respect to polyunsaturated fatty acids
(PUFA) content with the goal of slowing progression and
reducing proteinuria. The consensus recommendation is
that dogs with glomerular disease should be fed a diet
with a reduced n‐6:n‐3 PUFA ratio of approximately 5:1.
It is unknown if there is any additional benefit of supplementing n‐3 PUFA when this ratio is already being provided via the diet. If supplementation is chosen, care
should also be taken to provide adequate antioxidants
(e.g., vitamin E). Dogs with glomerular disease should be
fed modified protein diets because this has been shown
to reduce proteinuria and slow progression.
Lastly, the sodium chloride content should be reduced
in diets fed to dogs with glomerular disease. Salt restriction may enhance the beneficial effects of agents used to
inhibit RAAS and help reduce fluid retention.
Antithrombotic Therapy

Hypercoagulability is a complication of protein‐losing
glomerular diseases and thromboembolism can occur in
as many as 25% of dogs with glomerular disease. The
pathogenesis of hypercoagulability in glomerular disease
is complex and incompletely understood. Urinary loss
of antithrombin has long been given as the explanation
but in reality, the pathogenesis is more complex than
this and probably includes vascular stasis as well
as increased platelet aggregation, plasma procoagulant
factors, and fibrinogen concentrations. Unfortunately,
serum albumin concentrations, antithrombin activity,
and UPC cannot be used in isolation to predict hypercoagulability in individual patients. It follows then that it
remains unclear when to implement thromboprophylaxis. Consensus recommendations call for the daily
administration of low‐dose aspirin (1–5 mg/kg/day) in
dogs with protein‐losing glomerular diseases. Clopidogrel
may be an effective alternative.
Antihypertensive Therapy

All dogs with glomerular disease should undergo repeat
evaluation for systemic hypertension. This evaluation
should not only include measurement of systemic blood

pressure but also assessing the patient for target organ
damage, evaluating for conditions that may contribute to
hypertension and determining if any concurrent conditions that may complicate antihypertensive therapy are
present. Personal preference and experience should dictate how the blood pressure is measured; however, the
substaging by arterial blood pressure system that has
been proposed by the International Renal Interest Society
(IRIS) should be used to guide therapy (Table 121.2).
Antihypertensive therapy should be initiated when the
blood pressure exceeds 160 mmHg systolic or 100 mmHg
diastolic (i.e., AP2 or above). The goal of therapy is to
reduce the blood pressure to less than 150 mmHg systolic or 96 mmHg diastolic (i.e., AP0). Lowering the
blood pressure is not an emergency unless there is severe
ocular or central nervous system target organ damage. In
most cases, blood pressure reduction can be achieved
gradually over a period of several weeks. Effective treatment of hypertension should lead to a concomitant
reduction in the magnitude of proteinuria in dogs with
glomerular disease. Feeding a salt‐restricted diet alone
will not lower the blood pressure into the target range
but it may enhance the antihypertensive effects of the
inhibitors of RAAS, generally ACEi. However, ACEi are
generally only associated with a 10–15% reduction in
blood pressure. This reduction may be all that is needed
for dogs that are only moderately hypertensive (i.e.,
AP2). Dogs that are severely hypertensive (i.e., AP3)
should have a calcium channel blocker (i.e., amlodipine)
added to their RAAS inhibition therapy. Alternatively,
telmisartan can be used as a single agent to manage
hypertension and proteinuria.
The consensus recommendation is that dogs with IRIS
chronic kidney disease stages 1 or 2 should have blood
pressure evaluated 3–14 days after any change in antihypertensive therapy whereas those in stages 3 or 4 should
Table 121.2 International Renal Interest Society substaging by
arterial blood pressure
Systolic blood pressure

Substage

<150 mmHg

Normotensive, Minimal Risk

150–159 mmHg

Borderline hypertensive, Mild
Risk

160–179 mmHg

Hypertensive, Moderate Risk

>180 mmHg

Severely hypertensive, Severe
Risk

No evidence of end‐organ
damage

nc (no complications)

Evidence of end‐organ
damage

c (complications)

Blood pressure not measured

RND (risks not determined)

1105

VetBooks.ir

1106

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

be evaluated 3–5 days after making any change. Dogs that
have hypertensive emergencies should be evaluated daily.
The purpose of these evaluations is not only to assess
effectiveness of the antihypertensive therapy but also to
evaluate for exacerbation of azotemia. Dosages should be
reduced if the serum creatinine has increased more than
30% from baseline or if the blood pressure is reduced to
less than 120–mmHg systolic or 60–mmHg diastolic.
Once target blood pressure is achieved, the dogs should
be evaluated at 1–4‐month intervals, depending upon the
stability and severity of the renal disease.
Body Fluid Volume

Dogs with glomerular disease may have fluid excesses,
deficits or maldistribution, which may need to be corrected if the dog has decompensated or is being prepared
for anesthesia. Correcting body fluid imbalances in dogs
that are hypoalbuminemic from glomerular disease is a
very difficult therapeutic challenge. Fluid therapy can
exacerbate edema and hypertension and diuretics can
exacerbate azotemia or uremia. As such, those who have
experience and expertise in critical care are the best people to deliver these therapies to dogs with glomerular
disease.
Fluid therapy should be given only when needed to
help control clinical signs or provide support to those
dogs that have inadequate fluid intake. Both colloids and
crystalloid can be used. However, the decision to use colloids should not be based on the presence of hypoalbuminemia or decreased colloidal oncotic pressure alone.
Colloids should be considered when crystalloids have
failed to bring about the desired result. The fluid status
of affected dogs should be assessed before and during
fluid therapy on the basis of serial body weight and other
physical examination findings (e.g., skin turgor, appearance of mucous membranes, capillary refill time, pulse
rate and quality, arterial blood pressure). When the
serum albumin decreases below 2 g/dL in people, the
plasma oncotic pressure is sufficiently reduced to allow
for transudation of fluid from the vascular compartment
into the interstitial space. Dogs may be more resistant to
the formation of edema, which does not generally occur
until the serum albumin concentration is below 1.5 g/dL.
Plasma volume may be reduced at this point, making the
use of diuretics in the management of edema relatively
ineffective and also dangerous because of the increased
risk of acute kidney injury and vascular stasis leading to
thromboembolism.
Diuretics should be avoided unless needed to control
respiratory distress. When needed, furosemide is the
drug of choice for pulmonary edema but spironolactone
may be best for pleural or abdominal effusion. Provision
of adequate exercise also may help reduce the formation
of edema or ascites.

Immunosuppressive Therapy
Immunosuppressive therapy should be considered in
dogs that have severe, persistent or progressive glomerular disease and ICGN documented via appropriate evaluation of a renal biopsy specimen. However, there are
many practical and medical reasons why a biopsy might
not be performed. In addition, financial limitations may
prevent biopsy. The end‐result is that sometimes veterinarians must decide about the use of immunosuppressive
therapy in dogs with glomerular disease without a pathologic diagnosis. In these situations, immunosuppressive
therapy should not be administered if there is any doubt
that the proteinuria is of glomerular origin, administration of the specific drug is medically contraindicated, or
there is a high index of suspicion that the dog has a nonimmune‐mediated familial disease or amyloidosis.
Immunosuppressive drugs should be considered without a pathologic diagnosis when standard therapy has
been implemented but the azotemia is progressive or the
serum creatinine is >3.0 mg/dL or serum albumin is
<2.0 g/dL. Because ICGN is the disease process in approximately 50% of dogs with glomerular disease, using
immunosuppressive agents in these dogs without a renal
pathologic diagnosis has a 50:50 chance of being appropriate. The risks associated with such therapy need to be
clearly communicated to the pet owners.
Even with biopsy‐proven ICGN, the profession does not
have data regarding the expected outcomes of the various
possible protocols. Therefore, specific drug recommendations are difficult to formulate. The immunosuppressive
protocol should probably vary based on the severity of
clinical signs and the rate of progression of the glomerular
disease. More aggressive protocols that use rapidly active
agents are probably best for dogs with severe and rapidly
progressive disease. The rapidity with which the drug
becomes active is of less concern in dogs with more slowly
progressive disease. Drugs that could be considered are
glucocorticoids, mycophenolate, cyclosporine, cyclophosphamide, chlorambucil and azathioprine. Likewise,
combined therapy of mycophenolate and prednisolone,
cyclophosphamide and prednisolone or chlorambucil and
azathioprine could be considered. There is only weak evidence that supports worse outcomes when dogs with glomerulonephritis are managed with glucocorticoids and
more evidence is needed before the use of these drugs is
discarded. However, it is clear that glucocorticoids will
increase proteinuria; UPC monitoring is best performed
in samples collected on days when glucocorticoids are not
administered in patients receiving alternate‐day therapy.
Glucocorticoids should also be used with caution in dogs
that are receiving concurrent aspirin therapy.
Patients receiving immunosuppressive drugs should
be monitored for drug‐specific adverse effects as well as

VetBooks.ir

121 Glomerular Disease

a therapeutic response. Dogs should be thoroughly evaluated 1–2 weeks after starting therapy and every two
weeks after for the first 4–6 weeks of treatment, then
every four weeks for the next three months and then
quarterly until disease resolution.
A therapeutic response is viewed as a reduction in the
magnitude of proteinuria with improvement or stabilization of renal function and increases in serum albumin
concentration. A reduction in proteinuria is as described
earlier (see Inhibition of RAAS). Improvement or stabilization in renal function is defined as a sustained reduction in serum creatinine to less than 1.4 mg/dL (complete
response) or by >25% of baseline (partial response). A
meaningful increase in serum albumin is defined as a
sustained increase to >2.5 mg/dL (complete response) or
either to 2.0–2.5 mg/dL or by >50% of baseline (partial
response). Secondary goals include improved blood
pressure regulation, resolution of edema, and stabilization of body weight. If there are no unacceptable adverse
drug effects, treatment should be continued for 8–12
weeks before changing the regimen or discontinuing
treatment. Those demonstrating a partial or complete
response should have therapy continued for at least
12–16 weeks. If partial or complete responses are not
evident by the end of 8–12 weeks, the immunosuppressive protocol should be changed or discontinued. If there
is no response by 3–4 months, all immunosuppressive

therapy should be discontinued following appropriate
drug tapering.

­Prognosis
The prognosis for dogs and cats with glomerular disease is
variable and probably based on a combination of factors.
The prognosis is expected to differ with the various diseases. Although progressive disease can be expected to
occur in a large percentage of animals with glomerular disease, spontaneous remission and response to specific therapy can also be expected. Furthermore, disease progression
can be slow enough for the animals to lead relatively normal lives, especially when the diagnosis is established early
in the disease process. In humans, azotemia, severe proteinuria, systemic hypertension, and marked tubulointerstitial lesions at presentation are the most significant
predictors of an unfavorable outcome in most forms of
glomerular disease. In dogs, the presence of nephrotic
syndrome or azotemia is a negative prognostic indicator.
Median survival time for dogs with nephrotic syndrome
was only 12.5 days versus 104.5 days for dogs without
nephrotic syndrome. When only nonazotemic dogs were
considered, (i.e., serum creatinine <1.5 g/dL), the median
survival for those with nephrotic syndrome was 51 days
versus 605 days for those without nephrotic syndrome.

­Further Reading
Brown S, Elliot J, Francey T, Polzin D, Vaden S. Consensus
recommendations for standard therapy of glomerular
disease in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2013; 27: S27–S43.
Cianciolo RE, Brown CA, Mohr FC, et al. Pathologic
features of canine renal biopsies: methods for
identifying features that differentiate immune‐
mediated glomerulonephritides from other categories
of glomerular disease. J Vet Intern Med 2013; 27:
S10–S18.
Klosterman ES, Moore GE, de Brito Galvao JF, et al.
Comparison of signalment, clinicopathologic findings,
histologic diagnosis, and prognosis in dogs with
glomerular disease with or without nephrotic syndrome.
J Vet Intern Med 2011; 25: 206–14.
Littman MP, Daminet S, Grauer GF, et al. Consensus
recommendations for diagnostic investigation of dogs

with suspected glomerular disease. J Vet Intern Med
2013; 27: S19–S26.
Pressler B, Vaden S, Gerber B, Langston C, Polzin D.
Consensus recommendations for immunosuppressive
treatment of dogs with glomerular disease absent a
pathologic diagnosis. J Vet Intern Med 2013; 27:
S55–S59.
Segev G, Cowgill LD, Heiene R, Labato MA, Polzin DJ.
Consensus recommendations for immunosuppressive
treatment of dogs with glomerular disease based on
established pathology. J Vet Intern Med 2013; 27:
S44–S54.
Schneider SM, Cianciolo RE, Nabity MB, et al. Prevalence
of immune‐complex glomerulonephritidies in dogs
biopsied for suspected glomerular disease: 501 cases
(2007–2012). J Vet Intern Med 2013; 27: S67–S75.

1107

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1109

122
Obstructive Uropathy
Edward Cooper, VMD, MS, DACVECC1 and Brian A. Scansen, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Cardiology)2
1
2

College of Veterinary Medicine, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA
Department of Clinical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA

­Urethral Obstruction
Etiology/Pathophysiology
There are a number of potential etiologies for urethral
obstruction (UO), with important differences between
dogs and cats. For dogs, the most common cause is uro­
lithiasis, with neoplasia, prostatic disease, trauma, and
stricture as additional considerations. Calcium oxalate
and struvite stones occur most commonly in dogs, fol­
lowed by ammonium biurate and cystine stones. Urethral
strictures develop secondary to chronic urethritis,
trauma during prior urethral catheterization, damage to
the urethral epithelium from urolith passage, urethral
tear or avulsion secondary to trauma, or as a result of
exuberant healing following surgical urethral incision.
Transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder trigone and
prostatic carcinoma are the urothelial neoplasms most
commonly associated with urethral obstruction.
For feline UO, urolithiaisis (predominantly calcium
oxalate) represents a smaller proportion of cases, with
the presence of a urethral plug and/or functional obstruc­
tion from urethral spasm/edema recognized more com­
monly. In any of these circumstances, it is thought that
the presence of feline idiopathic cystitis (FIC), and asso­
ciated inflammation of the lower urinary tract, may set
the stage for obstruction. Much less commonly, though
for reasons similar to those seen in dogs, cats may have
obstruction caused by neoplasia or urethral stricture.
Regardless of underlying cause, complete obstruction
of the urethra results in a similar pathologic progression.
Urine will accumulate within the urethra and urinary
bladder until those tissues can no longer distend. Once
this occurs, intraluminal pressure builds, resulting in
mucosal injury. The intraluminal pressure is then trans­
mitted up the ureters to the kidney and Bowman’s

­capsule with subsequent reduction of glomerular filtra­
tion. As a result, there will be accumulation of normal
­excretory products such as blood urea nitrogen, creati­
nine, phosphorus, potassium, and hydrogen ion within
approximately 24–48 hours. These then combine to cre­
ate the expected clinical course associated with UO.
Uremia can have a number of effects including depres­
sion, nausea, vomiting, and anorexia. The resulting
decreased intake and ongoing losses can cause the patient
to become dehydrated. Retention of organic and inor­
ganic acids can result in severe metabolic acidosis with
severe implications. Normal protein and enzyme func­
tion can be pH dependent, as well as responsiveness to
catecholamines and the ability to maintain cardiovascular
homoestasis. Finally, the development of severe hyper­
kalemia contributes significantly to the life‐threatening
nature of this disease process. Hyper­kalemia affects elec­
trical conduction and ultimately leads to bradycardia,
atrial standstill, and eventually cardiac arrest (particularly
at potassium levels above 9 or 10 mEq/L). As a result of
this combination of factors, without intervention com­
plete urethral obstruction will lead to significant illness
within 24–48 hours, and m
­ ortality within 3–5 days.
Epidemiology and Signalment
Given their long and narrow urethra (compared to females),
males are much more likely to develop UO. Among cats,
there do not appear to be specific breed predispositions for
UO in general, though Himalayan and Persian cats may
have an increased risk of urolithiasis. There is some evi­
dence to suggest indoor‐only cats, and cats fed an exclu­
sively dry food diet, may have an increased risk of UO.
Dogs that have a predisposition for stone formation
have a greater risk for developing UO. This includes older
castrated males and small‐breed dogs (bichon frise,

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1110

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

Pomeranian, shih tzu, etc.) at risk for calcium oxalate
stones. Because of their strong association with urinary
tract infection (UTI), female dogs are much more likely
to have struvite urolithiasis. Dalmatians and breeds pre­
disposed to portosystemic shunts (e.g., Yorkshire terri­
ers) should be considered for the potential of urate stones.
Lower urinary tract neoplasia is reported to have a higher
prevalence in Scottish terriers, Shetland sheepdogs, wire‐
haired fox terriers, and West Highland white terrier.
History and Clinical Signs
Feline UO typically involves demonstration of lower uri­
nary tract signs: vocalizing and straining unproductively
in the litter box. Cats with FIC may present similarly,
which could serve to complicate the diagnosis based on
these signs alone. Signs of systemic illness (vomiting, leth­
argy, anorexia, changes in mentation) in conjunction with
lower urinary tract signs should point more strongly to
UO than FIC. Owners may not be aware of lower urinary
tract signs when litter boxes are kept in isolated areas, or
the cat is indoor‐outdoor. These patients will present for
their systemic signs, and so UO might not be considered
as quickly. Along those lines, UO should be considered as
a differential for any sick male cat that presents.
Dogs may present for signs consistent with lower uri­
nary tract disease leading to obstruction, including fre­
quent trips outside, stranguria/dysuria, and pollakiuria.
Once obstruction occurs, owners might report unpro­
ductive attempts to urinate, abdominal distension, and
abdominal discomfort.
Clinical signs will depend on duration of obstruction
and degree of systemic impact by the time of presenta­
tion. A firm, distended urinary bladder will be the most
prominent feature for patients early in the disease pro­
cess. In dogs, it may be possible to palpate the presence
of a stone in the pelvic urethra, or prostatomegaly, when
performing a rectal exam. If the obstruction has been
present for greater than 24 hours, the patient may display
signs of systemic illness. Systemic signs include dehydra­
tion, dull mentation, bradycardia, and hypothermia.
Hyperkalemia should be considered for any ill patient
that presents with bradycardia as the normal stress
response to hospital presentation is tachycardia (though
patients with a primary conduction disturbance or cats
with septic or cardiogenic shock can also demonstrate
bradycardia). For cats with UO, the combination of brad­
ycardia (HR <140) and hypothermia (T <96.6 °F) strongly
suggests a serum potassium level greater than 8 mEq/L.

Point‐of‐care diagnostics are especially important in
the initial stages of assessing the sick obstructed patient.
This should include packed cell volume and total pro­
tein, as well as assessment of electrolyte, acid–base
status, and/or kidney values (if available). Expected
­
abnormalities include azotemia, hyperkalemia, and met­
abolic acidosis. An ECG should be placed to evaluate the
effects of hyperkalemia on electrical conduction in the
heart, even if the patient is not demonstrating bradycar­
dia. Progressive changes that can be seen associated with
hyperkalemia include prolonged P‐Q interval, dimin­
ished to absent P‐waves, widened QRS and tall, tented
T‐waves (Figure 122.1). Eventually, ECG changes can
progress to atrial standstill, ventricular fibrillation or
asystole. In cats, it is important to note that wide com­
plex tachycardia, rather than the expected bradycardia,
has been reported in the setting of severe hyperkalemia.
Once stabilized, more complete systemic bloodwork
(complete blood count, biochemical profile) should be
performed if clinically indicated. Urinalysis is typically
performed in dogs with UO to assess urine pH, presence
of crystalluria, and evidence for UTI. As cats are much
less likely to have a UTI, and the clinical importance of
crystalluria is unclear, the diagnostic value of urinalysis
is questionable. Similarly, given evidence that the inci­
dence of UTI at the time of presentation is very low in
cats, urine culture should not be performed. However,
dogs with UO are much more likely to have concurrent
UTI and a culture is more likely indicated.
Diagnostic imaging of some form should be performed
in any patient with UO. Typically, abdominal radio­
graphs are a first step to assess for the presence of cystic
and/or urethral calculi. Calcium oxalate and struvite
stones are radiopaque and should be evident on radio­
graphs. However, ammonium biurate and cystine may
be radiolucent and so an apparent absence of stones
does not rule out urolithiasis. The entire lower urinary
tract should be included (Figure 122.2), and the patient
positioned to help minimize superimposition of the pel­
vis or hindlimbs (Figure 122.3). Common sites where
stones lodge include the base of the os penis for dogs and
(a)

(b)

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of UO is largely based on history, clinical signs,
and physical exam. However, further diagnostics are help­
ful to assess the systemic compromise of the patient as
well as to determine the underlying cause of obstruction.

Figure 122.1 Potential ECG changes associated with (a) moderate
(approx. 6.0–8.0 mEq/L) and (b) severe hyperkalemia (>8.0 mEq/L).

VetBooks.ir

122 Obstructive Uropathy

(a)

(b)

Figure 122.2 Lateral abdominal radiographic projection of a cat depicting (a) normal abdominal positioning technique and (b)
positioning to include the entire lower urinary tract. Note the urolith evident in the distal urethra (arrow).

Figure 122.4 Lateral abdominal radiographic projection of a cat
depicting the presence of a linear opacity within the proximal
urethra, likely representing a mineralized urethral plug (arrow).

Therapy
Figure 122.3 Lateral abdominal radiographic projection of a dog
depicting proper positioning of the hind legs to avoid
superimposition of bony structures. Numerous uroliths are present.

the distal tip of the urethra in cats. Cats may also have
mineralized mucous plugs evident on abdominal radio­
graphs (Figure 122.4).
Male dogs should be assessed for prostatomegaly and/
or the presence of prostatic mineralization. Loss of
abdominal detail may suggest uroabdomen secondary to
bladder leakage/rupture. In some cases, it may be useful
to perform a positive or negative contrast cystourethro­
gram, especially if radiolucent stones, stricture or ure­
thral tear are suspected. Abdominal ultrasound may also
be of benefit in patients with radiolucent stones, pros­
tatic disease, or lower urinary tract neoplasia.

Intravenous catheter placement and fluid therapy should
be initiated immediately in the “sick” UO patient. This
will serve to begin rehydration/volume repletion, as well
as have a dilutional effect on the serum potassium level.
There is some debate as to the optimal fluid to use.
Traditionally, 0.9% NaCl has been considered the fluid of
choice because it has a greater dilutional effect on potas­
sium. However, 0.9% NaCl is an acidifying solution which
could exacerbate metabolic acidosis. Conversely, bal­
anced electrolyte solutions are alkalinizing but contain
small amounts of potassium (4–5 mEq/L) and therefore
may have less of a dilutional effect. It has been demon­
strated that between 0.9% NaCl and a balanced electro­
lyte solution (Normosol R®) there were no differences in
outcome (survival, length of stay) or in reduction of
serum potassium levels, though acid–base abnormalities
corrected more rapidly in the Normosol R group. If car­
diovascular collapse is present, it may be necessary to

1111

VetBooks.ir

1112

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

administer crystalloid “shock doses” (80–90 mL/kg dog,
40–60 mL/kg cat) in bolus fractions (1/4 to 1/3 shock
dose over 15–30 minutes, repeated as necessary) to rap­
idly restore vascular volume. If resuscitation is not nec­
essary, fluid rate should be based on replacement of
dehydration added to the maintenance fluid require­
ment. If time does not allow more accurate determina­
tion of fluid rate, it is reasonable to start at a rate of
10 mL/kg in the initial stages and then reassess. Care
must also be taken with the amount of fluids given, espe­
cially in cats, as a recent study has shown that cats with
UO are at risk for volume overload.
While urinary catheter placement and IV fluids will be
important in addressing the underlying cause, there is a
significant delay for glomerular filtration rate (GFR) to
resume and for potassium excretion to occur. Calcium
gluconate is the most immediate way to offset the effects
of hyperkalemia on electric conduction, though this
medication does not decrease the potassium itself. In
addition, medications that promote intracellular shift of
potassium include regular insulin, dextrose, terbutaline,
and/or sodium bicarbonate (see Table 122.1 for dosing
recommendations).
Generally, if it was deemed necessary to give calcium
gluconate, then one or more of these medications should
also be given. It should be noted that dextrose should
always be given with insulin to prevent the development
of hypoglycemia.
There is also consideration of cystocentesis as part of
initial management. On the one hand, it may allow for
more immediate relief of bladder pressure compared to
urinary catheter placement (particularly for those with
limited experience in deobstructing). In addition, rela­
tively less sedation is typically needed to perform cysto­

centesis. Cystocentesis can allow an uncontaminated
urine sample to be obtained for urinalysis and/or urine
culture. Finally, it is speculated that decreasing intralu­
minal pressure may make for easier passage of a urinary
catheter. The major counterargument against the use of
cystocentesis is related to the concern for bladder tear or
rupture. While this is a known potential side‐effect
whenever cystocentesis is performed, it is believed by
some that a distended and friable bladder present with
UO is associated with increased risk. There is evidence
to suggest that development of clinically significant
abdominal effusion, as shown by abdominal ultrasound
or radiographs, occurs very uncommonly after cystocen­
tesis in cats with UO and that this procedure can be
safely performed. Similar information regarding cysto­
centesis in dogs with UO is currently unavailable.
Urethral catheterization

Urinary catheter placement is an important step in the
management of UO. In this process, every effort should
be made to minimize the risk of urethral trauma and
optimize the likelihood of successful catheterization.
Along these lines, UO patients should receive appropri­
ate sedation and pain medication, with consideration of
coccygeal epidural and/or general anesthesia. In addi­
tion to impacts on patient comfort and standard of care,
inadequate analgesia and sedation may be associated
with urethral spasm and urethral injury. If the patient is
still reactive to effort (vocalizing, moving), additional
medications should be given; alternatively, general anes­
thesia should be performed.
For cats, the perineal region should be clipped, prepped,
and draped in order to minimize risk of contamination.
An open‐ended semi‐rigid catheter (polypropylene or

Table 122.1 Emergency dosing for severe hyperkalemia. All medications given intravenously (IV)
Medication

Dose (IV)

Rate

Indications

Isotonic crystalloid

10–15 mL/kg (c)
20–30 mL/kg (d)
5–10 mL/kg/h

15–30 minutes, repeat if needed
Constant rate infusion

Shock
Replacement fluid rate

Calcium gluconate

50–150 mg/kg

Over 5 minutes while monitoring ECG

Severe ECG changes
Bradycardia

Regular insulin

1 unit (c)
0.1 U/kg (d)

IV bolus

If Ca gluconate given
Potassium >8 mEq/L

Dextrose

0.5 g/kg

Admin over 3–5 min

2.5–5% in fluids

Constant rate infusion

If Ca gluconate given
If insulin given
Potassium >8 mEq/L

Terbutaline

0.01 mg/kg

IV bolus

If Ca gluconate given
Potassium >8 mEq/L

Sodium bicarb

1 mEq/kg

Admin over 3–5 min

Potassium >10 mEq/L

c, cat; d, dog; ECG, electrocardiogram.

VetBooks.ir

122 Obstructive Uropathy

polytetrafluoroethylene) can be used to initially relieve
the obstruction. Given the very rigid nature of polypro­
pylene catheters, care should be taken not to use too
much force in advancing. For comfort, as well as associ­
ated inflammation and irritation, these catheters should
also not be left in place. With regard to optimal catheter
size, there is some evidence to suggest that use of a 3.5 Fr
urinary catheter may be associated with less risk of
immediate reobstruction compared to 5 Fr. However,
another study failed to show this association.
When passing the catheter, aggressive flushing (rather
than force) should be utilized to dilate the urethra and
retropulse/break down any physical component of the
obstruction. For the flush solution, adding sterile lubri­
cant to sterile saline and mixing across a three‐way stop­
cock (in a ratio of 10:1) may help to decrease urethral
injury by allowing lubricant to be deposited throughout
catheter placement (rather than just lubricating the end
of the catheter). Another helpful technique is to pull the
prepuce dorsal and caudally after the catheter is intro­
duced into the penile urethra (Figure 122.5). Elevating
the natural downward angle of the urethra as it passes
out of the pelvic canal may facilitate catheter placement.
Once the initial catheter is in place, the urinary bladder
can be emptied and flushed. A sterile closed collection
system should be connected to allow for urine produc­
tion to be quantified, and decrease risk of ascending
infection.
(a)

For catheterization and deobstruction in dogs, general
anesthesia can be especially important to ensure optimal
urethral relaxation. The prepuce or vulva should be
cleaned and flushed to decrease risk of contamination. A
red rubber or Foley catheter is typically used, though in
some circumstances a more rigid catheter may be needed
(with potential increased risk of urethral trauma). Similar
to the process described for cats, hydropulsion with
lubricated saline should be the primary means of retro­
pulsing any physical obstruction. In male dogs, it is help­
ful to pinch the urethral orifice to prevent antegrade
movement of flush solution. An additional useful trick
(in either male or female dogs) is to have an assistant rec­
tally apply pressure to the pelvic urethral during hydro­
pulsion. This allows a build‐up of pressure which, when
released, can help dislodge a luminal obstruction.
If urethral catheterization fails due to urethral trauma,
rupture, or persistent partial obstruction, antegrade ure­
thral access can provide a means to deobstruct the
patient and facilitate catheterization (Figure 122.6).
Briefly, percutaneous access into the bladder is achieved
with an 18 gauge over‐the‐needle catheter by palpation
or ultrasound guidance. Through the catheter, a hydro­
philic wire is directed toward the bladder trigone and out
the urethra. As the tear or trauma is usually created from
a retrograde direction, the wire finds the true urethral
lumen easily and often can be directly advanced out the
penile urethra. Once wire access is achieved in this man­
ner, the open‐ended urinary catheter is advanced over
the wire into the bladder lumen. The access catheter and
wire are then removed and the urethral catheter sutured
in placed and cared for routinely. Ideally, this procedure
is performed under fluoroscopic guidance to visualize
the path of the wire and appropriate positioning of the
catheter.
Postobstructive Care

(b)

Figure 122.5 Once the catheter is seeded in the distal urethral,
the prepuce is pulled dorsal and caudal to straighten the urethra
and facilitate passage.

One major facet of postobstructive care is careful moni­
toring of urine output and maintaining fluid balance.
Some patients may experience a postobstructive diuresis
which can lead to significant quantities of urine produc­
tion. Proposed mechanisms for this diuresis include
accumulation of osmotically active substances in the
blood, pressure necrosis, medullary washout and/or
antidiuretic hormone resistance. Likely owing to these
mechanisms, it has been demonstrated that up to 50% of
cats may have increased urine production after deob­
struction. However, in some circumstances it is unclear
whether the initial rates of fluids administered may have
also been contributing to increased urine production.
Similar data are not available for dogs.
Given the potential to produce significant quantities of
urine (>5–10 mL/kg/h), it is very important to keep up
with urinary losses to prevent dehydration and hypov­

1113

VetBooks.ir

1114

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

(a)

(d)

(b)

(e)

(c)

(f)

Figure 122.6 Radiographic images of antegrade urethral catheterization for urethral tear in a cat. (a) The initial retrograde urethrogram
showing severe contrast extravasation throughout the pelvic canal consistent with urethral rupture during attempted urethral
catheterization. (b) Percutaneous access to the bladder has been obtained with an 18‐gauge over‐the‐needle catheter and iodinated
contrast has been delivered to highlight the urinary bladder. (c) A hydrophilic guidewire is then advanced through the catheter and into
the urinary bladder. (d) The wire is manipulated under fluoroscopic guidance and advanced antegrade out the urethra. As the tear was
made during retrograde catheterization, the soft wire will follow the normal urethral lumen and pass out the penile urethra. (e) Once the
wire is exteriorized, an open-ended urinary catheter can be advanced over the wire and will follow the true urethral lumen. Once the
urinary catheter is within the bladder, the wire and bladder catheter are removed. (f ) After seven days of in‐dwelling urethral
catheterization, a repeat urethrogram shows the urethral tear has healed and the urinary catheter is removed.

olemia. This can be achieved by at least matching the
fluid rate to hourly urine production (even though the
resultant rate could be very high). In the postobstructive
period there is also the potential concern for inadequate
urine production (<1 mL/kg/h). Major concerns in this
setting would be obstruction of the collection system,
dehydration, or oliguria from acute kidney injury.
The obstructive process and urethral catheter place­
ment are painful and stressful, and could add to postob­
structive morbidity. As such, provision of adequate
analgesia and sedation is also important for managing
these patients. For cats, buprenorphine (0.01–0.02 mg/kg
q8h) generally provides sufficient pain control. If buprenor­
phine is not sufficient, a fentanyl continuous rate infusion
(CRI) (2–4 μg/kg/h) or intermittent methadone (0.2–
0.3 mg/kg q6h) is recommended. Because of the potential
to cause excitability and hyperthermia, hydromorphone is
typically avoided. For dogs, fentanyl or methadone (similar
doses as cats) or hydromorphone (0.05–0.1 mg/kg) typi­
cally provide adequate analgesia. Acepromazine (0.05 mg/

kg IV/IM/SC or 0.5 mg/kg PO) can provide adequate seda­
tion to decrease stress and agitation, so long as the patient
is stable. Given the potential functional nature of feline
UO, the alpha‐antagonist effects of acepromazine might
promote urethral relaxation and decrease risk of reob­
struction once the urinary catheter is removed.
Another important consideration is whether UO
patients should be placed on antibiotics after catheter
placement. This may be done with concern for existing
UTI, or for introducing a UTI secondary to catheter
placement. For cats, it has traditionally been accepted
that the incidence of bacterial infection in lower urinary
tract disease is very low. There is also evidence that pro­
phylactic antibiotics do not prevent development of
catheter‐associated UTI. Therefore, antibiotic therapy is
not recommended for UO in cats while the urinary cath­
eter is in place unless bacteriuria and pyuria are docu­
mented. Dogs with evidence of UTI (based on urine
cytology or positive culture) should be placed onto
appropriate antibiotics.

VetBooks.ir

122 Obstructive Uropathy

Electrolytes and renal values should be monitored
every 12–24 hours (or more frequently depending on
patient severity at presentation) and should rapidly cor­
rect to normal. If there has not been a significant reduc­
tion in renal values within 24 hours, complications (such
as uroabdomen) may have occurred. Given the potential
for potassium wasting secondary to diuresis in the pos­
tobstructive period, supplementation may be needed,
even for patients that initially presented with life‐threat­
ening hyperkalemia.
Further Therapeutic Considerations

For cats with UO not secondary to urolithiasis, medical
management is typically sufficient. The urinary catheter
should remain in place until bloodwork abnormalities,
gross urine changes (major debris, clots or plugs), and
postobstructive diuresis have resolved in order to help
minimize the risk of immediate reobstruction. Performing
a urine culture and susceptibility after catheter removal
(sample obtained by cystocentesis) is recommended to
determine if a UTI has been introduced. Observation for
12–24 hours after catheter removal will help to ensure
effective spontaneous urination prior to discharge. In
order to improve comfort and potentially decrease risk
of reobstruction, continued analgesia and sedation after
discharge may be helpful. While buprenorphine was
previously recommended for oral administration in cats,
its bioavailability has been called into question and it
may not be effective. Instead, gabapentin (10 mg/kg) has
potential as an oral analgesic, and could be given in con­
junction with continued administration of acepromazine
(0.5 mg/kg) for 5–7 days. As an alpha‐1 antagonist and
urethral relaxant, prazosin (0.25–0.5 mg per cat q12h)
has also been suggested to decrease urethral spasm.
However, a recent study failed to show an impact of pra­
zosin administration on the overall risk of reobstruc­
tion. Antibiotics should only be dispensed based on
results of urine culture taken after catheter removal.
Other recommendations which may help to decrease
the risk of reobstruction include increasing water intake
by switching to wet food, flavoring the water, or using a
running‐water bowl. In order to decrease stress, and
thereby potentially reduce risk of reobstruction, envi­
ronmental enrichment may be of benefit.
Urethral obstruction caused by urolithiasis often
requires surgical intervention for stone removal. In most
circumstances, successful catheterization is associated
with retrohydropulsion of stones into the urinary blad­
der, which can be removed by subsequent cystotomy. If
catheterization and deobstruction was not successful, it
may be necessary to perform a urethrotomy, but this can
be associated with significant risk of urethral stricture.
For more distally lodged stones, penile amputation and
perineal or scrotal urethrostomy may be preferred.

Minimally invasive techniques for stone removal, includ­
ing laser lithotripsy, percutaneous cystolithotomy, and
cystoscopic‐guided stone basket retrieval, are available
in some centers. Stones should always be submitted for
analysis to determine composition, with subsequent die­
tary management to decrease risk of recurrence.
Historically, dogs that presented with complete UO
secondary to neoplasia were euthanized, managed by
indwelling urinary catheters until NSAIDs (piroxicam),
chemotherapy or radiation therapy alleviated the obstruc­
tion, or underwent urinary diversion procedures that
are invasive and associated with moderate to severe
rates of morbidity. In the last decade, intraluminal
stenting for malignant urethral obstruction has been
employed with increasing frequency as a mechanism
to palliate the disease and restore urethral patency
(Figure 122.7).
In the largest series to date on urethral stent implanta­
tion, involving 42 dogs, the obstruction was relieved in
41 dogs and median survival was reported as 78 days,
with some dogs living for over a year after stent implan­
tation. The most common complication associated with
the procedure was urinary incontinence, graded as
severe in approximately 25% of the dogs. While place­
ment of a urethral stent for urothelial malignancy pro­
vides a minimally invasive option for animals with
complete urethral obstruction, it is solely a palliative
procedure and further tumor growth and/or spread
should be expected unless additional chemotherapy or
radiation therapy is pursued.
Surgical therapy is often advised for patients with ure­
thral stricture if the animal is stranguric or oliguric and
can result in an excellent outcome if the stricture is in the
penile urethra and either a perineal urethrostomy (feline)
or scrotal urethrostomy (canine) can be performed.
Treatment of urethral strictures is complicated when
they occur within the pelvic urethra as this will require
surgical exposure to the pelvic canal and resection of the
stricture. Additionally, surgical resection and anastomo­
sis to remove a urethral stricture may induce develop­
ment of a stricture at the anastomotic site as the tissues
heal. Options in these cases include urinary diversion
procedures such as a cystostomy tube, which are associ­
ated with a high rate of complications, balloon dilation of
the stricture, or placement of an intraluminal stent.
Urethral stenting for the palliation of urethral strictures
has been reported with good to excellent results in both
the dog and cat (Figure 122.8).
While effective in many cases, there is a risk of urinary
incontinence with stent implantation that is higher in
female dogs and in animals with greater amounts of ure­
thral coverage (e.g., longer stents). Anecdotally, stric­
tures have been observed to grow through the interstices
of bare‐metal stents. Consequently, covered stents may

1115

(b)

(c)

(d)

VetBooks.ir

(a)

Figure 122.7 Fluoroscopic images during urethral stent placement from a 9‐year‐old female mixed‐breed dog with transitional cell
carcinoma of the bladder trigone and severe stranguria. (a) The initial urethrogram shows multiple filling defects in the area of the bladder
trigone and proximal urethra (asterisk). (b) A wire has been advanced past the obstruction and into the bladder, over which the self‐
expanding stent is advanced. The length of the stent can be seen between the two arrows. (c) The stent is partially expanded under
fluoroscopic guidance. (d) A repeat urethrogram post stent implantation shows improved urethral patency with mild urethral spasm at
the distal aspect of the stent. A marker catheter is present in the colon in all images to correct for radiographic magnification.

(a)

(b)

Figure 122.8 Radiographic images from a male mixed‐breed dog with a urethral stricture and severe stranguria. (a) The contrast
urethrogram prior to stent implantation with a focal stricture in the urethra (arrow). (b) One day post stent implantation with improved
urethral lumen diameter; the dog was continent and urinating normally upon stenting.

VetBooks.ir

122 Obstructive Uropathy

be considered to avoid this potential development, albeit
with a possible increased stent infection rate, in the
authors’ experience.
Alternative Management Protocols for Feline UO

Unfortunately, the ability to provide the optimal treat­
ment course (close monitoring, IV and urinary catheteri­
zation) may be limited by owner financial constraints.
Predicated on the notion that there is a component of
functional obstruction (urethral edema and spasm), it
has been demonstrated that pharmacologic manipula­
tion (buprenorphine and acepromazine +/‐ dexmedeto­
midine), a low‐stress environment, and intermittent
cystocentesis can result in spontaneous urination with­
out the need for catheterization. This approach was
­successful in achieving spontaneous urination in approx­
imately 75% of cats in one study. However, while a rea­
sonable alternative to euthanasia, this protocol cannot
be recommended in lieu of traditional management
(which carries a reported success rate of 91–94%) as
no direct comparison between the two has been made.
Further, severely debilitated cats in need of emergency
stabilization, based on significant physical exam/meta­
bolic derangements, should be excluded from this
protocol.
In some cases, financial limitations might preclude the
ability to hospitalize for treatment. Under those circum­
stances, it may be necessary to offer euthanasia, ­especially
for severely affected patients (hypothermia, bradycardia,
lateral recumbency, etc.). For those patients presenting
in the earlier stages of obstruction that are not yet sig­
nificantly ill, it may be possible to provide care on an out­
patient basis, though this should be reserved as a last
resort. One option would be to provide sedation and
analgesia (acepromazine and buprenorphine) and blad­
der decompression through either passage of a urinary
catheter or cystocentesis. Catheterization would offer
the benefit of removing any physical obstruction within
the urethra but could also result in damage or irritation
to the urethral and an increased risk of reobstruction.
Cystocentesis would likely be less expensive to perform
and less injurious to the urethra, but might only provide
temporary relief if a significant physical obstruction
is present.
In either approach, the patient would be discharged in
the hopes that continued analgesia and sedation will
allow for spontaneous urination to occur. Aside from
anecdotal reports and clinical experience, there is no evi­
dence to support the merits of either of these approaches,
nor is there information regarding the likelihood of suc­
cess or recurrence. The client would have to be well
informed of the potential for treatment failure, and fol­
low‐up phone calls to determine response would be
strongly recommended.

Prognosis
Depending on the underlying cause, there is an approxi­
mately 15–40% incidence of recurrence with feline UO.
With repeated obstructive episodes, it may be necessary
to consider perineal urethrostomy (PU). This procedure
will decrease risk of UO, though will not impact underly­
ing FIC if present. In addition, patients with a PU may be
at increased risk for UTI.
Prognosis for UO in dogs is even more dependent on
the underlying cause. Obstruction secondary to urolithi­
asis is generally very good with successful catheteriza­
tion and stone removal, though there is potential for
recurrence. Proper dietary management to decrease
stone formation may help decrease this risk. Prognosis
for bladder/urethral/prostatic neoplasia is guarded, with
palliative efforts (chemotherapy, radiation, urethral
stenting) only providing temporary relief. Reported
median survival for dogs with urothelial malignancy
varies from days to nearly one year after diagnosis,
­
depending on the severity of disease and the treatment
pursued.

­Ureteral Obstruction
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Ureteral obstruction in small animals results from uro­
lithiasis, stricture, blood clots, congenital anomalies
(ureteropelvic junction stenosis), neoplasia, external
compression, severe ureteritis, or as a functional conse­
quence of urethral obstruction. In nearly all cats and
most dogs, urolithiasis is identified as the underlying
cause. A rare cause of ureteral stricture is the presence of
a circumcaval ureter, reported in four of 10 cats with
strictures in one series and also reported in case reports
of dogs. The consequences of ureteral obstruction vary
depending on several factors: whether one or both kid­
neys are affected, the acuity versus chronicity of the dis­
ease, whether the obstruction is partial or complete, and
the presence of any complicating co‐morbidities, such as
infection.
Ureteral obstruction may be complete or partial,
depending on whether any urine is able to flow beyond
the site of obstruction. The degree of obstruction dic­
tates the severity of any rise in hydrostatic pressure
exerted upstream of the obstruction – to the proximal
ureter, renal pelvis, and renal parenchyma. The effect of
this increased pressure on the proximal ureter and renal
pelvis is passive dilation of these structures, which can
become profound (Figure 122.9).
Similar to UO, the increased pressure upstream of a
ureteral obstruction is transmitted from the renal pelvis
to the renal parenchyma, specifically to the nephron and

1117

VetBooks.ir

1118

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

(a)

(b)

Figure 122.9 Ultrasound images of ureteral obstruction in a dog (a) and cat (b). In both images, moderate to severe dilation of the renal
pelvis (*) and proximal ureter (between the +) can be appreciated. The dog suffered from transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder and
the cat from ureterolithiasis.

Bowman’s space, resulting in impairment or even cessa­
tion of glomerular filtration. With experimental acute
ureteral obstruction, renal blood flow initially increases,
but gradually declines as ureteral hydrostatic pressure
rises and the obstruction is not alleviated. Permanent
damage to the kidney occurs within days to weeks after
ureteral obstruction though if the obstruction can be
alleviated rapidly, there may be no permanent effect on
renal function. Experimental studies in dogs suggest the
obstructed kidney will recover only a fraction of its ini­
tial, normal GFR after weeks of complete obstruction
even if the obstruction is completely alleviated at that
time. In the setting of bilateral ureteral obstruction, the
effect on GFR is even more dramatic. This implies that
diagnosis of ureteral obstruction is an urgent problem
that requires rapid deobstruction to preserve renal func­
tion, particularly as animals with ureteral obstruction
often are older and likely have a degree of renal compro­
mise prior to the development of the obstruction.
Epidemiology and Signalment
Large‐scale epidemiologic studies of ureteral obstruction
in veterinary medicine are lacking. As described above, the
cause in most feline cases appears related to ureterolithia­
sis while the cause in dogs is often related to ureterolithiasis
or urothelial malignancy. The epidemiology of urolithiasis
(both upper and lower urinary tract) in small animals sug­
gests that from the 1980s to the early 2000s, there was an
increasing frequency of this condition in both dogs and
cats, concurrent with an increased proportion of calcium
oxalate calculi compared to struvite. This trend for increas­
ing calcium oxalate calculi in cats appears even more dra­
matic when only upper urinary tract stones are considered.
In dogs with ureterolithiasis, struvite and calcium oxalate
calculi seem to be found in a comparable proportion.

Breed predilections are observed in dogs with upper
urinary tract calculi, with miniature schnauzers, Lhasa
apsos, shih tzus, and Yorkshire terriers affected with
greater frequency than other breeds. No consistent
breed differences have been reported in cats specific to
ureterolithiasis. There are breeds of dog that are recog­
nized to have a greater incidence of urothelial malig­
nancy than others. Specifically, the Scottish terrier,
Shetland sheepdog, beagle, wire‐haired fox terrier, and
West Highland white terrier are reported to have an
increased risk.
The effect of gender on prevalence of ureterolithiasis is
unclear. It has been suggested that male cats are more
frequently affected by urolithiasis in general than
females, though reports evaluating solely ureteral stones
suggest a higher proportion of female cats. In dogs with
ureterolithiasis, there are fewer cases reported, but a
female majority was also observed. Female dogs have
been recognized as having a higher prevalence of urothe­
lial neoplasia compared to males; additionally, castrated
dogs of both sexes are at higher risk for transitional cell
carcinoma compared to sexually intact dogs.
History and Clinical Signs
The signs of ureteral obstruction are often nonspecific,
with vomiting, lethargy, and inappetence commonly
reported. Abnormalities in urination, such as pollaki­
uria, hematuria, or stranguria, can also be seen, which
may be related to concurrent lower urinary tract
­uroliths, lower urinary tract infection, or ureteral irri­
tation. Weight loss may be reported if the animal
has a chronic course of disease with compromised
renal function. Increased urination and thirst may also
be observed, associated with renal dysfunction if
present.

VetBooks.ir

122 Obstructive Uropathy

Diagnosis
Abdominal pain may be the only finding associated with
unilateral ureteral obstruction, as the animal’s renal
function from the contralateral kidney should be suffi­
cient to maintain renal values in a normal range.
Abdominal discomfort appears to be a more easily rec­
ognized sign in the dog than the cat. On physical exami­
nation, a poor body condition may be observed if the
obstruction has been chronic and renal dysfunction is
long‐standing. It is relatively common to observe cats
with marked discrepancy in renal size on abdominal pal­
pation, the so‐called “big kidney, little kidney” syndrome.
This is theorized to occur secondary to prior chronic
obstruction of the little kidney, which led to a reduction
in glomerular filtration and renal blood flow, progressive
nephron loss, renal fibrosis, and compensatory hyper­
trophy of the unobstructed big kidney.
Diagnostic testing involves arterial blood pressure
measurement, serum biochemical analyses to investigate
the degree of renal dysfunction and concurrent disease, a
complete blood count to screen for anemia or leukocyto­
sis, urinalysis and urine culture, and imaging. Abdominal
radiographs are advised to look for evidence of urolithi­
asis as most, at least in the cat, are calcium oxalate and
therefore radiopaque. However, radiography is imperfect
as small stones may be missed or findings interpreted as
stones may not be within the urinary tract. The presence
of calculi in the kidneys, bladder, or urethra as well as the
relative size of each kidney can also be investigated with
survey radiographs. For dogs with urothelial neoplasia,
an increased soft tissue opacity may be observed at the
bladder trigone or prostate. Confirmation of ureteral
obstruction, however, typically requires ultrasound (see
Figure 122.9). Ultrasound should be utilized to quantify
the magnitude of renal pelvic and ureteral dilation, the
presence, number, and location of uroliths throughout
the urinary tract, the existence of a stricture or area of
ureteral thickening, the location of a trigonal or other
extramural lesion compressing the ureter, an assessment
of renal blood flow, and the presence of any free abdomi­
nal fluid.
Therapy
Treatment is directed at providing the animal comfort
and alleviating the obstruction. Analgesia should be
given due to the pain associated with ureteral obstruc­
tion, related to stretch of the ureteral wall and renal cap­
sule resulting in activation of mechanoreceptors. Medical
therapy should be initiated as soon as a diagnosis of ure­
teral obstruction is made as it will be necessary to help
stabilize the animal and may aid in alleviating the
obstruction in a small proportion of cases. However,

medical therapy is typically insufficient to cure most ure­
teral obstructions, as the physical barrier (stone, tumor,
stricture) must be addressed.
Upper urinary tract calculi are typically calcium oxa­
late, particularly in the cat, and dietary dissolution will
therefore not be effective in most cases. Furthermore,
there is insufficient time to allow dissolution to take
place in the setting of a complete ureteral obstruction in
which rapid nephron loss is occurring. In the patient
with ureterolithiasis, intravenous fluid therapy should be
initiated as the animal is often dehydrated and an
increase in urine flow may help to move the calculus into
the bladder.
Ureteral relaxation and reduced ureterospasm can be
achieved by administration of an alpha‐receptor antago­
nist such as prazosin (0.25–0.5 mg per cat q12h) or the
smooth muscle relaxant amitriptyline (1 mg/kg PO
q24h). There are additional medications with greater uri­
nary selectivity now available on the human market,
such as tamsulosin, though there is only anecdotal evi­
dence of their use in animals. An additional strategy to
facilitate movement of ureteroliths is a mannitol infusion
(0.25‐0.5 g/kg over 20 min, followed by CRI at 1 mg/kg/
min) to promote an osmotic diuresis. Mannitol should
be given with caution in these animals, however, as
hypervolemia can develop – particularly in cats or dogs
with bilateral ureteral obstruction. In the dog, broad‐
spectrum antibiotics should be initiated as canine upper
urinary tract calculi are more likely to be infected than in
cats, which are typically sterile.
While medical therapy should be initiated once a diag­
nosis of ureteral obstruction is made, it must be recog­
nized that medical therapy is effective in only a small
portion (reported as less than 15%) of cats with obstruc­
tive ureteroliths. Medical therapy should be attempted
for no more than 12–48 hours in animals with ureteral
obstruction secondary to urolithiasis, depending on the
stability of the patient, with serial monitoring to evaluate
for progressive renal decline or movement of the stone. If
medical therapy is unsuccessful, or in the setting of ure­
teral obstruction secondary to urothelial malignancy
that will not respond rapidly to medical therapy, inter­
vention by surgery or minimally invasive therapy is
advised.
Currently, noninvasive therapy for ureteral obstruction
secondary to urolithiasis involves the use of extracorpor­
eal shock wave lithotripsy. This treatment modality
employs high‐energy shock waves directed through the
body and focused at the site to pulverize the urolith into
sufficiently small particles that can be safely passed out of
the body. This is the standard of care in the treatment of
human upper urinary tract calculi, but has not gained
wide use in veterinary medicine. Few veterinarians
employ this therapy in cats as the small size of the feline

1119

VetBooks.ir

1120

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

ureter makes even small stone fragments problematic
and even in dogs there is risk of ureteral obstruction after
shock wave therapy of nephroliths. The likelihood of
ureteral obstruction following shock wave therapy can be
limited if a ureteral stent is implanted at the time of the
shock wave treatment. Extracorporeal shock wave litho­
tripsy is a consideration for dogs and appears well toler­
ated, though transient hematuria or shock wave‐induced
pancreatitis may occur.
In dogs, surgical ureterotomy for an obstructive uro­
lith is typically associated with a favorable outcome in
the hands of an experienced surgeon. In cats, however,
major complications were reported in a significant num­
ber of the cases, with a mortality rate of 18% in the larg­
est series from a highly experienced center. In light of
these figures, alternatives to surgical ureterolith removal
have been developed in recent years, including ureteral
stenting (Figure 122.10) and subcutaneous ureteral
bypass (Figure 122.11).

An indwelling ureteral stent is composed of a flexible
polymeric compound that has a loop at each end, which
help maintain the stent’s position throughout the ureter,
with one loop in the renal pelvis and the other in the
bladder. Ureteral stents may be placed endoscopically,
though this is most feasible in female dogs where a rigid
cystoscope and a comparatively larger urethra facilitate
the procedure. For cats, the stents are typically placed via
an open abdominal procedure with fluoroscopic guid­
ance. The stent may be placed antegrade through the
renal parenchyma after needle access into the renal pel­
vis, or retrograde through a cystotomy incision and visu­
alization of the ureterovesicular orifices. Reports of
ureteral stents in both dogs and cats suggest successful
implantation in greater than 95% of cases with low com­
plication or reintervention rates. The cat shown in
Figure 122.10 presented with a BUN of 280 mg/dL (refer­
ence interval, 13–30 mg/dL) and a creatinine of 20.5 mg/
gL (reference interval, 0.9–2.1 mg/dL) and complete

Figure 122.10 Radiographic images from a cat with complete right ureteral obstruction secondary to a circumcaval ureter and
ureterolithiasis. A double‐pigtail ureteral stent has been implanted in the obstructed right ureter to restore urine flow. Note that the left
kidney is severely shrunken and small.

Figure 122.11 Radiographic images from a cat with a subcutaneous ureteral bypass system. The system includes a nephrostomy tube
and a cystostomy tube connected to a dual‐lumen vascular port that is sutured to the body wall under the ventral skin.

VetBooks.ir

122 Obstructive Uropathy

right ureteral obstruction. In addition, it had a severely
shrunken left kidney, which was likely nonfunctional.
After placement of the right ureteral stent, the cat was
discharged four days later with a BUN of 16 mg/dL and a
creatinine of 1.4 mg/dL.
In the authors’ experience, ureteral stents in cats pro­
vide acute resolution of the obstruction but have a mod­
erate risk for ureteral irritation and pollakiuria that can
be challenging to manage. Studies suggest one‐third of
cats with a ureteral stent will have dysuria either tran­
siently or permanently and that 19% of feline ureteral
stents will become obstructed. There is also an increased
risk of ascending urinary infection with a stent in place.
In human medicine, ureteral stents are left in place for
only 3–4 months in most cases to avoid stent encrusta­
tion and calcification. However, stents have been left
indwelling in cats for greater than five years that were
seemingly well tolerated (see Figure 122.10). In dogs,
ureteral stents for benign ureteral obstructions are well
tolerated, can be placed cystoscopically, and are often
removed once the obstructive stone has passed, avoiding
long‐term risk for stent dysfunction. The presence of a
ureteral stent induces passive ureteral dilation which
may allow a previously obstructive urolith to pass, after
which the stent can be removed via an outpatient cysto­
scopic procedure. Currently, the authors monitor ani­
mals with ureteral stents every 3–4 months by imaging
and urine culture. If stent malfunction develops, evi­
denced by recurrent infection, pollakiuria, obstruction,
abdominal pain, or stent migration/fracture, then the
stent is removed via cystoscopy or cystotomy.
To avoid eventual dysuria and potential complications
of a ureteral stent in cats, or for those animals in which a
stent cannot be placed, subcutaneous ureteral bypass
(a)

(b)

devices are commercially available. Subcutaneous ure­
teral bypass employs a nephrostomy tube and a cystos­
tomy tube, which are connected to a dual‐lumen vascular
port that is attached under the skin to the ventral body
wall. This port allows the system to be flushed at regular
intervals to avoid obstruction and facilitates urine sam­
pling (see Figure 122.11). At many centers, subcutaneous
ureteral bypass devices are now the treatment of choice
for obstructive urolithiasis in cats but are rarely implanted
in dogs where conventional surgery or temporary ureteral
stenting are often effective. Long‐term complications of
ureteral bypass devices include infection and biofilm for­
mation, encrustation and obstruction, and rarely signs of
dysuria. The rate of complications appears lower in cats
with a subcutaneous ureteral bypass device than was
observed with ureteral stents but routine surveillance
(imaging, system flushing, urine culture) is still required.
For animals with ureteral obstruction secondary to
urothelial malignancy, ureteral stenting is advised to
deobstruct the kidney and restore urine flow. In the dog,
this is done via percutaneous transabdominal access to
the dilated renal pelvis with a small needle, through
which a wire is advanced under fluoroscopic guidance to
the site of obstruction (Figure 122.12).
The wire is manipulated through the obstruction, into
the bladder, and out the urethra. The stent is then
advanced over this wire and into place within the renal
pelvis proximally and the bladder distally and urine now
flows through the stent lumen, bypassing the neoplastic
obstruction. A small series of 12 cases found that percu­
taneous stent implantation for trigonal urothelial carci­
noma was feasible in all dogs and the stents remained
patent for the remainder of the animals’ lives, which
ranged from 0.25 to 11 months.
(c)

Figure 122.12 Fluoroscopic images from an 8‐year‐old Labrador retriever with urothelial neoplasia causing ureteral obstruction. (a) Direct
puncture of the renal pelvis was obtained and a wire was advanced down the dilated ureter to the site of obstruction at the
ureterovesicular junction. (b) With manipulation, the wire is advanced across the obstruction and into the bladder. (c) The stent has been
positioned throughout the length of the ureter with one pigtail in the renal pelvis and one in the bladder, allowing restoration of urine
flow past the malignant obstruction.

1121

VetBooks.ir

1122

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

Prognosis
The prognosis for ureteral obstruction is fair, dependent
on the chronicity of the obstruction, the ability of the
veterinarian to alleviate the obstruction, and the under­
lying disease process. If the obstruction has been in place
for some time, a return to normal renal function after
ureteral patency is restored is unlikely. In the setting of

urolithiasis, recurrence of stones and progression of
intrinsic renal dysfunction are common, but typically
manageable. In dogs with urothelial malignancy, the
prognosis by the time they have developed ureteral
obstruction is typically poor. However, ureteral decom­
pression in this disease can allow an improved quality of
life and give the patient additional time until conven­
tional therapy (e.g., chemotherapy) has an impact.

­Further Reading
Berent AC. Interventional radiology of the urinary tract.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2016; 46(3):
567–96.
Cooper ES. Controversies in the management of feline
urethral obstruction. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2015; 25(1):
130–7.
Horowitz C, Berent A, Weisse C, Langston C, Bagley D.
Predictors of outcome for cats with ureteral obstructions
after interventional management using ureteral stents or

a subcutaneous ureteral bypass device. J Feline Med Surg
2013; 15(12): 1052–62.
Reineke EL, Thomas EK, Syring RS, et al. The effect of
prazosin on outcome in feline urethral obstruction. J Vet
Emerg Crit Care 2017; 27(4): 387–96.
Segev G, Livne H, Ranen E, et al. Urethral obstruction in
cats: predisposing factors, clinical, clinicopathological
characteristics and prognosis. J Fel Med Surg 2011; 13:
101–8.

VetBooks.ir

1123

123
Urolithiasis in Small Animals
Alice Defarges, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)1, Michelle Evason, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM) 2,
Marilyn Dunn, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM) 3, and Allyson Berent, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)4
1

Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada
Atlantic Veterinary College, University of Prince Edward Island, Charlottetown, PE, Canada
3
Département des sciences cliniques, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vétérinaire (CHUV), Université de Montréal, Saint‐Hyacinthe, QC, Canada
4
The Animal Medical Center, New York, USA
2

­Overview
Definition
Urine is a complex solution that contains multiple crystal
components. The ionic elements of crystals in urine are
referred to as crystalloids, which can be organic or inor­
ganic. Uroliths are organized assemblages of crystalloids,
combined with a small amount of organic matrix, located
within the urinary tract.
Urolith Formation
Formation of urinary calculi (uroliths) has been hypoth­
esized to occur through multiple mechanisms or pro­
cesses. Three of the more common of these theories are:
the precipitation‐crystallization theory: supersaturation
of urine with crystalloids is followed by growth of calculi
●● the matrix‐nucleation theory: an abnormal substance
in the urine is responsible for calculi development
●● the crystallization‐inhibition theory: the absence of a crit­
ical inhibitor (or the presence of a promoter) of crystal
formation is the primary factor in calculi development.
●●

All three of the above theories (individually or in combi­
nation) likely contribute to development of individual
uroliths.
Urine is commonly supersaturated with crystalloids,
and this is a prerequisite for urolith formation (Figure
123.1). Supersaturation of urine with crystalloids depends
on urine crystal volume, renal crystal excretion, urine
concentration, urine pH, and the presence of urolith
promoters or lack of inhibitors. Following establish­
ment of these supersaturation criteria, and dependent on

numerous patient‐related factors, urine crystals may
begin to aggregate into a nucleus. The crystal nucleus,
commonly referred to as the nidus, can then develop into
a urolith, aka the “stone.”
Additional theories regarding urolith development
have been postulated. One of these, homogenous nuclea­
tion, refers to the spontaneous precipitation of crystals
from a pure solution. This process is considered uncom­
mon in urine, and urine crystal formation is believed to
occur through heterogenous nucleation. This theory is
similar to the matrix‐nucleation theory, whereby another
substance (e.g., bacteria, inflammatory cells or debris)
acts as a nidus for crystal precipitation. Once again, after
the crystal nidus has formed, it may develop into a uro­
lith dependent on the following: degree and duration of
urine supersaturation, and sufficient time for the nidus
to remain in the urinary tract without being flushed out.
Factors that predispose to urine stasis also play an
important role in urolithiasis formation. Consequently,
factors that induce frequent and regular voiding of urine
may be protective and aid in prevention of urolith devel­
opment and progression.

­History and Physical Examination
History
Dogs and cats with uroliths may present for a variety of
animal owner concerns. Most commonly, dogs and cats
present with lower urinary tract signs (i.e., pollakiuria,
hematuria, stranguria) related to the irritating presence of
uroliths in the bladder or urethra. In patients with upper
urinary tract uroliths (i.e., nephroliths, ureteroliths), signs

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

in clinical signs related to uremia, unless there is con­
tralateral kidney disease.
Systemic disease signs, such as fever, weight loss or
dehydration, associated with uremia may be present
dependent on functionality of the renal parenchyma and
the presence of infection. Flank pain may be present with
ureteral obstruction or infection.

VetBooks.ir

1124

­Patient Signalment Related
to Specific Stone Types
In dogs and cats, signalment (breed, sex, age) and geo­
graphic region can provide clues to urolith composition
(Tables 123.1, 123.2).
Figure 123.1 One canine oxalate urolith from a 12‐year‐old
female spayed miniature schnauzer. Source: Courtesy of Andrew
Moore, Canadian Veterinary Urolith Centre.

of systemic disease may be noted (e.g., vomiting, lethargy,
anorexia, polyuria‐polydipsia secondary to uremia, etc.),
which can range in severity, as related to secondary infec­
tion or complete urethral obstruction. Other patients
may have subclinical disease, that is, no signs, and either
upper or lower urinary tract uroliths are discovered inci­
dentally, for example via radiographs, ultrasound, etc.
Physical Examination Findings
Physical examination is frequently normal but dependent
on stone type and, more importantly, location, abnor­
malities associated with either the lower or upper urinary
tract can occur and are detailed below. Systemic signs
(i.e., fever, dehydration, etc.) can be found in patients
with secondary infections or obstructive disease.
Lower Urinary Tract Urolith Physical Exam Findings

Palpation of urinary calculi can be challenging, particu­
larly in overweight or tense patients. If the bladder is
empty and there are multiple stones, a crepitant sensa­
tion may be noted on bladder palpation. Urethral stones
can sometimes be palpated rectally or via palpation of the
perineum or penile urethra. A large firm bladder may be
suggestive of urethral obstruction. However, in the case
of uroabdomen, the bladder may be empty (not palpable),
and the patient may have a tense and painful abdomen.
Upper Urinary Tract Urolith Physical Exam Findings

The patient may be subclinical. An enlarged kidney may
be palpated with hydronephrosis associated with ure­
teral obstruction in dogs and cats; however, most cats
have chronically small kidneys, even with obstruction.
Unilateral renal or ureteral obstruction should not result

Oxalate Urolithiasis
Calcium oxalate uroliths are usually composed of 100%
calcium oxalate, although some also contain varying
amounts of calcium phosphate. Additionally, concurrent
infection can change the composition of the stone, for
example calcium oxalate nidus encased in struvite shell.
Two crystalline forms of calcium oxalate uroliths can
occur: calcium oxalate monohydrate (whewellite) and
calcium oxalate dihydrate (weddellite). Calcium oxalate
monohydrate is more frequent in canine uroliths than
calcium oxalate dihydrate.
The surface characteristics of oxalate uroliths can vary
widely; uroliths may be smooth, mulberry shaped or have
sharp projections (Figure 123.2; see also Figure 123.1).
Epidemiology and Risk Factors

Calcium oxalate uroliths represented 48.1% (49.5%
including mixed stones) of all canine and feline uroliths
submitted to the Canadian Veterinary Urolith Centre
(CVUC) from 2009 to 2014 (see Table 123.2). Most upper
urinary tract uroliths in cats (98%) and half of those
found in dogs are composed of calcium oxalate.
Although calcium oxalate stones are not considered
infection induced, they may be associated with secondary
urinary tract infections (UTI). This is because the presence
of the uroliths is believed to affect the patient’s local immune
defenses. In one study, 52% of female dogs and 31% of male
dogs with calcium oxalate urolithiasis were found to have
concurrent bacteria present, that is, positive urine or uro­
lith cultures. However, other studies have not supported an
association between calcium uroliths and UTI.
Risk factors for calcium oxalate uroliths in dogs include
sex, and they occur more commonly in male than female
dogs. Additionally, neutered male dogs have an increased
risk of calcium oxalate uroliths compared with intact
males. Obese dogs are more likely to form calcium oxa­
late uroliths, which is similar to cats and humans.

VetBooks.ir

Table 123.1 Summary of the signalment of cats and dogs with each type of stone
Dogs
Breed

Cats
Sex

Age

Breed

Sex

Age

Cystine English bulldog, Newfoundland, dachshund,
Irish terrier, basset hound, bullmastiff,
Rottweiler,mastiff, Australian cattle dog,
Australian shepherd, Chihuahua, Basenji,
Scottish deerhound, Staffordshire terrier,
pitbull terrier, Welsh corgi, miniature pinscher,
silky terrier, bichon frise, Yorkshire terrier,
Dalmatian, borzoi, Shetland sheepdog,
Doberman, border collie

Male dogs much more
commonly than females
(except in
Newfoundlands)

Young to middle‐aged
dogs (3–8 years),
exception in
Newfoundlands

Very rare in cats

Males equal to
female

Any age, average 3–5
years or older

Oxalate Any breed but increased risk in miniature
schnauzer, bichon frise, Lhasa apso, Yorkshire
terrier, miniature poodle, shih tzu, and other
small breed dogs. The predisposition for
smaller breeds may be related to their lower
urine volume, fewer numbers of micturitions,
and likely increased mineral concentrations
compared with larger breeds

Male dogs more
commonly than
females; exception
miniature schnauzer

No age predilection
(generally older than
those with struvite
calculi)

Persian and
Himalayan cats

>7 but <10 years
Male neutered cats
more commonly than
females

Purine

Black Russian terriers, shih tzus, miniature
schnauzers, Yorkshire terriers, Dalmatians,
English bulldogs

Pure urates are more
common in males than
females

Variable (in Dalmatians,
any age but often 1–4
years; other breeds 3–6
years)

Siamese, Birman,
Egyptian Mau
(male)

No sex
Mean age 6.3 ± 0.17
predisposition in cats years; portosystemic
vascular shunts (PSS) are
more common in cats
<1–5 years

Silicate

German shepherds, Old English sheepdog,
miniature schnauzer, shih tzu, Lhasa apso,
Yorkshire terrier, Pekingese, Labrador
retriever, golden retriever, cocker spaniel,
English bulldog, bichon frise, Rottweiler, and
mixed breeds

Male dogs much more Middle‐aged dogs
commonly than females

Does not appear
to be a breed
predisposition

Does not appear to
be a gender
predisposition

Does not appear to be an
age predisposition

Female dogs more
commonly than males

Any breed
Himalayan
Persian, domestic
cats

No sex predilection,
may be slightly more
common in females
>2 years

No age predisposition
but typically >6 years

Struvite Any breed
Increased risk in miniature schnauzer, bichon
frise, shih tzu, Lhasa apso, Yorkshire terrier,
miniature poodle (and other small‐breed
dogs). The predisposition for smaller breeds
may be related to their lower urine volume,
fewer numbers of micturitions, and likely
increased urine mineral concentrations
compared with larger breeds

No age predilection
(middle‐aged but
generally younger than
those with oxalate
calculi).
Calculi that occur in
dogs younger than 1 year
are frequently composed
of struvite

VetBooks.ir

1126

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

Table 123.2 Urolith composition for feline and canine samples
submitted to the Canadian Veterinary Urolith Centre (Guelph,
Ontario, Canada; 2009–2012)

Etiopathogenesis
Hypercalciuria and Hyperoxaluria

Major composition

Canine
n (%)

Feline
n (%)

Total
n (%)

Ammonium urate

619 (2.9)

257 (4.7)

876 (3.3)

Brushite

60 (0.3)

2 (0.04)

62 (0.2)

Calcium oxalate

10 043
(47.4)

2778
(50.7)

12 821
(48.1)

Calcium phos apatite

221 (1.0)

69 (1.3)

290 (1.1)

Calcium phos
carbonate

240 (1.1)

11 (0.2)

251 (0.9)

Cystine

134 (0.6)

6 (0.1)

140 (0.5)

Silica

181 (0.9)

7 (0.1)

188 (0.7)

Sodium urate

21 (0.1)

1 (0.01)

22 (0.08)

Struvite

7226 (34.1)

2238
(40.9)

9464 (35.5)

Uric acid

5 (0.02)

0

5 (0.02)

Xanthine

5 (0.02)

5 (0.09)

10 (0.04)

X‐oxalate/Ca
phosphate

237 (1.1)

28 (0.5)

265 (1.0)

Excessive urinary excretion of calcium (hypercalciuria) or
oxalate (hyperoxaluria) results in increased risk of cal­
cium oxalate urolith formation. Lulich et al. reported that
6/6 miniature schnauzers with calcium oxalate urolithia­
sis had hypercalciuria. Similarly, urinary concentration of
oxalate is an important factor in calcium oxalate crystal­
lization and urolithiasis. This is because increases in urine
oxalate concentration have a greater effect on urinary
saturation of calcium oxalate than equivalent increases in
urinary calcium concentration on a molar basis.
Urinary oxalate is derived mainly from endogenous
production in the liver (metabolism of ascorbic acid, gly­
oxylate, and glycine) with lesser amounts from dietary
intake of oxalate. Enteric (large intestine) colonization of
Oxalobacter formigenes, an anaerobe which exclusively
relies on oxalate metabolism for energy, is correlated
with absence of hyperoxaluria or calcium oxalate (CaOx)
urolithiasis in humans and laboratory animals. It has
recently been demonstrated that the absence of enteric
colonization of O. formigenes is a risk factor for CaOx
urolithiasis in dogs.

X‐oxalate/silica

63 (0.3)

1 (0.02)

64 (0.2)

X‐oxalate/struvite

39 (0.2)

13 (0.2)

52 (0.2)

Water Type

X‐struvite/Ca
phosphate

1878 (8.9)

21 (0.4)

1899 (7.1)

X‐struvite/urate

215 (1.0)

41 (0.7)

256 (1.0)

Total

21 187

5478

26 665

Source: Courtesy of Andrew Moore, Canadian Veterinary Urolith
Centre.

In humans, the mineral content of water may play a role
in calcium oxalate urolith formation. It is also thought
that increased sodium content can increase water intake
and offset its calciuretic effect. Increased water sodium,
calcium, or the absence of trace minerals such as zinc,
which chelates calcium, may increase the risk of calcium
oxalate urolithiasis. However, in cats, the source of water
(bottle, municipal, etc.) did not appear to affect the risk
of calcium oxalate urolithiasis. A similar study has not
been conducted in dogs.
Modifiers of Calcium Oxalate Crystal Formation

In humans, urine normally contains several natural
inhibitors of urolith formation and growth. Inhibitors
can be either organic or inorganic substances in urine
that reduce crystal formation, aggregation, or growth. A
defect or deficiency in these inhibitors may contribute to
urolith formation. Inhibitors of calcium oxalate include
citrate, magnesium, pyrophosphate, glycosaminogly­
cans, nephrocalcin, and Tamm–Horsfall mucoprotein.
Although little is known about these inhibitors in dogs, it
is suspected they may play a similar role as in humans.
Concurrent Medical Conditions
Figure 123.2 Feline oxalate stones from a 16‐year‐old female
spayed domestic short‐hair. Source: Courtesy of Andrew Moore,
Canadian Veterinary Urolith Centre.

Hyperadrenocorticism is associated with calcium oxalate
urolithiasis in humans and dogs. In humans, glucocorti­
coid excess leads to hypercalciuria secondary to increased
mobilization of calcium from bone. Glucocorticoid‐

VetBooks.ir

123 Urolithiasis in Small Animals

induced decreases in tubular resorption of calcium,
chronic metabolic acidosis, and decrease in urinary excre­
tion of citrate may also occur. Similar glucocorticoid‐
associated mechanisms are believed to occur in dogs.
A recent study in humans demonstrated an association
between calcium oxalate stones and hypertriglyceri­
demia. The predisposition of miniature schnauzers for
idiopathic hyperlipidemia may one day be found to
explain why this breed is at high risk of calcium oxalate
stones.
Struvite Urolithiasis
Epidemiology

Struvite uroliths are typically composed of 100% magne­
sium ammonium phosphate hexahydrate. Struvite stones
may also contain varying amounts of calcium phosphate
(termed calcium apatite) or calcium carbonate phos­
phate (termed carbonate apatite). These uroliths are
commonly referred to as “infection stones” or “urease
stones” because, in dogs, they are primarily due to the
presence of urease‐producing bacteria. Struvite stones
are often multifaceted or pyramidal in appearance, espe­
cially when multiple urocystoliths are present, because
the adjacent surfaces are smooth and flattened. If soli­
tary, struvite may have sharp spiculated projections
(Figure 123.3). Struvite uroliths represented 35.5%
(43.6% including mixed stones) of all canine and feline
uroliths submitted to CVUC from 2009 to 2012 (see
Table 123.2). More recently, struvite urolith submissions
have increased and have exceeded the calcium oxalate

Figure 123.3 Bladder struvite uroliths retrieved from a 10‐year‐
old female spayed golden retriever. Source: Courtesy of Andrew
Moore, Canadian Veterinary Urolith Centre.

urolith submissions for small animals (2018 Minnesota
Urolith Center [MUC] Global Data generated by
Minnesota Urolith Center, February 2019).
Struvites are most commonly located in the lower uri­
nary tract (LUT) (95%). Risk factors appear related to sex
and associated higher bacterial infection risk, as they are
more frequent in female dogs (71–85% of struvite sub­
mitted to urolith centers) than male dogs (15–29%).
Certain breeds are predisposed to struvite uroliths (see
Table 123.1).
Etiopathogenesis

The majority of canine struvite uroliths are due to urinary
tract infection, most commonly related to bacterial infec­
tion with urease‐producing organisms. However, sterile
struvite urolithiasis has been reported in related cocker
spaniels. In dogs, Staphylococcus pseudintermedius is
cited as the most common urease‐producing bacterium
associated with struvite uroliths. Other less common
urease‐producing organisms include Pseudomonas spp.,
Klebsiella spp., Proteus, and Corynebacterium urealyticum. Urease‐producing mycoplasmas (termed urea­
plasma) such as Ureaplasma urealyticium may also cause
struvite urolithiasis.
Infection‐based struvite uroliths form when urease
cleaves urea to form ammonia and bicarbonate. The
available ammonium then combines with magnesium
and phosphate, normally present in urine, to form mag­
nesium ammonium phosphate hexahydrate (struvite)
crystals. Bicarbonate increases the urine pH (i.e., urine
becomes more basic), which then decreases the solubil­
ity of struvite crystals. Ammonium also damages the
urothelial glycosaminoglycan layer by acting as an irri­
tant. This allows struvite crystals and bacteria to adhere
to the urothelium and may promote production of an
organic matrix for the crystal–matrix interaction, lead­
ing to stone formation. Unlike in cats, where sterile stru­
vite urolithiasis may occur solely because of excess
mineral intake in the diet, infection with a urease‐pro­
ducing bacterium is associated with struvite urolithiasis
in most dogs.
Infection‐induced struvite uroliths may contain viable
bacteria trapped in the interstices of the stone layers.
Bacteria have been cultured from the core of struvite
uroliths that have been stored in formalin for years.
Dissolution or fragmentation of struvite uroliths may
release viable bacteria into the urinary tract and this may
cause reinfection unless appropriate antimicrobials and
duration of therapy are provided. If the bacteria isolated
from the urine and the urolith differ, a change in antimi­
crobial is only necessary if poor clinical response is
observed. If a nonurease‐producing bacterium is isolated
and subclinical bacteriuria is suspected, an antimicrobial

1127

VetBooks.ir

1128

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

is rarely indicated. If a urease‐producing bacterium is
isolated, antibiotic therapy should be continued as long
as struvite uroliths are present. If therapy duration is
insufficient, UTIs will not resolve or a relapse of infec­
tion will likely occur.
Purine Urolithiasis
Epidemiology

Naturally occurring purine uroliths consist of uric acid
(and its various salts) and xanthine. Xanthine and uric
acid are successive biodegradation products in the
metabolism of purines (Figure 123.4). Purine uroliths
may be pure (100%) in composition, or less commonly,
may contain varying amounts of other minerals. The
term “urate” includes uric acid, ammonium urate, and
the other salts of uric acid, mostly sodium acid urate,
sodium calcium urate, and ammonium calcium urate.
Ammonium urate accounts for 86% of urate uroliths.
Urate uroliths are typically small, round, smooth
stones that are greenish‐brown in color (Figure 123.5).
There are often multiple urate uroliths present. Cross‐
sections of urate uroliths reveal a concentric appearance.
Xanthine uroliths are typically similar in size and shape
to urate uroliths but are usually yellow to brown
(Figure 123.6).
Purine uroliths accounted for 6.4% of canine uroliths
analyzed at the MUC between 1981 and 2007, making it
the third most common type of canine urolith in this
region. In Canada, purine uroliths represented 3.44% of
canine and feline uroliths submitted to the CVUC between
2009 and 2012 (see Table 123.2). The majority of urate
(97%) and xanthine (94%) uroliths that are submitted for
Dietary
purines

Endogenous
purines

Figure 123.6 Xanthine stone retrieved from a 2‐year‐old male
neutered Dalmatian. Source: Courtesy of Andrew Moore, Canadian
Veterinary Urolith Centre.

Hypoxanthine
(Xanthine Oxidase)
Xanthine
(Xanthine Oxidase)
Excreated in
the urine of
Dalmatians

Allopurinol*
(Xanthine oxidase
inhibitor)

Uric Acid
(Uricase)

Excreated in
the urine of
normal dogs

Figure 123.5 Urate stones retrieved from a 12‐year‐old male
neutered Dalmatian dog. Source: Courtesy of Andrew Moore,
Canadian Veterinary Urolith Centre.

Allantoin
*Increases urinary excretion of
hypoxanthine and xanthine

Figure 123.4 Normal canine purine degradation pathway.

analysis have been removed from the LUT. However, con­
sidering the difficulty in removing uroliths from the upper
urinary tract (UUT), nephroliths and ureteroliths may be
underrepresented in submission frequency.
Risk factors for purine uroliths (and types of these)
include species, breed, age, and sex. Ammonium urate is
the most common (approx. 95%) naturally occurring
purine urolith in cats. Xanthine uroliths are uncommon
specimens submitted to the CVUC, having been diag­
nosed in only five cats and five dogs (0.02% of uroliths in
cats and 0.09% of uroliths submitted in dogs) from 2009
to 2012 (see Table 123.2). Uroliths composed of hypox­
anthine have not been recognized in cats.
Urate stones may be found in dogs of any age but are
most frequently retrieved from young to middle‐aged
dogs (see Table 123.1). Pure urate uroliths occur more

VetBooks.ir

123 Urolithiasis in Small Animals

often in males than in females. Female dogs may sponta­
neously void urate uroliths without being detected. In
dogs, urate uroliths are most commonly retrieved from
Dalmatians (61% of ammonium urate and 91% of sodium
and calcium urate uroliths). In cats, the typical patient
with urate uroliths is a pure‐bred neutered cat, 4–7 years
old, with uroliths in the bladder or urethra. The Siamese
breed seems to be overrepresented, along with the
Egyptian Mau and Birman breeds. Cat breeds that
had lower odds for urate urolith submission than
mixed breeds included Abyssinian, American shorthair,
Himalayan, Manx, and Persian. There is no sex predispo­
sition in cats.
Naturally occurring xanthine uroliths are rare and are
frequently retrieved from dogs that have been treated
with allopurinol.
Etiopathogenesis in Dogs

The purine metabolites, uric acid and xanthine, have
much lower solubility than that of allantoin. Consequently,
if urine is oversaturated with these substances, uroliths
can form. A high dietary intake of purines and purine
precursors, along with acidic urine, aids in urolith for­
mation. Infection with urease‐producing bacteria may
also promote formation of urate uroliths by increasing
ammonium ion concentration from the breakdown of
urea (see Figure 123.6).
Dalmatian Dogs

Dalmatian dogs are predisposed to the development of
urate uroliths because of their reduced transport of uric
acid into hepatocytes. This results in decreased conver­
sion of uric acid to allantoin, a subsequent moderate
increase in serum uric acid concentration (hyperurice­
mia), and then hyperuricosuria. The inheritance of
hyperuricosuria in Dalmatians is via a simple autosomal
recessive gene. The missense mutation in the SLC2A9
gene that encodes for a urate transporter is responsible
for this defect, and all Dalmatians are homozygous.
Despite excretion of relatively large quantities of uric
acid, not all Dalmatians form urate uroliths. It is esti­
mated that 25% of male Dalmatians will have urolithiasis
and it is suspected that other risk factors play a role in
dogs who become urate stone formers.
Non‐Dalmatian Dogs

Dogs other than Dalmatians accounted for approxi­
mately 30–60% of urate uroliths submitted for analysis.
Similar to Dalmatians, urolith‐forming bulldogs and
black Russian terriers have been shown to be homozy­
gous for a mutation in SLC2A9. However, the reasons for
development of urate uroliths in these non‐Dalmatian
breeds is unknown and does not appear associated with
hepatic dysfunction.

Hepatic Dysfunction

Hepatic dysfunction is associated with a reduced ability
to convert ammonia to urea and uric acid to allantoin.
Therefore, dogs suffering from hepatic dysfunction may
develop hyperammonuria and hyperuricuria, which
may result in urate urolith formation. The incidence of
urate urolithiasis appears to be higher in dogs with por­
tal vascular anomalies than with other causes of hepatic
dysfunction.
Xanthine

Xanthine is an important mediator in purine metabolism;
the drug allopurinol binds rapidly to (and inhibits the
action of ) xanthine oxidase, thereby decreasing conver­
sion of hypoxanthine to xanthine and xanthine to uric
acid. The result is a reduction of serum and urine concen­
trations of uric acid, with an increase in serum and urine
concentrations of xanthine. As such, most xanthine uro­
liths in dogs form secondary to therapy with allopurinol
via this mechanism. This is particularly true when a diet
high in purines (meat based) is fed to these at‐risk dogs.
Naturally occurring xanthinuria has been reported in
Cavalier King Charles spaniels and dachshunds, and is
thought to reflect an inborn error of xanthine oxidase
activity.
Etiopathogenesis of Urate Urolithiasis in Cats

The pathophysiology of urate urolith formation in cats is
unknown. Ammonium urate uroliths have been recov­
ered from cats with portovascular anomalies. Such con­
genital anomalies can be found in male and female cats
and are typically are detected when cats are <12 months
of age. As Siamese cats are overrepresented among those
with portosystemic shunts, it is recommended to evalu­
ate them for underlying liver pathology when this breed
is presented with calculi. However, most cats with urate
stones do not have portovascular anomalies, and risk
factors for urate lithogenesis in cats are thought to
include an increase in renal excretion and urine concen­
tration of uric acid, the potential presence of promoters,
or the absence of inhibitors of urate urolith formation.
Xanthine urolithiasis is considered rare in cats, and
only five cats have been reported with spontaneous
xanthine urolithiasis and hyperxanthinuria in the last
20 years.
Calcium Phosphate Urolithiasis
Calcium phosphate uroliths are commonly called apa­
tite uroliths. Most pure calcium phosphate uroliths in
dogs are composed of hydroxyapatite. Brushite (cal­
cium hydrogen phosphate dehydrate) stones are less
common and whitlockite (calcium orthophosphate)
uroliths are rare.

1129

VetBooks.ir

1130

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

Epidemiology and Risk Factors

Epidemiology

Pure calcium phosphate uroliths are rare in dogs, com­
prising only 0.3–0.6% of uroliths submitted to the MUC
per year and 2% of uroliths submitted to the CVUC (see
Table 123.2). Most calcium phosphate uroliths are mixed
in composition and are predominantly (≥70%) struvite or
calcium oxalate. Mixed stones are very common in cats
and dogs.
Risk factors for these uroliths vary based on stone con­
tent and sex, as pure hydroxyapatite uroliths occur
slightly more in male dogs (52%) than female dogs (48%)
whereas with brushite uroliths, male dogs (75%) are
more commonly affected than female dogs (24%).

Geographic location of the dog or cat plays a large role in
the prevalence of cystine urolithiasis. In the USA, urolith
prevalence has been reported as 1–2%. This is in con­
trast to parts of Europe where cystine urolithiasis has
been reported as 8% in Sweden and 26% in central Spain.
In Canada, cystine uroliths submitted to the CVUC rep­
resented 0.6% and 0.1% of all canine and feline stones,
respectively, between 2009 and 2012 (see Table 123.2).
Risk factors for cystine urolithiasis in dogs include age,
breed, and sex. Most affected dogs are males (98%),
although the disease is not genetically sex linked, and
young to middle‐aged (3–8 years). The exception to
these risk factors is the Newfoundland breed, where
these stones occur in both genders and often at a younger
age. Newfoundland dogs also appear to have an increased
incidence of cystine nephroliths.
Breed predisposition has varied widely over the last
15 years and urolith risk may depend on the dog’s geo­
graphic location. Unfortunately, most studies do not
compare breed distribution to the national registry for
dog breeds, nor are dog health insurance numbers,
which have provided the information for these studies,
common everywhere. Bull mastiff, Scottish deerhound,
English bulldog, Newfoundland, Chihuahua and dachs­
hund are the most common breeds affected in North
America, while terrier breeds (Yorkshire, Jack Russell,
and West Highland white) are the most affected in
the UK.

Etiopathogenesis

Several factors may influence urine calcium phosphate
saturation including urine concentration of calcium and
phosphate, urine pH, and the presence or absence of
inhibitors of calcium phosphate crystal formation.
Alkaline urine pH decreases the solubility of hydroxyapa­
tite and likely contributes to calcium phosphate uroliths.
Excessive urinary excretion of calcium (hypercalciuria)
and phosphate (hyperphosphaturia) may also induce cal­
cium phosphate urolith formation.
Co‐morbidities such as primary hyperparathyroidism
and hypercalcemia may influence stone formation, and
up to 30–40% of dogs with primary hyperparathyroidism
present with calcium‐containing uroliths. However,
hypercalcemic cats are more likely to have calcium oxa­
late rather than calcium phosphate uroliths.
It has been reported that some dogs with urinary tract
hemorrhage can develop blood clots mineralized with
calcium phosphate. These stones are not considered true
calcium phosphate uroliths as they do not contain the
same matrix proteins or ultrastructure as typical calcium
phosphate uroliths.
Cystine Urolithiasis
Dogs that develop cystine uroliths excrete an increased
amount of cystine (and to a variable extent other amino
acids) in their urine, a condition called cystinuria.
Cystine is composed of two cysteine amino acid mole­
cules linked by a disulfide bond. Urine solubility of cys­
tine is low, and dogs with cystinuria are predisposed to
urolith formation.
Canine cystine uroliths are typically pure, but a few
contain struvite, urate, silicate, oxalate or calcium apa­
tite. Typically, urolith appearance is smooth, oval and
light yellow to reddish‐brown. The size of cystine uro­
liths varies, but small and multiple stones are common.
The cystine uroliths submitted to urolith centers have
usually been retrieved from the LUT.

Etiopathogenesis

In normal dogs, cystine is freely filtered at the glomeru­
lus and then actively reabsorbed in the proximal tubules.
Cystinuria is a limited hereditary renal transport d
­ isorder
involving cystine and the dibasic amino acids ornithine,
lysine, and arginine, collectively known as COLA.
Instead of the normal >99% reabsorption in the proximal
renal tubules, these amino acids are lost in the urine;
however, only cystine causes a problem. In cystinuric
patients, the carrier proteins responsible for reabsorp­
tion are defective. The type of amino acids lost and their
quantity vary depending on the case. The low solubility
of cystine in acidic urine predisposes to the formation of
cystine crystals and uroliths in the urinary tract.
Cystinuria in humans and dogs is classified into several
distinct types depending on age of onset, severity, sex,
inheritance, and mutant gene. In dogs, type I‐a cystinu­
ria is an autosomal recessive disease caused by a SLC3A1
gene mutation common in the Newfoundland, Landseer,
and Labrador retriever breeds.
A nonsense mutation in exon 2 of the SLC3A1 (amino
acid – aa‐transport) gene has been identified as a
­molecular basis of the defect but the underlying genetic

VetBooks.ir

123 Urolithiasis in Small Animals

defect(s) in most cystinuric breeds of dogs have yet to be
identified. More recently, Labrador retrievers were found
to have a different mutation in the same gene, encoding
for a renal basic amino acid transporter. DNA‐based
genetic tests are available to detect abnormal cystine
excretion for some breeds of dogs.
Type II cystinuria is an autosomal dominant disease
that has been reported in Australian cattle dogs, border
collies (type II‐a) and miniature pinscher (type II‐b). In
the latter, the mutation affects the SLC7A9 gene and
encodes for intramembrane transporter protein.
The molecular basis for androgen‐dependent type
(type III) cystinuria is unknown. Type III cystinuria
regroups several breeds of dogs such as the English bull­
dog, English mastiff, French bulldog. Type III cystinuria
is typically detected later in life, is less severe clinically,
and appears to involve only males. Castration seems to
lower cystine excretion, therefore the mode of inherit­
ance is unclear. No gene mutation has been identified as
the cause of type III cystinuria.
Etiopathogenesis of cystine in cats is not well charac­
terized, but one study recently reported an SLC3A1
mutation causing cystinuria in a cat as well as three dif­
ferent SLC7A9 gene variants in four cats.
Resources for cystinuria testing (urine nitroprusside/
genetic testing) can be found at PennGen Laboratories:
http://research.vet.upenn.edu/penngen

crops. Plant sources implicated in silicate urolithiasis
include rice and soybean hulls and corn gluten feed.
Silicates may be high in certain home‐made diets and in
some groundwater from aquifers. In certain regions, soil
may contain high concentrations of silicate so consump­
tion of dirt and grass (pica) should be discouraged.
Experimentally, beagle dogs consuming large quanti­
ties of antacids containing magnesium trisilicate were
predisposed to silica uroliths. Homeopathic, other medi­
cations and vitamin‐mineral supplements may contain
silica, for example silica is used in anticaking materials
added to tablets.
Other Types of Urolithiasis
In dogs, mixed composition uroliths comprised 2.3% of
uroliths submitted to the MUC, with an additional 8.8%
of uroliths being described as compound. Compound
uroliths are likely to form when factors initially promot­
ing precipitation of one type of mineral are replaced by
factors promoting precipitation of a different mineral.
This can make compound uroliths poorly responsive to
medical management due to the need to treat each min­
eral type separately for dissolution or prevention.
The list below includes uncommon types of uroliths
submitted to major urolith centers.
Suture induced: some stones can be induced by residual
or retained suture material. Uroliths typically have a
piece of suture contained within the stone, or have a hole
where the suture was located (Figures 123.7 and 123.8).
●● Dried solidified blood calculi: calculi composed solely
of dried solidified blood have been removed from the
urinary tract of cats.
●●

Silicate Urolithiasis
Epidemiology

Silica (silicon dioxide) uroliths are infrequently diag­
nosed. They account for 0.9% of specimens submitted to
the MUC and 0.7% of specimens submitted to the CVUC
between 2009 and 2012 (see Table 123.2). Silica‐contain­
ing nephroliths are rarely submitted to urolith centers,
but have been reported in native Kenyan dogs.
Some silica uroliths are pure, while others are composed
of different layers, with oxalate and struvite being the most
commonly associated minerals. Most silica uroliths have a
“jackstone” appearance; however, an outer layer (coating)
of another mineral type may mask this configuration.
Typically, multiple silica uroliths present and cross‐sec­
tion of the urolith usually reveals laminations.
The majority of dogs with silica uroliths are male, with
a mean age of 7.2 +/‐ 3.1 years (range 1–17 years).
Etiopathogenesis

Silica uroliths are thought to form due to individual ani­
mal increase in consumption of this mineral. Animal
protein contains very low concentrations of silica and
consumed dietary sources are likely plant origin, such as
direct ingestion of soil or ingestion of contaminated

Figure 123.7 Suture‐induced stone removed from the bladder of
a 7‐year‐old male neutered Yorkshire terrier. Source: Courtesy of
Andrew Moore, Canadian Veterinary Urolith Centre.

1131

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

urine stasis, high rate of urinary excretion of drugs that
are poorly soluble in urine, and/or prolonged treat­
ment with high doses of potentially lithogenic drugs.

VetBooks.ir

1132

­Urolith Diagnosis
Urinalysis
Urine Sediment

Urolithiasis typically induces inflammatory urine sedi­
ment, such as pyuria (presence of white blood cells),
hematuria (red blood cells), and proteinuria. Bacteria may
also be present if there is a primary or secondary UTI,
(i.e., infection induced by urolith‐associated trauma).
Figure 123.8 Suture‐induced stone (60% struvite, 40% calcium
phosphate) removed from a 4‐year‐old female spayed miniature
schnauzer. Source: Courtesy of Andrew Moore, Canadian
Veterinary Urolith Centre.

Potassium magnesium pyrophosphate: the etiology of
these uroliths is not definitively known, and it is theo­
rized that formation is related to a type of temporary
or permanent enzymatic dysfunction causing pyroph­
osphate supersaturation of the urine.
●● Melamine and/or cyanuric acid‐induced uroliths: after
a devastating occurrence of diet‐related renal failure in
dogs and cats, melamine urolithiasis or crystalluria
was noted in affected patients (Figure 123.9).
●● Drug and drug metabolite uroliths: these are most
commonly related to the use of the sulfonamides or
allopurinol and there are reports of fluoroquinolone
(ciprofloxacin), primadone, and tetracycline uroliths.
Factors predisposing to precipitation of drugs in urine
include reduced volume of highly concentrated urine,
●●

Urine pH

The urine pH of dogs and cats depends on many factors
and can be affected by method of measurement. A study
in dogs found that urine dipstick tended to overestimate
pH, in some cases yielding an alkaline result for a sample
that had a mildly acidic urine as determined by the refer­
ence method. As such, if accurate measurement of urine
pH is important, a pH meter should be used. Relatively
inexpensive hand‐held instruments are commercially
available.
Certain minerals are more soluble in acidic or alkaline
pH. For these reasons, some minerals tend to precipitate
and form stones in acidic (e.g., cystine, purine, calcium
oxalate) or in alkaline pH (e.g., struvite, calcium carbon­
ate, and calcium phosphate stones). At present, research
indicates conflicting results regarding the role urine pH
plays in the formation of calcium oxalate stones.
Crystals

Crystals may indicate the presence of uroliths or be nor­
mal, that is, no urolith. As such, specific therapy for crystal­
luria is not indicated unless a urolith is documented
through imaging, the patient has a history of urolithiasis or
urethral plugs (cats), and/or specific crystal types are noted.
In order to correctly identify crystalluria, urine should
be analyzed within one hour of collection. This is advised
because both calcium oxalate and struvite crystals can
form in vitro if there is a delay prior to analysis or due to
refrigeration. Crystal types that are not normally present
in the urine, and demand attention regardless of urolith
presence, include cystine, xanthine, and urate (excluding
Dalmatians).
Urine Culture

Figure 123.9 Melamine cyanuric acid removed from the bladder
of a Burmese cat. Source: Courtesy of Andrew Moore, Canadian
Veterinary Urolith Centre.

Urine culture and susceptibility should be performed in
all patients with urolithiasis in order to detect infections
and start appropriate antibiotic treatment if necessary,

VetBooks.ir

123 Urolithiasis in Small Animals

that is, there are concurrent clinical signs of infection.
Urinary tract infections can be the primary cause of uro­
lith formation (e.g., struvite uroliths in dogs), or they can
be secondary to urolith‐induced irritation of the urinary
tract. If the urine culture is negative despite a high suspi­
cion of UTI in a patient (i.e., a dog with struvite stones),
culture of the bladder wall and stone nidus, at the time of
stone removal, is strongly advised in order to accurately
direct any needed antimicrobial therapy.
Bloodwork
Complete blood count (CBC) is usually normal in
patients with urolithiasis. A left shift may (or may not) be
present with pyelonephritis or pyonephrosis. A serum
biochemistry may show evidence of liver dysfunction in
a dog with hepatic vascular abnormalities (portosys­
temic shunt [PSS]), microvascular dysplasia (portal
hypoplasia), or severe hepatic disease. The lab changes
can include increased alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
and alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and with hepatic dys­
function there can be low albumin, urea, and glucose.
Bile acid (pre‐ and postprandial) measurement is
strongly recommended if a young dog or cat presents
with bladder stones and clinical signs compatible with
PSS (i.e., signs of hepatoencephalopathy, polyuria/poly­
dipsia [PU/PD], poor growth) or increased liver enzymes.
Dogs with portovascular abnormalities are more likely to
have urate uroliths than those with other types of hepatic
dysfunction. Middle‐aged, small‐breed dogs with a por­
tovascular anomaly and good portal perfusion can have
normal chemistry panels with urate stones, making bile
acid testing indicated.
In cases of ureteral calculi resulting in urinary tract
obstruction, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine
may or may not be increased. This will depend on the
laterality (unilateral or bilateral obstruction) and under­
lying intrinsic renal damage due to the calculi. Azotemia
will not be present if the contralateral (nonobstructed)
kidney is normal. Most cats (88%) with unilateral ure­
teral calculi are azotemic (>90%), indicating the presence
of intrinsic renal disease in the contralateral kidney.

example of this is a calcium oxalate stone forming in an
at‐risk breed of dog after an incidence of struvite uro­
lithiasis due to bacterial infection.
Stone Layers

When a urolith is analyzed, it is named according to the
constituents making up the majority of the “stone”
(Figure 123.10). These layers consist of the following.
Nidus (center of the urolith): this may or may not be
composed of crystalline material and/or a foreign
body, such as suture material.
●● Stone: the stone may or may not be composed of the
same minerals as the nidus.
●● Shell: the layer(s) that surround the stone. The shell is
the outermost complete layer on the urolith.
●● Surface crystals: these may or may not be present on
the outermost surface of the urolith. They do not com­
pletely encase the urolith (incomplete layer).

●●

Ideally, all four layers of the urolith should be analyzed
separately and their respective mineral amounts listed.
Only quantitative analysis ensures that all urolith layers
are examined and provides an estimate of the mineral
content of each visible layer. This is important since con­
fusion over urolith content and therapy and prevention
can occur when only the outer layer is analyzed. This type
of confusion can also occur when using the qualitative

CANADIAN VETERINARY
UROLITH CENTRE
Terminology for Urolith Reporting*

Shell
Surface
Crystals

Stone

Nidus

Stone Analysis
A common pitfall for clinicians dealing with urolithiasis
in small animals is attempting to guess the type of
stone(s) noted on imaging based on signalment of the
patient, diet, urine pH, urine culture results, and radio­
graphic density of the stone. For this reason (and if pos­
sible), it is always recommended to submit uroliths for
mineral analysis. It is important to note that even if there
is recurrence of urolithiasis in the same patient, the uro­
lith type may be different from the prior episode. An

* These terms will be used
in all reports from the
Canadian Veterinary
Urolith Centre.

Figure 123.10 Stone layers description. Source: Courtesy of
Andrew Moore, Canadian Veterinary Urolith Centre.

1133

VetBooks.ir

1134

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

test for urolith analyses, where the entire urolith is
crushed and then analyzed. An example of why this is
important would be with a primary metabolic stones (i.e.,
urate) which may have a large (or several) outer covering
(s) of struvite. If only the outer layer was assessed or if the
urolith was crushed and then analyzed, then ongoing
diagnostics and therapy would be misdirected, at the
struvite rather than the urate portion.

linked marker test to identify dogs at risk for early stone
formation is being evaluated.
Imaging of the Urinary Tract
Radiography

Specific Tests to Detect Cystinuric Dogs

Most uroliths are radiopaque on survey abdominal radi­
ographs. Radiopaque uroliths include calcium p
­ hosphate,
calcium oxalate, struvite and silicate (Figures 123.11 and
123.12). Survey radiography is suitable for identification
of these radiopaque uroliths, ­provided they are greater
than approximately 2–3 mm in diameter. However, urate,
cystine, and xanthine uroliths are generally character­
ized as radiolucent or only slightly radiopaque on survey
radiographs. The failure rate for detection of uroliths by
survey radiography was 2–27% dependent on urolith
size and composition.
Clinicians may try to guess the chemical composition
of a urolith based on the density, shape, and number of
uroliths on radiographs. One aid for this type of “guessti­
mate” is the pneumonic POCUS, which is used by clini­
cians to remember the order of the stones that are most
radiodense to radiolucent: calcium phosphate, calcium
oxalate, struvite, silicate, cystine, and urate calculi.
Contrast‐enhanced radiographic procedures or ultra­
sound are needed to identify uroliths composed of com­
pounds similar to the radiographic density of soft tissue.
Double‐contrast cystography has been associated with
high sensitivity and low false‐negative detection rates
(Figure 123.13). Small uroliths are detected more reliably by
double‐contrast cystography or ultrasonography. However,
ultrasound is superior to double‐contrast cystogram in
experienced hands and for very small stones and sand.

On average, dogs with type I cystinuria have a several‐
fold higher urinary COLA excretion than non‐type I
cystinuric male dogs. A simple urinary screening test to
determine if a dog is cystinuric is available through the
Metabolic Screening Laboratory, Section of Medical
Genetics, at the University of Pennsylvania (http://
research.vet.upenn.edu/penngen). This test can detect
any type I cystinuric animal, but not necessarily all dogs
with non‐type I cystinuria. High‐performance liquid
chromatography can be further used to determine the
amount of cystine and other amino acids in urine.
However, this form of quantitative amino acid analysis is
currently restricted to a few laboratories (PennGen and
LaboKlin) and is relatively expensive. Based on studies,
dogs with either cystine levels of >200 μmol/g creatinine
or COLA values of >700 μmol/g creatinine are consid­
ered cystinuric. Moreover, for Newfoundlands and
Labrador retrievers, a breed‐specific mutation test is
available that detects not only cystinuric dogs but also
asymptomatic carriers. Finally, in mastiffs, a preliminary

Figure 123.11 Abdominal radiographs (lateral view) showing
bladder stones in a dog. Source: Courtesy of Stephanie Nykamp,
Radiologist, Ontario Veterinary College.

Stone Characterization

Uroliths are defined based on their mineral composi­
tion as noted earlier. The following terms are used to
identify type.
Pure urolith: when 70% or more of the urolith is com­
posed of one type of crystalloid, it is named for that
crystal type. In dogs and cats, most stones have one
major crystal component.
●● Mixed urolith: when less than 70% of the urolith is
composed of one mineral, it is called a mixed urolith.
This means that the urolith does not contain one pre­
dominant mineral type but is a combination of two or
more types.
●● Compound urolith: this is a urolith in which each layer
is composed of a different mineral. Uroliths that have
formed around foreign material in the urinary tract are
often classified as compound. Suture material, urinary
catheter, metal pellets, plant material, hair strands,
and other foreign objects (ex. porcupine quill) have all
been reported to be a part of uroliths of various min­
eral types.
●●

VetBooks.ir

123 Urolithiasis in Small Animals

Figure 123.12 Abdominal radiographs (lateral view) showing
bladder and urethral stones in a dog. Source: Courtesy of
Stephanie Nykamp, Radiologist, Ontario Veterinary College.

transducer, and found that ultrasonography may be
more sensitive than survey and contrast cystography
for detection of urocystoliths, with false‐negative rates
of 6%.
Ultrasonography allows simultaneous evaluation of
the upper urinary tract for nephroliths and ureteroliths.
Therefore, radiography combined with ultrasonogra­
phy are preferred over contrast radiography alone.
Ultrasound can detect upper urinary tract obstruction
that is characterized by renal pelvis dilation >13 mm.
However, pelvis dilation can be iatrogenic (diuresis) or
secondary to different diseases such as chronic kidney
disease or pyelonephritis. Although a renal pelvis
>13 mm may indicate ureteral obstruction, the absence
of dilated renal pelvis does not rule out an upper urinary
tract obstruction. The combination of proximal ureteral
dilation and normal kidney pelvis diameter can be asso­
ciated with ureteral obstruction in cats. In a recent study,
25% of cats with confirmed ureteral obstruction had a
renal pelvis <13 mm but a proximal ureteral dilation. In
25% of cats with ureteral obstruction, ureteropyelog­
raphy is necessary to determine the cause of the
obstruction.
Computed Tomography

Determination of urolith composition using computed
tomographic (CT) peak attenuation measurement has
been described in vitro. In humans, this technique is
preferentially used in order to detect uroliths and also to
predict their composition. CT may be more specific for
ureteral calculi than either radiography and/or ultra­
sonography in cats.
Figure 123.13 Double‐contrast cystography (lateral view) in a
dog showing multiple, various sized filling defects centrally in the
contrast pool indicative of bladder stones. Source: Courtesy of
Dr Stephanie Nykamp, Radiologist, Ontario Veterinary College.

Ultrasonography

Ultrasonography is a cost‐effective tool in the diagno­
sis of urolithiasis but it may overlook some important
aspects of the stones that can help the clinician predict
the nature of the uroliths, such as surface contour and
shape. One limitation of ultrasound is that it often
overestimates urolith size, so radiographs should be
used for determining size when possible. Ultrasound is
also less reliable than radiography for predicting the
number of stones and their location. Finally, ultra­
sound only provides evaluation of the most proximal
portion of the urethra and therefore cannot replace
radiography.
Ultrasonographic examination can detect radiopaque
and radiolucent uroliths. One study compared survey
and contrast radiographs, pneumocystography, double‐
contrast cystography, and ultrasound using a 7.5 MHz

Educated Guess
Determining the type of urolith based on imaging stud­
ies alone is very risky. This type of “guesstimate” of uro­
lith composition based on the radiolucency of a stone
and its shape can lead the clinician to misdiagnosis
(Figure 123.14). In certain scenarios the chemical com­
position of uroliths may be predicted based on patient
signalment, in combination with the results of urinalysis,
urine culture, and radiographs. However, it must be
understood that this technique can lead to error and is
not advised as the best method of urolith identification.
In situations where uroliths are not available for analysis
or are pending analysis, the guesstimate may need to be
used; however, communication to clients that errors may
be made with this technique and verification of stone
type (when practical and possible) are ideal. Unfortunately,
this verification cannot be made until stone analysis
occurs. For example, the clinician can make an educated
guess as to the likelihood that a given stone is com­
posed of struvite based on finding a urease‐positive

1135

VetBooks.ir

1136

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

(a)

(b)

Figure 123.14 (a) Cystine stone in a 3‐year‐old male pug. (b) Struvite urolith in a 4‐year‐old female Chihuahua mixed dog. These two look
the same, but they are not the same type. Source: Courtesy of Andrew Moore, Canadian Veterinary Urolith Centre.

UTI (usually Staphylococcus spp.), alkaline urine, stru­
vite crystalluria, and radiodense calculus in a high‐risk
breed (ex. female bichon frise). Certain breeds are also
predisposed to a specific type of urolith which makes
guesstimating a bit less risky, for example Dalmatians
(see Table 123.1).
As mentioned, there are multiple “traps” or pitfalls to
avoid when guesstimating the chemical composition of
a urolith. Areas where errors can occur include urine
pH, urinalysis and crystalluria, urine culture results,
and radiographic density of the stone. Urine pH can be
influenced by meals and time of day. First morning pre­
prandial urine is typically the most acidic and concen­
trated sample of the day. After eating, the pH will
become more alkaline, often referred to as the “alkaline
tide.” Urine pH is also affected by stress and hyperventi­
lation, leading to respiratory alkalosis and consequent
urine alkalinization, for example a stressed dog panting
in clinic. Additionally, an acidic pH does not rule out
the presence of struvite stones. One example of this
would be a compound urolith made of a struvite core
surrounded by an oxalate shell. The pH may also be
alkaline if there is concurrent infection with urease‐
producing bacteria, while the predominant urolith
type may be unrelated to infection, for example a cal­
cium oxalate stone and concurrent Staphylococcus spp.
infection.
Similarly to urine pH pitfalls, crystalluria is not a con­
sistent feature of the urinalysis in dogs and cats with uro­
liths. For example, in one study of 30 cats with struvite
urocystoliths, struvite crystals were only detected in 17
patients. Additionally, dogs and cats may have a small
number of struvite or calcium oxalate crystals, but other
types of crystals do not typically form in vitro.

­Medical Management of Lower
Urinary Tract Stones
It is ideal to identify urolith type prior to initiation of dis­
solution protocols, and if uroliths are small enough,
voiding or catheter retrieval may be possible and allow
for this. Unfortunately, stone composition identification
is rarely possible prior to the need to make therapy deci­
sions, and best “guesstimate” strategies are warranted in
most cases. As such, it is imperative to perform diagnos­
tic studies (urinalysis, urine culture, radiography) to
evaluate urolith size and location and to provide the
most information to guide therapy as available.
Attempts to medically dissolve uroliths are not always
the least expensive method of management, nor is medi­
cal dissolution an option for all stone types, such as cal­
cium oxalate. For other urolith types (e.g., struvite), the
cost of diet and antimicrobial therapy along with the cost
of the recheck appointments and imaging should be dis­
cussed thoroughly when considering medical dissolu­
tion. Similarly, animal owner communication to ensure
compliance is essential in order for medical dissolution
strategies to be successful.
Rationale for Medical Dissolution
Medical dissolution of amenable urolith types consists of
reducing the concentration of the calculogenic material
in the urine and increasing its solubility.
Regardless of urolith type, increasing water intake
through diet and via increased water consumption will
assist in dilution of urine crystalloids and help prevent
ongoing crystal formation. This may also aid in flushing
existing stones from the bladder in female dogs. The aim

VetBooks.ir

123 Urolithiasis in Small Animals

of water increase strategies is to obtain a urine specific
gravity of <1.020.
Indications for (and Limitations of) Medical
Urolith Dissolution
Urolith Type

Struvite, urate, and cystine stones in dogs may be amena­
ble to medical dissolution; however, the uroliths must be
located in undersaturated urine for this to occur. This
requires intervention with diet and urine dilution strate­
gies, along with appropriate therapy of concurrent bacte­
rial infections. Dissolution success is much lower for
urate and cystine stones than struvite, and in cats, only
struvite uroliths are responsive to medical dissolution. In
cats, low‐protein diet and allopurinol has been reported
as effective in urate stone dissolution; however, until fur­
ther studies looking into safety and efficacy of this treat­
ment are performed, mechanical removal of bladder or
urethral urate uroliths is advised. Mechanical urolith
removal is recommended for bladder or urethral cystine
stones in cats, in part because 2‐MPG (Thiola®, t­ iopronin)
is toxic in cats, and is only effective about 60% of the time
in dogs.
Urolith Location

Medical dissolution for specific stone types can be suc­
cessful, but is more efficient when uroliths are located in
an area where they are in constant contact with urine,
such as the bladder. Suspected struvite nephroliths or
ureteroliths should be medically dissolved unless they
are too large to be effectively bathed in urine.
If uroliths are obstructive, relief of obstruction with a
minimally invasive approach and rapid control of infec­
tion should preserve kidney function.
Obstructive ureteroliths cannot be dissolved by medi­
cal or dietary protocols unless a ureteral stent is placed
concurrently. Urethroliths are typically not amenable to
dissolution, although they may be flushed into the blad­
der by retrograde hydropulsion and then dissolution can
be attempted.
Calcium oxalate uroliths are not amenable to medical
dissolution regardless of location, and must be removed
from the urinary tract mechanically. In cats, because
more than 90% of feline upper urinary tract stones are
composed of calcium oxalate, dissolution should not be
attempted with obstructive nephroliths or ureteroliths.
Silica uroliths are also thought to be unresponsive to
medical dissolution.
Size and Number of Uroliths

The size and number of the stones will influence rapidity
of dissolution but do not dictate the likelihood of ther­
apy success in stones that are amenable to dissolution.

Since the rapidity of dissolution is related to the size and
surface area of the urolith being exposed to urine, one
large urolith will take longer to dissolve than multiple
small uroliths. An analogy for this is that one large ice
cube will dissolve more slowly than an equal volume of
crushed ice. The rate of dissolution is influenced by the
surface area of the urolith exposed (“bathed”) in under­
saturated urine.
Presence of Obstruction

Medical dissolution is contraindicated in patients with
obstruction of the urinary tract. Relieving urinary tract
obstruction in those cases is mandatory in order to avoid
consequences such as postrenal azotemia, irreversible
renal damage, bladder rupture, and death.
Risk of Obstruction in Males

Medical dissolution of urocystoliths in male dogs is asso­
ciated with a risk of urethral obstruction once the uro­
cystoliths are small enough to pass into the urethra. The
risks and clinical signs of urethral obstruction should be
explained to the owner if medical dissolution is elected
in male dogs, and regular monitoring of urination is rec­
ommended. Medical dissolution should only be tried in
male dogs after clear owner communication and assur­
ance of owner compliance and ability to observe and act
on clinical evidence of obstruction.
Infection‐Induced Urolith

If the urease‐producing bacterium is isolated from uro­
lith culture, appropriate antibiotic therapy based on
urine culture and susceptibility must be administered
during the entire urolith dissolution period. Otherwise,
the persistence of infection with a urease‐producing
organism will confound dissolution of the stones. Despite
diet change, concurrent urinary tract infection will
maintain alkaline urine and promote urolith formation
and growth.
Dietary Factors

Limitations of medical dissolution are inherent to the
diet and medical therapy needed for the given urolith; for
example, an acidifying diet with low protein and caloric
content should not be fed to a pregnant or lactating
bitch. Similarly, thoughtful consideration of nutritional
growth requirements in young dogs and kittens needs to
occur when a diet lower in purines (protein) is indicated
for medical urolith dissolution (e.g., urate uroliths).
Similarly, a diet with a high salt or fat content should be
avoided in a patient with congestive heart failure or pan­
creatitis, respectively, as these patients may require vary­
ing levels of sodium or fat restriction for their concurrent
medical condition.

1137

VetBooks.ir

1138

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

Protocol for Medical Management
and Prevention of Individual Urolith Types
Calcium Oxalate Uroliths
Dissolution of Calcium Oxalate Uroliths

At present, calcium oxalate stones cannot be dissolved
through medical (nutritional) means in dogs and cats. As
such, removal or bypass of these uroliths by different
interventional methods is recommended. As upper uri­
nary tract stones in cats are predominantly composed of
calcium oxalate (>98%), medical dissolution is also not
recommended in these patients.
Follow‐Up and Prevention of Calcium Oxalate Uroliths

Dietary therapy has been recommended to help prevent
recurrence of calcium oxalate stones. Nutritional strate­
gies to aid prevention of calcium oxalate stones in cats or
dogs primarily focus on increasing water intake via feed­
ing canned or wet food or by adding water to dry food.
These techniques help to increase dilution of urine and
flush crystals from the urinary tract, and one study
showed that feeding canned food to a group of dogs
decreased their risk of calcium oxalate compared to
feeding a dry diet.
Medical management that is believed to prevent recur­
rence of calcium oxalate urolithiasis includes the follow­
ing factors.
Increased water content of food (>75% water: high
moisture).
●● Avoidance of dietary urinary acidification (pH <6.25
cats and <6.6. dogs).
●● Correction of underlying hypercalcemia. In cats with
recurrent CaOx stones and idiopathic hypercalcemia,
there may be a benefit to feeding a high‐fiber diet in
association with potassium citrate therapy.
●● Dietary sodium increase. Controversial at this time.
Feeding high‐sodium diets (3.5 g/1000 kcal) is not a
substitute for increased dietary moisture, as had been
previously thought, and any benefit of dietary increase
in salt is believed to be short‐lived.
●● Management with potassium citrate in cats and dogs
with persistence of acidic urine, and consideration
of thiazide diuretics if recurrence despite other
interventions.
●● Dietary protein restriction. At present, the recommen­
dation to restrict dietary protein in these patients is
controversial and it is very difficult to reduce dietary
protein without concurrent dietary phosphorus reduc­
tion. Unfortunately, lower phosphorus has been asso­
ciated with a higher risk of calcium oxalate uroliths.
This is due to low diet phosphorus leading to increased
intestinal absorption of calcium and increased calci­
triol production, which then leads to further calcium
gastrointestinal absorption and calciuresis.
●●

Avoidance of calcium‐containing supplements in at‐
risk patients.
●● Reduction in foods rich in oxalate precursors.
Examples of these include chocolate, nuts, beans,
sweet potatoes, wheatgerm, spinach, rhubarb. For a
complete list of the oxalate content in foods, please
visit the Oxalosis and Hyperoxaluria Foundation web­
site: www.ohf.org.
●●

In dogs, the diets recommended to achieve the above
goals are those that have undergone specific urinary test­
ing (i.e., CORI, RSS, Activity Product Ratio) to reduce
risk of calcium oxalate formation. Examples of these
diets include Hill’s c/d, Purina St/Ox, and Royal Canin
S/O. Unfortunately, the ideal diet to prevent calcium
oxalate urolith recurrence remains unknown.
Despite diet modification, recurrence in animals with
CaOx is high: 33% at two years in cats and up to 57% at
three years in dogs. If calcium oxalate uroliths recur
despite dietary therapy, the use of medications such as
thiazide diuretics or potassium citrate may benefit spe­
cific patients.
Potassium citrate supplementation has been shown to
reduce recurrence of calcium oxalate uroliths in humans.
In veterinary patients, there are conflicting opinions on
the utility of potassium citrate for prevention of calcium
oxalate urolithiasis. In normal dogs, potassium citrate
supplementation did not significantly increase the mean
citrate excretion, although in three miniature schnauzers
supplementation did increase urinary citrate excretion
and lower relative calcium oxalate supersaturation. In
another study, potassium citrate did not increase mean
urinary citrate concentration but did cause a dose‐
dependent increase in urine pH. If calcium oxalate crys­
talluria is persistent or calcium oxalate uroliths recur,
potassium citrate is commonly recommended to achieve
a urine pH of 6.5–7.0 using a dose of 150 mg/kg PO q24h.
The serum potassium should be initially monitored
monthly during potassium citrate supplementation and
the dose reduced if hyperkalemia occurs.
Thiazide diuretics are proven to reduce the recurrence
of calcium oxalate urolithiasis in humans by reducing
urinary calcium excretion. However, there are conflict­
ing results for dogs, and in normal dogs, administration
of chlorothiazide did not reduce urinary calcium excre­
tion. In contrast, administration of hydrochlorothiazide
decreased urinary calcium excretion and urine calcium
concentration in dogs with calcium oxalate urolithiasis.
Reduction in urinary calcium was greatest in dogs with
the highest pretreatment urine calcium concentrations
when combined with using Hill’s Prescription Diet u/d.
As thiazide diuretics contribute to urine acidification,
concomitant administration of potassium citrate may be
recommended. Hydrochlorothiazide (2 mg/kg PO q12h)

VetBooks.ir

123 Urolithiasis in Small Animals

should be considered in dogs that have persistent cal­
cium oxalate crystalluria or recurrence of calcium oxa­
late urolithiasis despite dietary therapy. This drug can
cause severe gastrointestinal (GI) side‐effects.
Decreased serum vitamin B6 concentrations were
detected in a small number of oxalate stone‐forming
dogs compared to nonstone formers. Based on this study,
supplementation of vitamin B6 (2–4 mg/kg PO q24–48h)
could be considered in repeat stone formers. Vitamin C
is converted to oxalate, so vitamin C supplementation
may contribute to hyperoxaluria and increased risk of
calcium oxalate urolithiasis. Vitamin D supplementation
increases intestinal absorption of calcium, thereby pro­
moting hypercalciuria and increased risk of calcium oxa­
late urolithiasis.
Dietary recommendations for prevention of calcium
oxalate uroliths in cats are thought to be similar to those
in dogs, although higher salt levels are sometimes used
to aid increased urination. In addition, one two‐year
study in cats showed no significant difference between
two diets that differed in calcium and magnesium con­
tents and in urinary pH potential. Primary hyperoxaluria
can occur in cats. Examples of diets that have undergone
urinary testing for reduction of calcium oxalate include
Hill’s c/d Multicare (canned and dry), Purina UR St/Ox
(canned and dry), and Royal Canin S/O (canned, chunks
and gravy, and dry).

to eradicate UTI throughout the diet treatment and is
likely the most important facet of medical dissolution of
struvite uroliths. The average time of dissolution of
canine infection‐induced struvite urocystoliths on the
Hill’s s/d diet was approximately 2–3 months in dogs.
This diet should not be continued beyond this time as it
is not meant to be a long‐term diet.
Feeding small meals throughout the day rather than
one or two large meals may prevent postprandial alkaline
tide and is associated with more acidic urine production
and less struvite crystalluria.
The use of urinary acidifiers has been suggested in
dogs because struvite and hydroxyapatite are most solu­
ble in acidic urine (pH 6.0–6.5). In most dogs with infec­
tion‐induced struvite uroliths, eradication of the UTI
with dietary modification will return urine pH to the
acidic range. Use of urine acidifiers in these cases is not
indicated.
Most clinical symptoms of lower urinary tract inflam­
mation resolve after the first 10 days of antibiotic and
diet therapy. However, antibiotic and diet therapy should
be continued for one month beyond radiographic evi­
dence of urolith dissolution or one month beyond stone
removal. Although feeding a dissolution diet is advised,
struvite uroliths have been managed with effective con­
trol of the underlying UTI alone.

Struvite Uroliths
Dissolution of Struvite Uroliths in Dogs

Examination of urine pH, specific gravity, sediment, and
culture is recommended at 5–7 days after starting
­therapy, and then every four weeks until the stones are
dissolved (Table 123.3). Once dissolution (based on radi­
ographic evidence) or removal is accomplished, a urine
culture should be obtained at four and eight weeks later,
with cessation of antibiotic and dietary therapy four
weeks after resolution. Urine culture and radiographs
should then be repeated every three months for one year
and then every six months thereafter. The goal is to
maintain the average urine pH 6–6.5, the average urine
specific gravity <1.020, the sediment free of significant
crystalluria, and the dog free of bacterial infection.
In dogs with a history of urinary tract infections, pro­
active and routine urine culture and susceptibility is rec­
ommended. This is particularly important if co‐morbid
situations arise (e.g., hyperadrenocorticism, renal dis­
ease) that may predispose to the development of a uri­
nary tract infection.
The need for specific ongoing dietary therapy for pre­
vention of struvite uroliths in dogs is unknown. Since the
majority of dogs have infection‐induced struvite uro­
liths, it is likely that effective control and prevention of
infection alone would be sufficient to prevent recur­
rence. However, dietary therapy to lower urine concen­
tration (canned food or addition of water) or minimize

Struvite uroliths in dogs are almost always due to infec­
tion with a urease‐producing organism, and as such
medical dissolution of struvite depends on the careful
elimination of infection together with specific dietary
therapy.
The calculolytic diets most commonly advised for
struvite stone dissolution in dogs are the Prescription
Diet Canine s/d (Hill’s Pet Products, Topeka, Kansas)
and Royal Canin S/O. Of these two, the Prescription Diet
Canine s/d has been used successfully to induce dissolu­
tion of struvite calculi in dogs. The Royal Canin diet was
effective for struvite dissolution in an ex vivo setting.
When using the Hill’s s/d diet, laboratory changes in
the patient will occur that can also be used to monitor
owner compliance. The diet is low in phosphorus and
protein which reduces urea, phosphorus, and serum
albumin. Mild increases in serum alkaline phosphatase
may also be present. These changes are not expected
with Royal Canin S/O. Both diets promote undersatura­
tion of the urine with ions necessary for the formation
of struvite uroliths and, thus, promote dissolution of
existing struvite calculi. Both diets also contain a high
NaCl content in order to induce diuresis and dilution of
urine. Concurrent antibiotic therapy is recommended

Prevention and Follow‐Up of Struvite Uroliths in Dogs

1139

VetBooks.ir

1140

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

Table 123.3 Compound urolith recurrence prevention strategies. The strategy for prevention of compound uroliths is typically directed at
the nidus of the urolith; however, dependent on the proportion of the concurrent mineral layers/types, preventive measures may need
to be instituted for more than one mineral type. Further consultation is advised for these complex stones. As with all uroliths, increased
water intake should be promoted to decrease the resulting concentration of calculogenic material in urine
Type of compound urolith
Inner layer –nidus

Outer layer

Prevention strategies

Calcium oxalate

Magnesium ammonium
phosphate (struvite)

Infection is very common with urolith‐induced trauma of the LUT, so
treat the infection with appropriate antibiotics and direct nutritional
therapy at the calcium oxalate

Calcium oxalate

Calcium phosphate

Calcium phosphate is commonly found – patient‐related and nutritional
control strategies are directed at the calcium oxalate

Calcium oxalate

Silica

Control strategies are directed at the calcium oxalate

Magnesium ammonium
phosphate (struvite)

Calcium phosphate

Calcium phosphate is commonly found – patient‐related and nutritional
control strategies are directed at the struvite

Magnesium ammonium
phosphate (struvite)

Ammonium urate

Patient‐related and nutritional control strategies are directed at control
of urease‐producing micro organisms, and/or assessment of liver
function. Control is typically directed at the struvite portion of the stone
and/or concurrent liver disease if present

Purine/urate salts

Magnesium ammonium
phosphate (struvite)

Infection is very common with urolith‐induced trauma of the LUT, so
treat the infection with appropriate antibiotics and direct nutritional
therapy at the purine/urate. Liver assessment may be indicated in these
patients

Purine/urate salts

Calcium oxalate

Control strategies are directed at the purine/urate. Liver assessment
may be indicated in these patients

Purine/urate salts

Calcium phosphate

Calcium phosphate is commonly found – control strategies are directed
at the purine/urate. Liver assessment may be indicated in these patients

Hollow cylindrical central
area

Calcium oxalate

Selection and use of appropriate suture material for the urinary tract.
Attempt to minimize suture material in the lumen of the urinary tract,
thus eliminating a potential nidus for crystal formation

LUT, lower urinary tract.

urolith burden may aid in prevention of urine stasis and
crystal aggregation (to “help flush” the urinary tract).
Diets proposed for prevention in dogs include Hill’s c/d,
Royal Canin S/O, and Purina St/Ox UR. If the struvite
stones are sterile, which is very rare in dogs, acidifying
the urine pH is necessary. This can be achieved with cal­
culolytic dietary therapy or urine acidifiers alone.
Antibiotic therapy is not required.
Medical Management of Struvite Uroliths in Cats

Struvite uroliths in cats are typically sterile. Since stru­
vite is more soluble in acidic urine, any factors that may
contribute to urine alkalinization should be assessed
(e.g., vegetable protein diet, familial history, obesity/
inactivity leading to urine stasis). Although struvite
stones in cats are generally sterile, lower urinary tract
infection can occur and predispose to alkaline urine.
Urinary tract infections are more common in cats <1
year and >10 years, as well as in those with compro­
mised host defenses (e.g., diabetes mellitus, perineal
urethrostomy, renal disease, urinary tract neoplasia,

upper urinary tract stone disease, etc.). A thorough urine
assessment and culture should not be omitted in at‐risk
patients. Upper urinary tract stones in cats are almost
never struvite.
The calculolytic diets most commonly advised for
struvite stone dissolution in cats are Hill’s s/d and Royal
Canin S/O. Hill’s Feline s/d diet has been used success­
fully to dissolve stones in cats with struvite urolithiasis.
The average time for dissolution of sterile struvite cysto­
liths in cats fed this diet was about 30 days. Dissolution
of feline infection‐induced struvite stones, which are
uncommon, took 60–90 days. Urinary acidifiers are not
useful or advised in cats fed Hill’s c/d, s/d, or soft‐moist
diets because these foods are already acidifying.
Dissolution of feline struvite stones in cats eating Royal
Canin Urinary SO (canned and dry) occurred in a median
of 18 days (range, 10–55 days) in 31 of 39 cats.
Prevention and Follow‐Up of Struvite Uroliths in Cats

Radiographs are recommended after stone removal or
dissolution to ensure all uroliths have been eradicated.

VetBooks.ir

123 Urolithiasis in Small Animals

After this time, examination of urine pH, specific gravity,
and sediment is recommended at two weeks, four weeks
and then every three months for one year. The aim is to
maintain the average urine pH <6.5, the urine specific
gravity <1.030 and the sediment free of significant crys­
talluria. If the cat remains free of clinical signs and free of
significant crystalluria and uroliths, rechecks may be
decreased to twice yearly.
For cats with infection‐induced struvite uroliths, fol­
low‐up urine culture and sensitivity is recommended
one week after the end of the antibiotics. Further assess­
ment is recommended in cats that have repeat urinary
tract infections and struvite crystalluria.
Examples of diets recommended for use in struvite
prevention due to their known efficacy in reducing mag­
nesium and phosphorus levels and urinary acidification
properties include Hill’s c/d Multicare (canned and dry),
Purina UR St/Ox (canned and dry), and Royal Canin S/O
(canned, chunks and gravy, and dry). Many of the lifes­
tage diets from Hill’s, Purina, and Royal Canin are also
aimed at concurrent struvite urolith prevention. It is par­
ticularly important in cats that therapy is directed at
reduction of urine concentration, and thus a high‐mois­
ture diet is advised.
Ammonium Urate Uroliths
Dissolution of Ammonium Urate Uroliths in Dogs

Medical dissolution of urate can be achieved, although it
may not always be in the patient’s best interest, such as
urinary tract obstruction.
Dissolution of urate is only indicated in patients with
an underlying defect in purine metabolism and not in
cases of liver dysfunction. Nutritional therapy for urate
dissolution is achieved with a combination of the
following.
Urine alkalinization: alkaline urine contains low
amounts of ammonia, which subsequently reduces
ammonium urate. Feeding a low‐protein (purine) diet
and/or with potassium citrate supplementation pro­
duces alkaline urine.
●● Increase in urine volume: a canned diet (or addition of
water to the diet) is preferred for this reason. A low‐
protein diet also decreases the concentration of urine
by “wash‐out” of the medullary concentration gradient
(via low urea). The goal is a urine specific gravity of
<1.020.
●● Decreasing the excretion of ammonium ions: feeding a
diet low in protein‐purines decreases urea production
and consequently ammonium and its ions.
●● Decreasing the excretion of uric acid: feeding a diet low
in purines and their precursors will aid in this. The
purine content of proteins varies (e.g., it is high in
organ meats and fish), and by using selected protein
●●

sources (plant, egg white), severe protein restriction is
not mandatory to achieve a low urinary urate level.
●● The desired urine pH for urate dissolution is approxi­
mately 7.0. Targeting a higher urine pH (>7.5) could be
detrimental because it could favor the formation of
calcium phosphate urolith. Potassium citrate (50–
150 mg/kg q12h) may be needed to alkalinize the urine
if diet alone is not enough to sustain an average urine
pH of approximately 6.8–7.0. Obtaining both a fasting
and postprandial (2–6 hours after a meal) urinary pH
will allow for consistent and accurate medical titration
of potassium citrate. The patient should be monitored
for hyperkalemia when higher doses of potassium cit­
rate are used.
Hill’s Prescription Diet canine canned u/d (the most
purine‐restricted diet currently commercially available)
and allopurinol (30 mg/kg/day, divided q8–24h) has been
recommended for medical dissolution of urate stones.
This diet is very low in protein‐purine and contains
potassium citrate and calcium carbonate for urinary
alkalinization. In a clinical study of 25 dogs with ammo­
nium urate uroliths fed this diet and treated with allopu­
rinol, complete urolith dissolution occurred in nine dogs
(36%), partial dissolution in eight (32%), and no dissolu­
tion in eight (32%). The mean time for urate urolith dis­
solution was 3.5 months. Similar results were reported
when this diet was used for dissolution of sodium urate
uroliths. Owners must be fully compliant (i.e., no other
food or treats should be given) if this option is selected.
Careful patient monitoring is necessary as these uroliths
are prone to migrating into the urethra where lower uri­
nary tract obstruction can occur. However, Hill’s u/d is
contraindicated in dogs prone to pancreatitis or hyper­
lipidemia due to its high fat content.
Allopurinol is a specific enzyme inhibitor that causes
partial blockage of the purine degradation pathway
above the level of uric acid (see Figure 123.6). Allopurinol
inhibits the enzyme xanthine oxidase. As a result, hypox­
anthine, xanthine, and urate are all excreted in the urine.
Each of these purine metabolites has a different urinary
solubility; hypoxanthine is very soluble, whereas xan­
thine and urate are only poorly soluble. Allopurinol will
reduce the oxidation of xanthine to urate. Consequently,
xanthine concentration in the urine increases.
The dose of allopurinol recommended is variable
(5–30 mg/kg/day, divided q8–24h). It has a dose‐depend­
ent half‐life of 2.5–3 hours in dogs. For dissolution of
ammonium urate stones, the higher dose is recom­
mended (15 mg/kg q12h). Allopurinol and its metabo­
lites are excreted via the kidney, therefore the dose
should be reduced in patients with renal failure. In addi­
tion, any medications the dog is receiving need to be
carefully assessed. For example, allopurinol can inhibit

1141

VetBooks.ir

1142

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

metabolism of azathioprine, and can reduce metabolism
of anticoagulants, theophylline or aminophylline. Ciclo­
sporin (Atopica®) increases uric acid levels in urine and
should not be used in dogs with urate urolithasis.
There is a risk of xanthine stone formation with allopu­
rinol use. Careful monitoring for the presence of xan­
thine is strongly advised in all patients on allopurinol, as
it is likely to occur in patients treated with allopurinol
while fed a nonpurine‐restricted diet. This may also
occur in patients treated for leishmaniosis with allopuri­
nol. Clinicians may be able to dissolve xanthine uroliths
by discontinuing allopurinol and starting a low‐purine
diet. Alternatively, a preliminary study evaluating a low‐
purine, moderate‐protein diet evaluated the reduction of
xanthine calculi in dogs on allopurinol for long‐term
support of leishmaniasis therapy and appears to be
promising. Control of concurrent urinary tract infection
with appropriate antibiotics based on culture and sensi­
tivity is also essential for both dissolution and prevention
of urate uroliths.
Follow‐Up and Prevention of Ammonium Urate
Uroliths in Dogs

A low‐purine diet is advised (Hill’s Prescription Diet u/d
or Royal Canin UC Low Purine). Diets that contain lean
meat and glandular organs are high in purines, thus
avoidance of meat‐based protein (diet or treats) is recom­
mended. Acceptable treats include carrots, apple slices,
and air‐popped popcorn. Urine alkalinization to decrease
the production of ammonia and ammonium ions by the
kidneys is also recommended. The goal of urinary alka­
linization is to keep the urine pH around 6.8–7.0.
Allopurinol is only recommended for urate prevention
if urate crystals persist despite dilute and alkaline urine.
If urate crystals persist despite these interventions, the
lowest dose of allopurinol that prevents crystals is
advised, to avoid risk of xanthine stones.
For all urolith types, increasing water consumption
decreases supersaturation of urine with crystals through
dilution. Ideally, a urine specific gravity <1.020 in the
morning is desired. Dry food may be soaked with water
(aka “swim the kibbles”) or canned food may be fed to
help increase water consumption. Multiple water bowls,
small feedings, and ice cubes are all potential ways to
encourage drinking. Control of urinary tract infections
with appropriate antibiotics (based on culture and sensi­
tivity results) is essential in prevention.
The risk of recurrence is high for metabolic uroliths.
Owner compliance is essential to reduce risk, and aware­
ness of the genetic (breed) predisposition must be
encouraged.
The recommended follow‐up for these patients is
examination of urine pH, specific gravity and sediment
at two weeks, four weeks, and then every three months

(see Table 123.3). Double‐contrast cystography or ultra­
sonography should be performed every two months. If
the dog remains urolith free, free of clinical signs, and
significant crystalluria, rechecks may be decreased to
every 2–4 months for the first postoperative year, and
then twice yearly.
If the urate uroliths are secondary to a PSS, correction
of the portal vascular anomaly is expected to resolve
hyperuricuria and hyperammonuria followed by disso­
lution of ammonium urate uroliths. The frequency of
successful dissolution post attenuation of the shunt has
not been reported. Similarly, there is no study evaluat­
ing the success rate of a low‐protein diet alone to dis­
solve urate stones in dogs with a PSS. Stones can and
should be removed during correction of the PSS.
Nephroliths typically dissolve after PSS attenuation, so
they do not need to be removed unless problematic
(obstruction).
Prevention of Ammonium Urate Uroliths in Cats

Similar to dogs, the features of a balanced diet designed
to prevent recurrence of ammonium urate and uric acid
urolithiasis in cats are high moisture, low purine (low‐
protein or vegetable‐based protein), and the ability to
produce a urine pH of 6.8–7.0. For example, Hill’s
Prescription Diet k/d (wet) would be recommended.
Anecdotally, a commercially available hydrolyzed soy
protein diet has been fed to cats to provide an adequate
protein intake in a low purine form.
Calcium Phosphate Uroliths

Calcium phosphate uroliths are frequently multiple
small uroliths, and their removal by surgical or nonsurgi­
cal methods is recommended to avoid urethral obstruc­
tion. Dissolution of calcium phosphate has been reported
following parathyroidectomy for treatment of hyperpar­
athyroidism in dogs.
Prevention of stone recurrence includes identification
and therapy of any underlying disorder that causes an
elevated calcium or phosphorus level or alkaline urine
pH. Examples of these include primary hyperparathy­
roidism, disorders that predispose to hypercalciuria
(hypercalcemia, excess vitamin D, systemic acidosis,
excess dietary calcium), disorders that predispose to
hyperphosphaturia (excess dietary phosphorus), and
decreased urine volume.
Dietary manipulation that increases moisture and sub­
sequent polyuria (e.g., canned formula or moderate
sodium supplementation), and also provides the targeted
calcium and calcium:phosphorus ratio is also recom­
mended to prevent recurrence. A diet that avoids exces­
sive acidification (to prevent calcium oxalate risk) or
excessive alkalinization of urine is desired. The features
of a diet designed to prevent recurrence of calcium

VetBooks.ir

123 Urolithiasis in Small Animals

phosphate urolithiasis in cats are thought to be similar to
those in dogs.
Cystine Uroliths
Cystine Uroliths in Dogs

Medical dissolution of cystine in dogs consists of reduc­
ing cystine concentration in the urine and increasing its
solubility. As with all uroliths, increasing urine volume is
beneficial for dilution of crystalloids. The solubility of
cystine can be increased by making the urine pH alkaline
(approximately 7.0–7.5), either by feeding a specific diet
or by treatment with potassium citrate.
Features of a diet thought to help recurrence of cys­
tine are:
urine dilution
low protein/purine levels (low protein or vegetable
protein)
●● alkalinize urine – target pH of 6.8–7.0
●● limit sodium intake
●● taurine and carnitine supplementation.
●●
●●

Hill’s Prescription Diet Canine u/d and Royal Canin UC
Low Purine have been recommended because they alka­
linize the urine and reduce urine concentration. They are
also markedly protein restricted (low in s­ ulfur‐containing
amino acids), which decreases cystine excretion by
20–25% via reduction of cystine precursors.
Some dogs with cystinuria have increased renal excre­
tion of carnitine, and low‐protein diets increase the risk
of carnitine deficiency and associated dilated cardiomy­
opathy in cystinuric dogs. As such, carnitine supplemen­
tation may be indicated. In addition, cystine is a precursor
for taurine synthesis, and taurine supplementation may
be warranted in these patients.
Dissolution of cystine urolithiasis has been reported
by treating patients with a thiol‐containing drug without
feeding a protein‐restricted diet. Thiol‐containing drugs
react with cystine, resulting in its conversion to a more
soluble compound by a disulfide exchange reaction.
Thiol‐containing drugs include D‐penicillamine and 2‐
mercaptopropionylglycine (2‐MPG) (tiopronin, Thiola®,
Mission Pharmaceuticals). Although both drugs are
effective, metal chelation and gastrointestinal side‐
effects of D‐penicillamine make it a less desirable choice.
2‐MPG, at a dosage of 15–20 mg/kg of body weight
divided and given orally twice daily, is the treatment of
choice, in combination with dietary modifications for
dissolution and prevention of cystine calculi. Use of this
protocol resulted in dissolution of 60% of uroliths in one
study within 1–3 months and was effective in 18/18 dogs
in another. This drug has been reported to be associated
with side‐effects in dogs such as aggression, myopathy,
anemia, proteinuria, thrombocytopenia, elevations of
liver enzymes, and dermatologic changes.

Prevention of Cystine Uroliths

Diets used for dissolution of cystine uroliths are appro­
priate for cystine urolith prevention. Thiol‐containing
drugs have been used to prevent recurrence of cystine
uroliths in dogs, at doses similar to those used for disso­
lution. Older dogs are less likely to form cystine uroliths
and it may be possible to stop or taper therapies as
patients mature. The risk of recurrence of these uroliths
is high because cystinuria is an inherited defect in some
affected dogs. Giger et al. observed that castration of
mastiffs, Kromfohrlanders, and Irish terriers with non‐
type I cystinuria drastically diminished the excretion of
cystine and dibasic amino acids. Maintaining a negative
cyanide‐nitroprusside test may be used to monitor and
adjust therapy. In the subset of dogs with androgen‐
dependent cystinuria, castration can resolve cystinuria.
If cystinuria decreases two months after castration com­
pared to baseline measurement (before castration), the
patient is less likely to have recurrence of cystine uro­
liths. If cystinuria persists four months after castration, it
was probably not androgen dependent. Nitroprusside
test and cystine crystalluria are less reliable tests than
urine cystine measurement to detect persistent risk of
cystine uroliths formation.
For information on screening for cystinuria please
contact:
Dr Giger/PennGen Laboratories
School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Pennsylvania
3900 Delancey Street, Room 4013
Philadelphia, PA 19104
Website: http://research.vet.upenn.edu/penngen
Email: PennGen@vet.upenn.edu
Tel: (215) 573‐7545 (Metabolic Lab)
Silica Uroliths in Cats and Dogs

Effective dissolution protocols have not been reported
for silicate stones in small animals. The risk of silica uro­
lith recurrence is not well documented. In one study of
silica uroliths, 12% of dogs had a previous episode of uro­
lithiasis, but in most cases it was not known whether the
previous urolith was also composed of silica.
To reduce the risk of silica stone recurrence, it is rec­
ommended to change the diet to one in which the vege­
table content is limited. The recommendation is to avoid
diets containing soybean hulls and corn gluten feed, and
to avoid the ingestion of soil. As with all uroliths,
increased water intake should be promoted to decrease
the resulting concentration of calculogenic material in
urine.
Mixed and Compound Uroliths

The management of compound uroliths is challenging
because they consist of layers containing different mineral

1143

VetBooks.ir

1144

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

compositions. Theoretically, the objective of compound
urolith dissolution is to design a protocol to dissolve the
outer layer of the urolith first, and then change the pro­
tocol to address each successive outer layer. Serial reeval­
uation of the size of the compound urolith by an
appropriate imaging technique is recommended. Once
the urolith does not decrease in size, medical therapy
may be adjusted to attempt dissolution of suspected
minerals in the inner layers. An alternative to the above
consists of dissolving the outer layer of the urolith to
reduce its size, followed by removing the remaining
smaller portion by voiding urohydropropulsion. Neither
of these techniques is usually possible in practice given
the inability to predict each layer of the compound uro­
lith and then adjust medical therapy as each layer dis­
solves. As such, mechanical removal is recommended for
the majority of compound stones.
Compound uroliths may also contain layers that are
not amenable to dissolution (i.e., calcium oxalate). For
example, dissolution of an outer layer (i.e., struvite) may
lead to a smaller size of urolith, which will then not dis­
solve any further as the underlying layer is calcium oxa­
late. This may increase the risk of urinary tract
obstruction in male dogs. For this reason, most com­
pound uroliths are removed either surgically or using a
minimally invasive method (see later). Following removal
of the compound urolith, the specific management strat­
egy is aimed at prevention of the inner layer (nidus) of
the compound urolith (i.e., the first layer to form).
Suture‐associated stones have become more common.
In one study they accounted for 0.6% of all canine uro­
liths and 9.4% of recurrent uroliths from 1999 to 2006.
Suture‐induced stones were more likely to be compound
uroliths and often had a calcium phosphate nidus. Suture
material that dissolves rapidly (like poliglecaprone ver­
sus polydioxonone) is recommended, in case bladder
mucosal penetration occurs during closure.

­Removal of Lower Urinary
Tract Uroliths
Lower urinary tract calculi should be removed if they are
not amenable to medical dissolution and if they are caus­
ing, or may cause, clinical signs, urinary tract obstruc­
tion, inflammation, or recurrent infection.
Surgical Removal
In small animals, surgical removal of uroliths by cystot­
omy or urethrotomy was the traditional standard of care
for many years. However, urethral surgeries may result
in permanent alterations of the anatomy and function of
the urethra. For this reason, urethral surgeries are now

discouraged and minimally invasive management of
urethral stones has become the standard of care (see
later).
Calculi remained in the bladder after cystotomy in up
to 20% of dogs and cats. When removing cystic calculi,
the urethra should be catheterized and flushed to ensure
that it is free of calculi. Postoperative radiographs of the
entire urethra are indicated as well to ensure that all cal­
culi have been removed. A 2008 study reported that 9.4%
of recurrent stones in dogs were suture induced. Luminal
penetration is common in thin‐walled bladders, but this
is not believed to be associated with formation of calcu­
lus if absorbable monofilament suture is used.
Complications of cystotomy include a high recur­
rence rate of calculi, the need for serial surgeries that
can lead to suture‐induced stones, strictures, adhesions,
bleeding, uroabdomen, pain, and other life‐threatening
complications.
Nonsurgical Treatment Options
In humans, minimally invasive treatment options have
mostly replaced traditional surgical stone removal. In
2002, open surgical removal of uroliths was described in
only 0.3–4% of human patients. In small animals, mini­
mally invasive treatment options are now considered the
standard of care to manage lower urinary tract stones.
They consist of voiding urohydropropulsion (VUH),
intracorporeal lithotripsy, extracorporeal shock wave
lithotripsy (ESWL), cystoscopic stone basket retrieval,
percutaneous cystolithotomy (PCCL), and laparoscopic‐
assisted cystotomy.
All minimally invasive stone retrieval procedures
should ideally be performed after a negative urine cul­
ture has been documented, or the patient has been
placed on an appropriate antibiotic for at least 24 hours.
Voiding Urohydropulsion

Voiding Urohydropulsion consists of removing small
bladder calculi by inducing voiding while the dog or cat
is positioned vertically or laterally (Figure 123.15). This
procedure was first described by Lulich et al. and can be
successfully performed in dogs and female cats but not in
male cats as their narrow urethra may become obstructed
by the stones.
Stone size is the most important criterion in deciding
if VUH is an appropriate treatment option. Stones
smaller than 3–4 mm can typically be voided respectively
by small and small‐medium female dogs. In female ultra‐
small breeds (such as Pomeranian, Chihuahua), careful
evaluation of the size of the urethra in relation to stone is
indicated. We recommend passing an 8 Fr urinary cath­
eter before doing a VUH while the dog is under anesthe­
sia and choosing an alternative stone removal method if

VetBooks.ir

123 Urolithiasis in Small Animals

(a)

(b)

Figure 123.15 (a) Vertical positioning of a female dog to perform voiding urohydropulsion. (b) Container with cystic calculi removed by
voiding urohydropulsion.

the urethra is smaller than 8 Fr. Stones smaller than 3 mm
can be voided by male dogs weighing 10–25 kg. In male
dogs weighing 5–10 kg, stones smaller than 2–3 mm may
be voided. The clinician needs to try to catheterize the
urethra first to evaluate its size. A catheter that is 3 Fr is
equivalent to 1 mm, so that if an 8 Fr urinary catheter can
be passed through the urethra, a 3 mm stone can be
voided.
For VUH, the patient is placed under general anes­
thesia. The urethra is catheterized and the bladder is
distended with warm sterile saline. The capacity of
the bladder is typically 10–15 mL/kg. Once the bladder
is fully distended, the patient is positioned vertically
and then the urinary catheter is removed (see
Figure 123.15a). The bladder is agitated so that gravity
causes the stones to fall into the trigone. With strong,
steady bladder expression while pulling the bladder cra­
nially to straighten the urethra, the intravesicular pres­
sure will maintain a strong urine stream as small
fragments of stone material are voided into a container
(see Figure 123.15b). General anesthesia is mandatory
for this procedure, as the bladder can rupture if the
patient does not have a relaxed, unobstructed urethra.
The procedure is repeated until no calculi or stone

fragments are passed for two expressions. Radiography,
with or without positive or negative contrast (depend­
ing on the lucency of the stones), or cystoscopy, can be
performed after the procedure to confirm complete
urolith removal. VUH can also be used to obtain a few
small stones for analysis to determine whether medical
dissolution is an option for the remaining stones.
Empiric antibiotics should be given during the proce­
dure and for 3–5 days afterward. Broad‐spectrum anti­
biotics such as amoxicillin or cephalexin are usually
prescribed. To minimize discomfort during urination,
NSAIDs or opioids are administered for 1–4 days as
needed and based on clinical signs.
Extracorporeal Shock Wave Lithotripsy (Box 123.1)

Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy uses an external
unit guided by fluoroscopic visualization to create shock
waves that pass through the soft tissue of the patient. It is
typically used for the fragmentation of upper urinary
tract calculi from a renal pelvis or ureter, which are then
left to pass spontaneously through the ureter, bladder,
and urethra. It has also been used to fragment bladder
stones in some dogs. However, the movement of stones
within the bladder during treatment limits the repeated

1145

VetBooks.ir

1146

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

Box 123.1 Candidates for extracorporeal shock wave
lithotripsy
Nephroliths (dogs)
Indications
Hydronephrosis
●● Recurrent infection
●● Pain
●● Worsening chronic renal failure
Stone size
●● <10 mm: ESWL alone
●● >10–25 mm: ESWL with ureteral stent or PCNL
●● >25 mm: consider PCNL
●●

Ureteroliths (dogs and cats)
Indications
Ureteral obstruction
●● Pain
●● Recurrent infection
Patient characteristics
●● Dogs with ureteroliths; cats with distal ureteroliths
●● Normal coagulation status
●● Not pregnant
●● No evidence of concurrent pancreatitis
●● Appropriate antibiotic therapy for >48 hours before
ESWL
●●

Source: Reproduced with permission from Defarges A, Berent
AC, Dunn M. New alternatives for minimally invasive management of uroliths: nephroliths. Compend Contin Educ Vet 2013;
35(2): E3.
ESWL, extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy; PCNL, percutaneous
nephrolithotomy.

(a)

shock wave effect and may result in larger than desired
fragments. After ESWL for bladder stones, VUH or cys­
toscopic stone basket retrieval is required for stone frag­
ment removal. Typically, intracorporeal methods are
preferred for optimal fragmentation and immediate
removal of cystoliths.
Intracorporeal Lithotripsy

Electrohydraulic lithotripsy (EHL) and laser (Ho:YAG:
holmium:yttrium, aluminum, garnet) lithotripsy were
developed in the 1970s to fragment bladder uroliths in
humans, with success rates reported to exceed 90%. Both
types of intracorporeal lithotripsy have been described
in veterinary patients. To date, the Ho:YAG laser is the
most commonly used device for intracorporeal litho­
tripsy in veterinary and human medicine.
During laser lithotripsy, the patient is placed under
general anesthesia as for routine cystoscopy. Once the
urolith is visualized with the cystoscope, a small‐­
diameter flexible quartz laser fiber (200, 365, or 550 μm)
is guided through the working channel. The tip of the
fiber is placed in direct contact with the surface of the
urolith at a 90° angle, and pulsed laser energy is trans­
mitted from the energized crystal to the urolith via the
fiber (Figure 123.16). The stone is fragmented by a ther­
mal drilling process, in which the pulse of energy trave­
ling through the fiber creates a microscopic vapor bubble
on the surface of the calculus. The closer the fiber tip is
to the target, the larger the effect, having its greatest
effect in contact mode. The energy is absorbed in
<0.5 mm of fluid, making it safe to fragment uroliths in
tight locations, such as within the urethra, ureter, renal
pelvis, or urinary bladder, with limited risk of adjacent
urothelial damage.

(b)

Figure 123.16 Visualization of bladder stones (oxalate) before (a) and after (b) fragmentation with the Ho:YAG laser in a female dog.

VetBooks.ir

123 Urolithiasis in Small Animals

Stones are typically fragmented until the pieces are
small enough to be voided using VUH or manually
extracted from the bladder using a stone retrieval basket.
This technology is considered the standard of care in
human medicine and is currently being utilized for lower
urinary tract stones in many veterinary hospitals in
North America.
The Ho:YAG laser has been reported to be effective on
all stone types. Adams et al. reported that laser litho­
tripsy resulted in complete fragmentation of all uroliths
in 100% of females (28/28 dogs) and 86.7% of males
(39/45 dogs). In the literature, complete urolith removal
is typically achieved in 100% of dogs with urethroliths,
83–96% of female dogs with cystoliths, and 68–81% of
male dogs with cystoliths. In the Adams et al. study,
the complication rate reported with laser lithotripsy
was 17.9% in female dogs and 13.3% in male dogs.
Complications were typically minor and shortterm,
including urethral swelling, edema, and mild hematuria,
which were medically managed. Shortterm complica­
tions were most commonly related to urethral mucosal
swelling from serial passage of the cystoscope in female
dogs and resolved with the placement of an indwelling
urinary catheter for 12–24 hours. Short‐term complica­
tions were reported in 5/28 (17.9%) of female dogs and
6/45 (13.3%) male dogs in this study. In comparison,
Thierman‐Mankin et al. reported short‐term complica­
tions in 37–50% of 144 dogs using traditional surgical
cystotomy.
In another canine study in which laser lithotripsy was
retrospectively compared with traditional cystotomy,
both methods were considered equally effective. Complete
urolith removal rate was not significantly different
between dogs in the cystotomy group (86%) and those in
the lithotripsy group (89%). There were no significant
differences in complications evaluated between the
groups and patients undergoing lithotripsy were dis­
charged from the hospital 12 hours earlier than those
having a cystotomy. Adams et al. reported that of 73 dogs
with uroliths treated by laser lithotripsy, only 19% (14/73)
had stone recurrence after approximately 12–24 months
of follow‐up, which is less than that previously reported
with cystotomy (42%).
The greatest challenge of both laser and EHL litho­
tripsy is the removal of small stone fragments from the
bladder following fragmentation, which can take
extended periods of time and result in urethral trauma/
edema during repetitive endoscope passage. Grant et al.
identified female sex as a positive predictor of success
(complete stone removal). They reported that smaller body
weight, large urolith burden, and increasing urolith size
significantly increased the time required to perform laser
lithotripsy. This has made the use of other procedures, like

PCCL, appealing for smaller dogs and cats with a large
bladder stone burden, regardless of size or sex.
Cystoscopic‐Guided Basket Removal

Another option for stones that are too large for VUH but
small enough to fit through the urethra with gentle trac­
tion is stone basket retrieval. A variety of stone baskets
are available from several manufacturers. Basket retrieval
is usually performed under cystoscopic guidance,
although fluoroscopy can also be used. Typically, the size
of the stone is the limiting factor. Basket retrieval can be
considered in female dogs with stones <4–5 mm, male
dogs with stones <3 mm, and female cats with stones
<3 mm.
Percutaneous Cystolithotomy (PCCL)

This minimally invasive approach has been reported in
27 dogs and cats with excellent complete stone removal
rates (96%), short procedure times (40–75 min), and
similar hospitalization times as those seen with transure­
thral lithotripsy, regardless of patient sex, size, stone
number, or species. This procedure can be an alternative
in animals in which transurethral lithotripsy is a chal­
lenge (small male dogs, male dogs with a large stone bur­
den, male and female cats, rabbits, guinea pigs, etc.) or if
lithotripsy is unavailable.
For this procedure, a single small incision (approxi­
mately 1–1.5 cm) is made into the abdominal cavity just
over the apex of the urinary bladder. Once the bladder is
palpated digitally, stay sutures are used to hold the blad­
der up to the incision while a laparoscopic screw‐tip
cannula or port is inserted into the bladder at the apex.
Surgical aspiration is usually used while fluid is flushed
into the bladder with a urethral catheter, as the best
visualization is achieved with a saline‐filled bladder.
The bladder is typically not fully exteriorized
(Figure 123.17a,b). A small, rigid cystoscope is inserted
through this port into the bladder, and stones are iden­
tified and removed with a stone retrieval basket through
the working channel of the cystoscope (Figure 123.17c–e).
If the stones are very small, they can be flushed out
of the port in a retrograde manner with a urinary cath­
eter in the urethra flushing fluid into the bladder while
a suction device is placed into the port suctioning out
the fluid and small fragments. If the stones are larger
than the port, they can either be fragmented by litho­
tripsy or manipulated through the small incision with
the stone basket. It is very rare that lithotripsy is needed
concurrently. After all calculi are removed from the
bladder, the entire urethra is examined with a rigid cys­
toscope (female dogs) or a flexible ureteroscope (male
dogs) to ensure that all fragments have been removed
and the small incision is sutured closed. A basket

1147

VetBooks.ir

1148

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 123.17 Percutaneous cystolithotomy performed in a male dog. (a) A single small incision is made into the abdominal cavity just
over the apex of the urinary bladder. (b) Once the bladder is palpated digitally, stay sutures are used to hold the bladder up to the incision.
(c) A laparoscopic screw‐tip cannula is inserted into the bladder at the apex. (d) A small rigid cystoscope is inserted through this port into
the bladder. (e) Stones are identified and removed.

VetBooks.ir

123 Urolithiasis in Small Animals

retrieval device can be used to remove any remaining
urethral calculi through the working channel of the
endoscope.
In patients with embedded urethral stones, laser litho­
tripsy can be performed. Percutaneous cystotomy can
also be used to aid in gaining access to the ureters for
diagnostic or therapeutic purposes and for resection of
bladder polyps or diagnostic evaluation of the bladder
and proximal urethra in dogs that are too small for retro­
grade cystoscopy.
Laparoscopic‐Assisted Cystoscopy

Laparoscopic‐assisted cystoscopy is performed via a
mini laparotomy. In this technique, the abdomen is
insufflated with carbon dioxide and the bladder is iso­
lated. Another trocar is inserted into the abdomen at the
level of the bladder apex, and the bladder is exteriorized
at this access point using a laparoscopic Babcock forceps.
The incision is enlarged, creating a mini laparotomy, to
pull the urinary bladder. A small cystotomy is performed
and the bladder wall is sutured to the skin of this small
abdominal incision. A rigid cystoscope is then inserted
into the bladder for calculus retrieval. The use of a basket
passed through the working channel or a grasping for­
ceps next to the cystoscope aids in removal of the stones.
The cystotomy incision is closed routinely. This proce­
dure makes it difficult to maintain bladder distension for
the best visibility.
Laparoscopic‐assisted cystoscopy can circumvent
some of the limitations associated with laser lithotripsy,
but it does require creating a pneumoperitoneum, mak­
ing the alternative PCCL very appealing.

­Removal of Upper Urinary
Tract Uroliths
The incidence of nephroliths and ureteroliths in cats has
increased as much as 50‐fold since the early 1980s.
Calcium oxalate is the most common (>98%) type of
stone found in the upper tract of cats, followed by cal­
cium phosphate, in the form of apatite, or urate.
Approximately 30–60% of ureteroliths in dogs are com­
posed of calcium oxalate.
Indications for Upper Urinary Tract
Urolith Removal
Nephroliths

Many canine and feline nephroliths remain static in size
and clinically silent for years. Some controversy exists
as to whether nonobstructive kidney stones worsen
underlying kidney disease. Most recent studies in human
and cats show that the presence of nephroliths (vs no

nephroliths) seems to worsen renal disease and outcome.
For this reason, removal of nephroliths in people is
encouraged. In small animals, because of the challenges
associated with removal of nephroliths and the lack of
evidence that nephroliths are a cause of renal disease
progression rather than a marker for more aggressive
renal disease, it is not yet recommended to remove neph­
roliths that are not complicated. Nephrolith removal is
not indicated unless uroliths are increasing in size and
compressing the renal parenchyma, causing recurrent
infections despite appropriate duration of medical man­
agement, or if the patient has a partial or complete uret­
eropelvic junction (UPJ) obstruction resulting in
hydronephrosis, renal parenchymal loss, worsening renal
function, chronic hematuria, or pain.
Ureteroliths

If one or more ureteroliths are obstructing urine flow,
causing hydroureter and/or hydronephrosis, or are asso­
ciated with discomfort, hemorrhage, or concurrent pye­
lonephritis, management for medical stone passage or
interventional urinary diversion is indicated immedi­
ately, regardless of stone composition, as time is critical.
The presence of a hydroureter without renal pelvic dila­
tion greater than 5 mm is sufficient to suspect ureteral
obstruction. If the ureteral obstruction is complete,
decompression of the renal pelvis becomes urgent to
preserve the function of the ipsilateral kidney. The longer
the ureter remains obstructed, the more significant and
irreversible the damage. In one study, after seven days of
obstruction, the GFR was permanently diminished by
35% after relief of the obstruction, and recovery took five
weeks to occur. When the obstruction lasted for 14 days,
the GFR was permanently diminished by 54%, with
recovery taking four months to occur. These studies
were performed in dogs without preexisting renal or ure­
teral disease, so a worse outcome might be expected in
feline and canine patients with chronic obstructions,
previous and/or exhausted renal hypertrophy compen­
sation, and preexisting renal insufficiency. These data
suggest that aggressive and timely intervention is neces­
sary when a ureteral obstruction is diagnosed and that
the “watch and wait method” should be avoided when­
ever possible.
Medical Management
Medical management of upper urinary tract stones
includes dissolution (nephroliths), aggressive diuresis, or
intermittent hemodialysis (IHD).
More than 50% of dogs with ureteral obstructions have
been reported to have urinary tract infection. For that
reason, any patient with ureteral obstruction should
have a urine culture performed and should be given the

1149

VetBooks.ir

1150

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

appropriate antimicrobials. For dissolution to occur, the
uroliths must be surrounded by undersaturated urine to
allow them to go back into solution. For these reasons,
urocystoliths and nephroliths are amenable to dissolu­
tion but ureteroliths and urethroliths are not. Dissolution
of struvite nephroliths has been reported in six dogs that
had bacterial pyelonephritis and impaired urine‐concen­
trating ability. An average of 184 days of treatment
(range, 67–300 days) with a calculolytic diet (Hill’s
Prescription Diet Canine s/d) and antibiotic therapy was
required for radiographic dissolution of the stones in
these dogs. In the author’s experience (AB), ureteroliths
should be dissolved within 2–6 weeks and nephroliths
should be decreased in size (<75 % initial size) by three
months. It can take up to nine months to dissolve large
nephroliths. Increasing the number of walks per day
should be encouraged to improve stone elimination.
Aggressive diuresis has been effective at helping move
ureteroliths down into the bladder and in resolving
azotemia in 8–14% of cats with ureteroliths. This lim­
ited success rate of diuresis may be explained by the high
percentage of ureteral obstruction secondary to stric­
ture in cats.
Surgical management was effective in 101 cases, but
has a high postoperative complication rate (31% in cats
and ~35% in dogs) and perioperative mortality rate (18%
in cats and 25% in dogs). Medical management should be
considered prior to surgical intervention; however, more
aggressive management should be considered if the
patient fails to improve with medical management alone
for 48 hours, or if the patient is anuric/oliguria, hyper­
kalemic, overhydrated or if there is progressive renal pel­
vic dilation.
In the authors’ experience, aggressive diuresis in cats
appears to be more effective for small stones (<1–2 mm)
in the distal third of the ureter compared to larger stones,
or those in the proximal ureter. Aggressive diuresis con­
sists of aggressive IV fluid therapy while monitoring
­central venous pressure, body weight, electrolyte con­
centrations, and hydration status. One recommended
fluid therapy protocol includes administering 0.45%
saline mixed with 2.5% dextrose at a maintenance rate
(e.g., 50–60 mL/kg/d). Additionally, a replacement fluid
such as Plasma‐Lyte® (Abbott Animal Health) or lactated
Ringer’s solution (avoiding saline, if possible, to reduce
sodium load) is administered to correct dehydration and
promote diuresis (e.g., 45–75 mL/kg/d). The maximum
combined fluid rate should not exceed 120 mL/kg/day. In
patients without cardiac compromise, mannitol is
administered as a bolus at 0.25–0.5 g/kg over 20–30 min­
utes followed by a constant rate infusion of 1 mg/kg/min
for 24 hours. If, after 24 hours, there is no evidence of
improvement based on imaging and serial bloodwork,
the mannitol infusion is discontinued. Other medical

alternatives include amitriptyline, alpha‐adrenergic
antagonist therapy (prazosin or tamsulosin), or glucagon
therapy.
Intermittent hemodialysis has been reported to resolve
acute kidney injury secondary to obstructive uretero­
liths. Thirteen cats did not have any surgical intervention
and eight of these 13 survived 365 days or longer past
discharge; all of these cats had a degree of renal recovery
sufficient for discontinuation of IHD prior to hospital
discharge.
If medical management fails or the patient is unstable
(e.g., hyperkalemic, overhydrated, oligo‐/anuric, devel­
oping progressive hydronephrosis), or if IHD is not
available at the institution, immediate renal decompres­
sion should be considered. If minimally invasive urolith
extraction or bypass is not possible, then the two best
options are to (1) place a nephrostomy tube or (2) initi­
ate IHD or continuous renal replacement therapy
(CRRT), for stabilization. Immediate renal pelvis
decompression is recommended over hemodialysis or
CRRT if the patient is stable enough to undergo anes­
thesia and the operator is comfortable with the proce­
dure. Renal pelvis decompression halts the damage
being done by the increased hydrostatic backpressure,
whereas hemodialysis stabilizes a patient while the ure­
teral obstruction persists, resulting in ongoing renal
injury. A short delay in treatment in a stable patient is
preferred over immediate treatment by an inexperi­
enced operator, as the complication rates with any of the
decompression procedures are high if experience is lim­
ited. Partial obstructions allow a longer window of
opportunity for treatment without such dramatic renal
damage as seen with complete obstructions, allowing
time to arrange referral to a facility with experience in
these procedures. Over 75% of obstructed feline patie­
nts have a partial ureteral obstruction based on
ureteropyelography.
Many patients with ureteral obstruction have concur­
rent urinary tract infections (75% of dogs and 10–30% of
cats) so broad‐spectrum antimicrobial therapy is recom­
mended for all patients, and a urine culture and sensitiv­
ity should be part of the work‐up.
Surgical Removal of Upper Urinary
Tract Uroliths
Nephroliths

In small animals, traditional intervention for treatment
of nephrolithiasis involves a nephrotomy, pyelotomy, or
salvage ureteronephrectomy. Complications can be
severe and life‐threatening after a nephrotomy, including
hemorrhage, decreased renal function, ureteral obstruc­
tion by remaining nephrolith fragment passage, and uri­
nary leakage into the abdomen from the renal incision.

VetBooks.ir

123 Urolithiasis in Small Animals

In a study of normal cats, the GFR of the ipsilateral kid­
ney decreased by 10%–20% after a nephrotomy. This was
clinically insignificant in normal cats but in a clinical
patient with maximally hypertrophied nephrons due to
prior nephrolith‐induced damage, the significance could
be dramatic. Therefore, feline patients with an already
compromised GFR from chronic stone disease may
develop a clinically significant decline in renal function
after nephrotomy. Since over 30% of adult cats eventually
develop chronic kidney disease associated with a 75%
decline of renal function, a 10–20% further decline in
GFR from a nephrotomy may be poorly tolerated. Hence,
nephrotomy should be avoided when possible in all cats,
especially those with existing renal disease. In dogs
undergoing traditional surgery for nephrolithiasis, there
was a very high complication rate (23%) following the
procedure, as well as remaining fragments in more than
40%. In addition, 67% of dogs undergoing nephrectomy
developed renal azotemia.
Typically, unless the stone results in a ureteral obstruc­
tion or severe perisitent hematuria, is the cause of
chronic UTIs, or is so large that it is overtaking the renal
parenchyma, nephroliths remain clinically silent for the
life of the dog or cat and removal is currently not being
recommended. The 2016 ACVIM consensus statement
on the management of urinary tract stone disease rec­
ommends management of upper urinary uroliths by
minimally invasive techniques rather than standard sur­
gery when possible.
Ureteroliths

Traditional surgical intervention to address ureteroliths
includes ureterotomy, neoureterocystostomy, ureterone­
phrectomy, or renal transplantation. Kyles et al. reported
procedure‐associated complication and mortality rates
of >30% and 18–38%, respectively, in more than 150 cats
that underwent at least one of these procedures. These
cases were seen at two universities where microsurgical
expertise was available and a renal transplant program
existed. The morbidity and mortality rates may be
higher in environments where operating microscopes
and microsurgical experience and expertise are not
available.
Many of the complications associated with surgery are
due to site edema, recurrence of stones that then pass
from the renal pelvis to the surgery site, stricture forma­
tion, persistent obstructions, missed ureteroliths, and
ureterotomy‐associated or nephrostomy tube‐associated
urine leakage. In the Kyles et al. study, patients that
underwent a ureterotomy for treatment of a ureteral
obstruction (the most commonly performed procedure
in practice) had a perioperative mortality rate of 25%.
Uroabdomen occurred in 15% of cats in which a uretero­
neocystotomy was performed.

When ureterotomy or ureteroneocystotomy is unsuc­
cessful, a ureteronephrectomy may be required, which is
not ideal due to the high risk of subsequent stone‐
induced obstruction of the contralateral kidney and the
majority of cats being azotemic at the time of diagnosis
with a unilateral ureteral obstruction. Chronic kidney
disease is common in cats when a ureteral obstruction
is diagnosed, with 75–97% of cats with a unilateral
obstruction reported to be azotemic. For this reason,
removing a kidney for a diseased ureter should never be
encouraged.
Another major concern is that in one study, 40% of cats
developed a second ureteral obstruction over a 1–2‐year
follow‐up, and of these cats, 62% had evidence of neph­
rolithiasis documented at the time of the first surgery.
Unfortunately, removing a nephrolith in a cat is chal­
lenging and potentially harmful, and it is impossible to
predict whether a nephrolith will become an obstructive
ureterolith, so nephrotomy should not be encouraged.
Results after ureterotomy, pyelotomy, and/or uretero­
nephrectomy have been reported in 16 dogs. The mor­
tality rate (death related to azotemia or to clinical signs
related to the urinary system) in this study was 25% (4/16
dogs). Of the 12 dogs that were followed, 17% required
an additional surgery within four months for ureteral
stricture or recurrent ureteroliths. Most dogs (88%) had
urinary tract infections at diagnosis, and 50% had con­
current nephrolithiasis. Ten (62.5%) dogs presented to
the hospital with elevated blood urea nitrogen and/or
creatinine concentrations and 50% remained elevated
after successful surgery. Postoperatively, two dogs had
worsening azotemia.
Minimally Invasive Management
of Nephroliths and Ureteroliths
In humans, minimally invasive procedures are the treat­
ment of choice for nephrolithiasis and ureteroliths
due to the high complication rates and morbidity asso­
ciated with traditional surgery (Table 123.4). These
procedures include ESWL for nephroliths <1–2 cm and
endo­scopic nephrolithotomy (percutaneous nephroli­
thotomy [PCNL] or surgically assisted endoscopic neph­
rolithotomy [SENL]) for nephroliths >1–2 cm. Open
surgery and laparoscopy are typically only considered
after other less invasive options have failed or been deemed
inappropriate.
Over the last 10 years, evidence‐based data support
that minimally invasive treatment of upper urinary tract
uroliths in dogs and cats is associated with a lower mor­
bidity and mortality rate compared to surgical proce­
dures. Selection of the most kidney‐sparing procedure
should always be a priority to treat upper urinary tract
uroliths in small animals.

1151

VetBooks.ir

1152

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

Table 123.4 Considerations for various interventional procedures in patients with partial or complete ureteral obstructiona
Procedure

Medical management
(aggressive diuresis)

Cats
●●
●●

Nephrostomy tube

●●

ESWL

●●

Ureteroscopy

Indicated within 48 h of ureteral obstruction
Contraindicated if patient is unstable (hyperkalemic,
excessively overhydrated, becoming oliguric, or has
cardiac disease)

Indicated for urgent decompression of the renal pelvis
if ESWL and ureteral stenting not available
●● Renal pelvis must be >10 mm
●● Surgically placed; percutaneous placement not
recommended because of increased risk of
uroabdomen due to mobility of feline kidneys
●●

Ureteral stents

Dogs

Indicated for ureteroliths <3 mm
Add ureteral stent if ureterolith is between 3 and
5 mm or obstruction is present

Indicated for obstructive ureteroliths (any degree of
hydroureter and hydronephrosis)
●● Placed antegrade via nephrostomy access
●● Placed retrograde via cystoscopy or ureterotomy
●●

Not performed because of small patient size

●●
●●

Indicated for urgent decompression of the renal
pelvis if ESWL and ureteral stenting not available
●● Renal pelvis must be >10 mm
●● Percutaneously placed
●●

●●
●●

●●
●●

●●
●●

SUB

Current preferred method for ureteral obstruction in
cats
●● Indicated for ureteral strictures or very proximal
ureteral obstructions
●● Indicated for ureteral stent reactions
●●

Ureterotomy or
If deemed appropriate by attending surgeon
ureteral reimplantation

Indicated within 48 h of ureteral obstruction
Contraindicated if patient is unstable
(hyperkalemic, excessively overhydrated,
becoming oliguric, or has cardiac disease)

●●

Indicated for ureteroliths <5 mm
Add ureteral stent if ureterolith is >5 mm or
obstruction is present
Indicated for any obstructive ureterolith
Placed retrograde (cystotomy or cystoscopy) or
antegrade (percutaneous or surgical
nephrostomy access)
Indicated for dogs >18 kg
Ureteral stents placed when complete obstruction
Indicated for ureteral stent reactions or
intolerance or recurrence of occlusion

If deemed appropriate by attending surgeon

a

Immediate treatment of partial ureteral obstruction is typically recommended.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Defarges A, Berent AC, Dunn M. New alternatives for minimally invasive management of uroliths:
ureteroliths. Compend Contin Educ Vet 2013; 35(3): E1–E7.
ESWL, extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy; SUB, subcutaneous ureteral bypass.

Extracorporeal Shock Wave Lithotripsy

Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy is used to fragment
uroliths fixed in one location. It has been successfully used
to fragment nephroliths and ureteroliths in dogs and uret­
eroliths in cats. The patient is placed under general anes­
thesia to permit positioning and provide analgesia.
Fluoroscopy is used to position the ESWL unit to target
the urolith. If compromised renal function is of concern, or
if bilateral ESWL is to be performed concurrently, limiting
treatment to a maximum of 2000–2500 shock waves per
kidney is recommended. For uroliths in the distal ureter or
urinary bladder, higher doses are possible because the kid­
ney is not within the treatment focal zone and collateral
damage to surrounding tissues seems to be minimal.
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy is most com­
monly recommended for the treatment of nephroliths and
ureteroliths in dogs, rather than cats, for two reasons.
First, the feline ureter does not routinely accommodate
nephrolith fragment passage. Therefore, a nonobstructive

nephrolith could become an obstructive ureterolith after
ESWL. Post ESWL, nephrolith fragments are typically
≥1 mm in diameter, and the typical unstented feline ureter
is 0.3–0.4 mm in diameter. Second, there is some concern
that feline kidneys are more sensitive than canine kidneys
to shock waves and could experience bleeding.
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy treatment was
reported to be successful in approximately 85% of dogs
with calcium‐containing nephroliths and ureteroliths.
Successful fragmentation of renal stones was achieved
in 90% of dogs, but some dogs required multiple treat­
ments. Overall, 30% of dogs required more than one
ESWL treatment for adequate fragmentation of neph­
roliths when lithotripsy was used; when an older model
dry unit (Modulith SL‐20) was used, up to 50% of dogs
required more than one treatment. Success rates
approach ~85% with one treatment when ureteral
stenting is concurrently performed. In one study of five
cats with ureterolithiasis treated by ESWL (wet unit),

VetBooks.ir

123 Urolithiasis in Small Animals

only one cat had complete resolution of the ureterolith,
and partial fragmentation occurred in two other cats;
however, these fragments were still too large to pass
down the ureter. In the authors’ (AB) experience, suc­
cess in stone fragmentation and passage was seen in
two of an additional five cats, suggesting an approxi­
mate 30% passage rate overall (3/10). However, larger
studies are needed to confirm these results and this
procedure is not currently recommended in cats by the
authors.
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy is believed to be
safe and well tolerated by canine kidneys. In a series of
140 dogs with nephroliths or ureteroliths treated by
ESWL, the most common complication was ureteral
obstruction by stone fragments, which occurred in
approximately 10% of dogs. With the advocacy of ure­
teral stent placement for larger nephroliths (>10–20 mm)
before ESWL, this risk has declined. In dogs, it has been
shown that the renal changes observed after ESWL typi­
cally result in minimal decreases in GFR and renal blood
flow during the first 24 hours of treatment, and both
return to baseline within one week. Extrarenal complica­
tions with ESWL include abdominal pain, diarrhea, and
pancreatic injury (i.e., increased enzymes levels not asso­
ciated with clinical signs). Shock wave‐induced dysrhyth­
mias have been described in a few human patients (<8%).
Hospitalization typically ranges from eight to 24 hours
to monitor for the passage of urolith fragments and to
allow postprocedure analgesia and diuresis with intrave­
nous fluid therapy. Stone fragments may be voided 1–2
(a)

days after the procedure and collected in a strainer or
cheesecloth to be analyzed. Animals with ureteral stents
often require shorter hospital stays, as the concern for
post‐ESWL ureteral obstruction is diminished. Patients
are discharged with instructions for monitoring urina­
tion and urine appearance, lethargy, abdominal pain, or
vomiting. Follow‐up radiography and ultrasonography
are typically recommended one day after treatment, then
in 2–4 weeks, and then every month thereafter until all
stones are passed. If fragments that have passed into the
urinary bladder are not voided within 1–2 months after
ESWL, VUH or cystoscopic stone basketing is recom­
mended. If stone fragments remain in the kidney or ure­
ter after 2–3 months, repeat ESWL is suggested as long
as there is no concurrent ureteral obstruction. A second
treatment is required in 15–35% of cases to achieve
effective fragmentation if the remaining fragments
appear too large to safely pass through the ureter. In
cases of ureteral obstruction, placement of a ureteral
stent would be recommended.
Ureteral Stents

The use of ureteral stents in dogs and cats has been
investigated for the last 14 years as a less invasive alter­
native to traditional surgery. Placement of a double‐pig­
tail ureteral stent (Figure 123.18), via either minimally
invasive techniques (endoscopy and fluoroscopy in most
dogs) or surgically assisted (nephrostomy access in most
cats), can circumvent many of the perioperative compli­
cations of surgery (e.g., leakage, stricture, reobstruction)
(c)

(b)

Figure 123.18 Preoperative lateral (a), postoperative lateral (b) and ventrodorsal (c) radiographs following ureteral stent placement in a cat.

1153

VetBooks.ir

1154

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

and quickly stabilize the patient. Typical ureteral stent
sizes are 2.5 Fr for cats and 3.7 or 4.7 Fr for dogs. Ureteral
stents have many benefits:

traditional surgery. Surgical placement with fluoroscopic
guidance has a procedural success rate of more than 95%
in cats and 100% in dogs; with endoscopic and fluoro­
scopic guidance, the success rate is 20% in cats and over
90% in dogs. There are relatively few major long‐ or
short‐term complications (Table 123.5), and the stents
are typically left in place long term. In the authors’ (AB)
experience to date, the longest duration of stent patency
in a feline ureter is more than seven years and in dogs
more than 10 years.
The risks of stent placement need to be understood,
and owners must be educated on these risks before con­
sidering this option (see Table 123.5). The greatest risks
are associated with device placement, as the stent can
be very difficult to place in some feline patients, and
appropriate training and experience with the procedure
are critical to its success. Risks seen months to years
after stent placement are typically not life threatening,
and are relatively easy to address on an outpatient basis

immediate decompression of the renal pelvis
passive ureteral dilation for urine and stone passage
●● prevention of strictures and leakage associated with
surgical or nonsurgical procedures
●● prevention of a ureteral obstruction after ESWL
●● can be easily removed.
●●
●●

In cases of obstructive pyonephrosis, endoscopic ure­
teral and renal pelvic catheterization can lavage the renal
pelvis and ureter of infected debris and a ureteral stent
can then be placed to maintain ureteral patency. All of
these benefits have been clearly documented in human
medicine and, more recently, in veterinary medicine.
Ureteral stenting in dogs and cats performed by an
experienced operator is associated with a lower morbid­
ity and mortality rate (<2% and 7%, respectively) than

Table 123.5 Immediate, short‐term, and long‐term complications of various minimally invasive procedures to manage ureteroliths
in dogs and cats
Complications
Short‐term (1
week–1 month)

Procedure

Operative

Postoperative (<1 week)

Long‐term (>1 month)

Feline
ureteral
stent

Ureteral perforation with
guidewire (little clinical
consequence)
Leakage if concurrent
ureterotomy needed
Eversion of ureteral mucosa
during stent passage
Ureteral tear during stent
passage

Fluid overload during postobstructive
diuresis (<5%)
Failure of creatinine to improve (<5%)
MORTALITY (<8%) typically due to
nonurinary causes (pancreatitis or
congestive heart failure)

Dysuria (self‐
limiting 7–14
days)
Inappetence
(temporary)

Dysuria (38%) nearly all
respond to prednisolone and/
or prazosin
UTI (30%; 34% pre‐op)
Reobstruction (19%)
– Stricture recurrence (54%)
– Adhesions around ureter
(23%)
Obstructive pyelonephritis
(8%)
Chronic hematuria (18%)
Stent migration (6%)
Ureteral reflux (1%)

Canine
ureteral
stent

Endoscopic failure (~3%)
Ureteral perforation (<1%)
Leakage (<1%)
Ureteral tear (<1%)

MORTALITY (<1%)

Dysuria (<1%)

Proliferative tissue at
ureterovesicular junction
(25%)
UTIs (~10%; >60% pre‐op)
Migration (<5%)
Occlusion (<5%)
Dysuria (<3%)

SUB

Renal pelvis penetration by
guidewire (<5%)
Kinking of catheters (~5%)
Inability to place SUB
device (<1%)

Leakage (5%)
Fluid overload (<5%)
Failure of creatinine to improve (<5%)
Blockage of system (3%)
(blood clot, purulent material, device
failure)
MORTALITY 5.6%

Dysuria (<2%)
Inappetence
(temporary)

UTI (15%; 35% pre‐op)
Blockage of system (9%)
(stones 8%, purulent material
1%)
Dysuria (<2%)

Source: Reproduced with permission from Defarges A, Berent AC, Dunn M. New alternatives for minimally invasive management of uroliths:
ureteroliths. Compend Contin Educ Vet 2013; 35(3): E1–E7.
SUB, subcutaneous ureteral bypass; UTI, urinary tract infection.

VetBooks.ir

123 Urolithiasis in Small Animals

and include reocclusion, migration, or dysuria. In dogs,
ureteral stents have replaced standard surgery to
decompress upper urinary tract obstruction. Long‐
term complications include urinary tract infection
(26%), occlusion of the stent (9%), ureteritis (5%), stent
migration (5%), encrustation (2%), and hematuria (7%).
More than three‐quarters of the patients were able to
clear the infections if present before ureteral stent
placement. In cats, ureteral stent placement can be
challenging and is associated with a 38% rate of long‐
term dysuria (responsive to steroid therapy). Since sub­
cutaneous ureteral bypass has been associated with
lower complication rates (see later) than ureteral stent­
ing in cats, it is now considered the treatment of choice
to relieve upper urinary tract obstruction in cats in the
authors’ practices.
Endoscopic Nephrolithotomy

In humans, PCNL is typically performed for large or
embedded nephroliths (>15–20 mm). In small animals,
PCNL/SENL is considered if ESWL fails or is not avail­
able, cystine stones (which are resistant to EWSL) are
present, or the stone is >15–20 mm (depending on
patient size).
Typically, a combination of ultrasonographic, endo­
scopic, and fluoroscopic guidance is used for both PCNL
and SENL. PCNL has been performed in 11 dogs and
one cat to date. The smallest patient to date having a
PCNL/SENL was 5 lbs (2.3 kg), making patient size less
of an issue than other alternatives.
Typically, for PCNL, a renal access needle is used
to access the renal pelvis through the greater curvature
of the kidney under ultrasonographic guidance.
Subsequently, a nephroscope is inserted through a sheath
and into the renal pelvis to visualize the stone. If the lat­
ter is small enough, a stone retrieval basket is used to
remove the stone. If the stone is larger than the sheath,
intracorporeal lithotripsy (ultrasonic, pneumonic, elec­
trohydraulic, or Ho:YAG laser) is used to fragment it.
Once the stone fragments are small enough to fit through
the sheath, they are removed and a locking‐loop nephros­
tomy tube (5 or 6 Fr) is left in place to allow the small
hole to seal and form a nephropexy.
Surgical‐assisted endoscopic nephrolithotomy can be
performed similarly to that described for PCNL, only the
abdomen is opened to assist in nephrostomy access
­closure, to prevent the need for a nephrostomy tube.
For both PCNL and surgical‐assisted endoscopic
nephrolithotomy, because a balloon is used to dilate the
renal parenchyma (no incision is performed), minimal
nephron loss occurs. PCNL and SENL are considered
the most “kidney‐sparing” procedures with the highest
urolith‐free rate and minimal effect on GFR. For these
reasons, they are recommended as the first treatment for

patients with staghorn calculi according to the American
Urologic Association Guidelines.
The author (AB) has performed endoscopic nephroli­
thotomy in 11 dogs and one cat (16 renal units) using the
PCNL approach (n = 4 renal units) or SENL (n = 12 renal
units) to remove complicated nephroliths (median diam­
eter 2.5 cm; range, 0.5–5.7 cm). No kidney required
conversion to traditional surgical nephrotomy or
­
nephrectomy. Median procedure time was 180 minutes
(range, 90–270 minutes). Patients were discharged
within 48 hours (range, 48–144 hours). The procedure
was successful (resolution of complicated nephroliths) in
14 renal units. Ureteral stents were placed in all cases
during the PCNL/SENL and removed after 1–20 weeks
minimally invasively. No recurrence was reported during
the follow‐up period (median duration 557 days).
Owners tolerated recovery from the SENL better than
the PCNL because a nephrostomy tube was not required.
Overall, this series of cases demonstrates that PNCL
and SENL have a greater stone‐free rate (93% vs 85%)
and lower recurrence rate (0% vs 10%) than ESWL for
large problematic nephroliths. The results of this study
suggest that the median survival time is higher for dogs
with IRIS stage 1, 2 or 4 disease treated with ENL com­
pared to previously reported survival times for the same
IRIS stage diseases. However, further prospective studies
are required to draw conclusions as this was only a small
number of cases.
Ureteroscopy

Contrary to human medicine, ureteroscopy is rarely per­
formed in veterinary patients. For minimally invasive
treatment, dogs with a ureteral obstruction could have
an endoscopic ureteral stent placed and/or may also
undergo ESWL. If the patient is large enough (at least
39.6–44 lb [18–20 kg]), ureteroscopy can be considered.
However, most dogs with ureterolithiasis are small ter­
rier or toy breeds, making this an uncommon procedure.
If this is to be performed, then the preplacement of a ure­
teral stent to allow for passive ureteral dilation, prior to
ureteroscopy, is typically recommended.
Subcutaneous Ureteral Bypass

Feline ureteroliths are typically more frustrating than
canine ureteroliths due to the small diameter of the feline
ureter (<0.4 mm) and the endoscopic and surgical limita­
tions. In cats, ESWL is not typically advised and ureter­
oscopy is not possible.
A subcutaneous ureteral bypass (SUB) involves the
placement of a nephrostomy tube and a cystostomy tube
that are connected subcutaneously to a shunting port,
allowing for urine drainage from the kidney directly to
the bladder, bypassing the ureter (Figure 123.19). Initially,
this procedure was primarily performed for cats with

1155

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

VetBooks.ir

1156

Figure 123.19 Lateral radiographs of a feline patient following
the placement of a subcutaneous ureteral bypass.

ureteral strictures, very proximal ureteral obstructions,
or in which stent placement was unsuccessful. Based on
experience in over 300 cats in the authors’ practice, it is

now preferred over the feline ureteral stent due to the
minimal complications both shortterm and longterm.
Over 93% of cats survived to hospital discharge after
admission. The longest period for which an SUB device
has remained in place is nine years (personal communi­
cation AB), and the short‐ and long‐term complications
seen with this device are fewer and less severe than those
seen with ureteral stents in cats (see Table 123.5).
The use of a SUB device to treat cats with ureteral
obstruction has been associated with the highest sur­
vival rate to date. In that study, 135 out of 144 (94%)
cats survived to hospital discharge, and 90%, 83%, 80%
and 74 % of cats were alive after one, three, and six
months and one year respectively after SUB placement.
The most common complication was stent obstruction
(25%) requiring SUB system replacement. However,
with the use of tetrasodium ethylenediaminetet­raacetic
acid (tEDTA) solution, the rate of reobstruction declined
to 4.5%.

Acknowledgment
Andrew Moore, Canadian Veterinary Urolith Centre.
Dr Stephanie Nykamp, Radiologist, University of Guelph.

­Further Reading
Berent AC, Weisse CW, Bagley DH, Lamb K. Use of
subcutaneous ureteral bypass device for treatment of
benign ureteral obstruction in cats: 174 ureters in 134
cats (2009–2015). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 253:
1309–27.
Deroy C, Rossetti D, Ragetly G, Hernandez J, Poncet C.
Comparison between double‐pigtail ureteral stents and
ureteral bypass devices for treatment of ureterolithiasis
in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2017; 251: 429–37.
Lulich JP, Berent AC, Adams LG, Westropp JL, Bartges JW,
Osborne CA. ACVIM Small Animal consensus

recommendations on the treatment and prevention of
uroliths in dogs and cats. J Vet Intern Med 2016; 30:
1564–74.
Milligan M, Berent AC. Medical and interventional
management of upper urinary tract uroliths. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2019; 49: 157–74.
Weese JS, Blondeau J, Boothe D, et al. International Society
for Companion Animal Infectious Diseases (ISCAID)
guidelines for the diagnosis and management of
bacterial urinary tract infections in dogs and cats. Vet J
2019; 247: 8–25.

VetBooks.ir

1157

124
Prostatic Diseases
Serge Chalhoub, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM)
Department of Veterinary Clinical and Diagnostic Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada

Both male dogs and cats have prostate glands, but cats
rarely develop prostatic diseases. Prostatic diseases are
relatively common in middle‐aged to older, intact male
dogs and rare in neutered males, with a higher reported
frequency in medium‐ and large‐breed dogs. Most companion male dogs and cats are neutered, which prevents
the majority of prostatic diseases.
The prostate is the only accessory sex gland in male
dogs, and it surrounds the urethra in the pelvic region
caudal to the trigone of the bladder and distal to the
internal urethral sphincter. It is oval in shape and bilobed,
with the two lobes separated by a prominent median
septum (Figure 124.1). The size of the prostate is greatly
influenced by hormonal stimulation. Castration of dogs
removes the important trophic f­actors necessary for
­prostatic growth and function, estrogen and testosterone, and leads to prostatic ­atrophy (Figure 124.2).
The prostate itself is an exocrine gland that produces
continuous secretions that flow into the urethra through
multiple prostatic ducts. These secretions make up
the largest component of spermatic ejaculate (90–95%).
Normal prostatic acini are lined with tall columnar to
cuboidal epithelium. The prostate reaches normal size by
age 2, but it continues to grow with age in the intact
male.
Most problems associated with the prostate result in
prostatomegaly, but many of the diseases do not result in
pain upon palpation of the prostate or lower urinary
tract signs. The most common prostatic diseases are
benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), bacterial acute and
chronic prostatitis, prostatic abscesses, prostatic and
paraprostatic cysts, and prostatic neoplasia (discussed in
further chapters).

­Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia
and Prostatic Cysts
Etiology
Benign prostatic hyperplasia is by far the most common
prostatic disease in intact male dogs, and it develops due
to long‐term exposure of the prostate trophic hormone
testosterone’s active metabolite dihydrotestosterone
(DHT). Over time, an imbalance in the ratio of androgens to estrogens develops, and there is also both an
increase in prostatic tissue sensitivity to androgens and
an increase in androgen receptors. Over 50% of intact
male dogs will develop symptoms from BPH by age 5,
and by the age of 6 years 80% will manifest symptoms.
Fluid‐filled cysts may develop within the prostate and
are secondary to the hormonal influences that also cause
BPH. Theses cysts may not cause clinical signs until either
they get infected and develop into an abscess, or affect the
flow of urine through the urethra due to their size.
History and Clinical Signs
Not all dogs with BPH develop clinical signs. In others,
as the prostate becomes enlarged, observed clinical signs
with BPH include intermittent or continuous serosanguinous discharge or hematuria, and less commonly
straining to defecate, and lower urinary tract signs. Dogs
may experience pain upon ejaculation, and BPH can lead
to infertility in some cases. Dogs with BPH are not usually systemically ill but they do have a higher incidence of
developing prostatitis, prostatic abscesses, and urinary
tract infections.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

VetBooks.ir

1158

Figure 124.1 Ultrasound transverse view image of a normal
prostate of an intact male dog. Note the homogenous
echotexture and relatively uniform but prominent size of the
prostate. Source: Image courtesy of Dr Tim Spotswood.

Figure 124.2 Ultrasound transverse view image of an atrophied
prostate in a neutered male dog. The prostate is very small and
barely recognizable. The + symbols delineate the prostate.
Source: Image courtesy of Dr Tim Spotswood.

Diagnosis
With all suspected prostatic diseases, it is important to
put the entire clinical picture together: history, clinical
signs, physical exam, imaging results, laboratory results,
and cytology or histopathology.
Performing a rectal examination is of the utmost
importance. Neutered males rarely develop prostatic
­diseases but they can still develop prostatic neoplasia, so
it is important not to rule out prostatic diseases in castrated males. In most patients, the caudal portion of the
prostate can be palpated on the ventral floor of the colon.
This may be difficult in larger dogs. The normal prostate
should not be painful and should be soft. With BPH, the

prostate tends to feel enlarged but it is smooth, symmetric, and rarely painful. The median raphe may not be as
obvious to palpate. The enlargement may cause the prostate to move cranially into the abdominal cavity, and
therefore can be difficult to palpate rectally without the
help of concurrent abdominal palpation. Prostatic cysts
can rarely be identified. Rectal palpation should also
include the dorsal portion of the distal colon to feel for
enlarged iliac lymph nodes. With BPH, lymphadenopathy should not be present. Constipation may be possible,
but the rest of the physical exam is usually within
normal limits.
Complete blood count (CBC) and chemistry panel are
unremarkable in dogs with BPH and noninfected prostatic cysts. Human prostate‐specific antigen (PSA) has
not been shown to correlate with prostatic disease in
dogs. Abdominal radiographs may reveal an enlarged
soft tissue opacity in the caudal abdominal region usually near or within the pelvic canal and caudal to the
bladder, especially on a lateral radiograph. Radiographs
are not very sensitive or specific for identifying the
­etiology of prostatic disease but they do give a good indication of size and shape of the prostate. Prostatic mineralization can be seen in both neutered and intact dogs. In
neutered dogs, mineralization strongly indicates neoplasia, whereas in intact dogs, mineralization can indicate
neoplasia, prostatitis, BPH, and prostatic cysts.
Constipation can be noted on radiographs. The prostate
is harder to recognize on abdominal radiographs in a
neutered male.
Retrograde contrast urethrocystography can aid in
the diagnosis of prostatic and urethral disease. Prostatic
disease may result in the uptake of contrast into glandular tissue, and the degree of uptake can correlate with
severity of disease. With BPH, there should be minimal
to no contrast uptake. It may be possible to appreciate a
narrowed prostatic urethral diameter due to compression by an enlarged prostate.
Ultrasonography has become the gold standard for
visualizing the prostate. In the intact male, the normal
prostate usually appears as a bilobed structure on short
axis and oval on long axis, its architecture uniform and
with a homogenous echogenicity similar to the spleen. In
BPH, the prostate appears enlarged and there may be a
loss of visualization of the median septum. Echogenicity
should not differ from the normal prostate or the
­prostate may be slightly more hyperechoic (Figure 124.3).
Prostatic cysts can be seen within the parenchyma and
usually contain anechoic fluid (Figure 124.4). Cysts may
vary in size and number.
For a specific diagnosis of prostatic disease, a sample
of prostatic cells, fluid, or tissue is recommended.
Often with typical clinical signs and diagnostic results,
BPH can be tentatively diagnosed and treated, but it is
important to note that other diseases cannot be excluded.

VetBooks.ir

124 Prostatic Diseases

(a)

Figure 124.4 Benign prostatic hypertrophy with prostatic cysts as
seen on ultrasound in both transverse and sagittal planes. Source:
Image courtesy of Dr Tim Spotswood.

(b)

prostate for cytology and culture are possible and relatively
easy to do. Other cytology and/or culture ­techniques
include semen collection, prostatic massage and wash,
prostatic brush cytology, and traumatic prostatic wash
(Table 124.1). Cytology of a normal prostate contains
cuboid to columnar epithelial cells in clusters. Cytology
of BPH usually reveals normal‐appearing e­ pithelial cells
arranged in clusters characteristic of a honeycomb
appearance.
A urinalysis and urine culture is usually always
­indicated with any prostatic disease due to the higher
incidence of urinary tract infections. With BPH, urinalysis may be normal or show increased red blood cells with
an inactive sediment and negative culture.
Therapy

Figure 124.3 Benign prostatic hypertrophy as seen on ultrasound
in both transverse and sagittal planes. The prostate is larger than
normal and appears slightly more echogenic. Source: Image
courtesy of Dr Tim Spotswood.

Therapy is not always indicated for BPH as not all dogs
develop clinical signs. These patients should be monitored for the development of clinical signs over time by
their owners. Surgical castration is the treatment of
choice for BPH, and prostatic atrophy begins within days
to weeks following surgery, with completion usually by
Obtaining a biopsy of the prostate can be difficult due
12 weeks. The larger the prostate prior to surgery, the
to its location in the caudal abdomen. Biopsies may
longer the involution period. Clinical signs begin to
be obtained using ultrasound guidance and a Tru‐Cut
biopsy instrument, or surgically via laparotomy/­ resolve before involution is complete. Prostatic cysts will
usually resolve with castration unless they are infected.
laparoscopy. Biopsies may also be obtained in a blind
Large prostatic cysts may rarely require surgery.
fashion but this is not recommended. With BPH,
In breeding dogs, medical therapy can be used to
histopathology should indicate only evidence of
­
reduce prostatic size and clinical signs of prostatomegaly.
­hyperplasia and hypertrophy.
Finasteride, a 5‐alpha‐reductase enzyme inhibitor, is the
Cytology of prostatic cells and fluid has been shown to
treatment of choice in men and has been shown to be
agree most of the time with histopathology, and is more
effective in dogs. The medication blocks the conversion
sensitive in the detection of infectious processes.
of testosterone to DHT in the prostate. Finasteride does
However, a negative cytology does not rule out prostatic
not affect fertility and has no known side‐effects in dogs.
diseases. Ultrasound‐guided fine needle aspirates of the

1159

VetBooks.ir

1160

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

Table 124.1 Procedures for collecting cytologic samples from the prostate
Procedure

Specialized equipment

Advantages

Disadvantages

Percutaneous
ultrasound‐guided
aspirate

Ultrasound machine, probe
capable of reaching higher
frequencies; needles (22 G, 1.5
inch in length) or catheters;
syringes (6 cc) and extension set

Quick and relatively effective
at obtaining diagnostic
samples; can be used to target
specific areas of the prostate,
more sensitive

May require sedation; technique
requires learning curve and specialized
equipment; risk of seeding infectious
organisms or neoplastic cells into
abdominal cavity; risk of abscess rupture

Brush cytology

Bronchoscopy airway brush

Quick and easy to do; minimal
learning curve

May not reach the prostate;
nondiagnostic sample if more localized
disease; brush can only be used once;
sedation may be necessary

Ejaculate
collection

None

Easy and safe to do; sedation
not necessary

Difficult in painful animals; patients
may not cooperate; sample only useful
for culture and is not specific to
prostatic disease

Prostatic wash

Urinary catheters of various
French sizes (red rubber catheters,
Argyle feeding tube catheters);
syringes (30–60 cc) and extension
set; nonsterile gloves

Safe, relatively easy; sedation
may not be necessary; more
sensitive; less risk of bacteria
or neoplastic cell abdominal
seeding

Urine contamination possible; prostate
may be too far to reach; potential risk of
abscess rupture; requires multiple
people

Traumatic wash

Urinary catheters of various
French sizes (red rubber catheters,
Argyle feeding tube catheters);
syringes (30–60 cc) and extension
set; nonsterile gloves

Safe, relatively easy; may yield
a more diagnostic sample than
simple prostatic wash; less
risk of bacteria or neoplastic
cell abdominal seeding

Urine contamination possible; prostate
may be too far to reach; potential risk of
abscess rupture; sedation usually
necessary; requires multiple people

However, care must be taken in its administration and
the drug may cause birth defects in pregnant women.
Dosages range from 0.1–1 mg/kg orally once daily to
5 mg per dog per day, and a decrease in prostatic size by
50–70% is usually seen by 2–3 months. Flutamide is
androgen receptor antagonist and prevents DTH from
binding to the receptor. It has been reported to be
­effective at a dosage of 5 mg/kg orally once daily with
no known side‐effects. Cost is the limiting factor for
both drugs.
Estrogen therapy can also be used to treat BPH and
will cause a decrease in testosterone production.
However, long‐term therapy with estrogen may cause
bone marrow suppression, symptoms of feminization,
and prostatic squamous metaplasia. Estrogen and its
derivatives are no longer recommended as first‐line
therapy to treat BPH.
Lastly, gonadotropin‐releasing hormone (GnRH) agonist implants have shown great promise and effectiveness with no reported adverse effects in treating BPH in
intact male dogs. Their limited availability limits their
use at this time.

response to pharmacologic therapy. Fertility is usually
restored with finasteride therapy once the prostate
beings to atrophy. Prostatic cysts that are not infected
should shrink and disappear with surgical castration.

Prognosis

Diagnosis

Prognosis from uncomplicated BPH causing clinical
signs is excellent with surgical castration as treatment is
curative, and good with medical therapy depending on

Abdominal ultrasound is the modality of choice
for detection of these cysts (Figure 124.5). They often
­resemble a second urinary bladder.

­Paraprostatic Cysts
Etiology
Paraprostatic cysts are fluid‐filled structures that
develop beside and outside the prostate secondary to the
retention of the embryonic muellerian duct system
(uterus masculinus). These cysts may become quite
large, usually are thin‐walled, and contain anechoic to
debris‐filled fluid.
History and Clinical Signs
These cysts often do not cause appreciable clinical signs,
or they may grow large enough to compress and obstruct
the urethra or the colon.

124 Prostatic Diseases

VetBooks.ir

History and Clinical Signs

Figure 124.5 Paraprostatic cyst as seen on sagittal ultrasound
view. BL, urinary bladder; PPC, paraprostatic cyst. Source: Image
courtesy of Dr Tim Spotswood.

Therapy
Surgery is required to completely or partially remove
these cysts. Concurrent castration is recommended.

Acute prostatitis is usually a very painful condition and
these patients tend to have a greater frequency of systemic signs: depression, dehydration, anorexia, abnormal discharge, painful gait, difficulty urinating, inability
to mount or ejaculate, and trouble defecating. Lower
urinary signs such as stranguria, purulent urethral
­
discharge, hematuria, pollakiuria, and abnormal dis­
charge are often present. Patients may also vocalize when
attempting to urinate or defecate. Stool quality may
change due to compression of the colon. Other common
clinical signs and physical examination findings include
fever, vomiting, diarrhea, dehydration, tenesmus, and
constipation. Abscesses may rupture within the abdominal cavity and cause symptoms of acute abdomen,
­endotoxemia, sepsis, and peritonitis.
Dogs with chronic prostatitis may sometimes have no
evident clinical signs. History may include decreased
mounting behavior, decreased sperm count or quality,
recurrent and chronic urinary tract infections, lethargy,
decreased appetite, intermittent urethral discharge, and
potentially other vague and nonspecific clinical signs.

Prognosis

Diagnosis

Prognosis is good to excellent depending on the ability to
surgically remove the cysts.

Rectal palpation usually reveals either an enlarged and
symmetric prostate or the prostate can be abnormally
shaped, especially when abscesses are present. Acute
prostatitis may be very painful on palpation. Iliac lymph
node enlargement is possible.
With acute bacterial prostatitis, the CBC may be normal or may display a neutrophilic leukocytosis of varying
severity with a left shift. The biochemistry panel
may reveal azotemia of varying degrees which may be
a combination of postrenal (secondary to prostatic
enlargement and urethral obstruction), intrinsic renal
(ascending pyelonephritis) or prerenal (dehydration) factors. Hepatic enzymes, especially alkaline phosphatase
enzyme, may be elevated. Urinalysis collected by cystocentesis may reveal hematuria, proteinuria, and an
active sediment but this is not sensitive or specific for
diagnosing prostatitis. Urine culture is usually positive.
Abdominal radiographs may indicate an enlarged and
irregular prostate, and mineralization is possible.
Peritonitis is sometimes noted caudal to the bladder
due to inflammation and secondary to abscess rupture.
The bladder may also be pushed cranially into the
abdominal cavity. Abdominal ultrasound findings
include an enlarged and sometimes irregular prostate
that is diffusely heterogenous with or without abscesses,
sometimes giving the appearance of being mottled
(Figure 124.6). Contrast urethrocystogram may indicate
prostatic contrast uptake of varying degree.

­Prostatitis and Prostatic Abscesses
Etiology
Bacterial prostatitis is usually the result of an ascending
infection via the urethra and into the communicating
prostatic ducts. The presence of other prostatic conditions such as BPH, prostatic cysts, or prostatic neoplasia
may increase the incidence of prostatitis. Alterations in
urine flow and urinary tract infections also increase the
risk of prostatitis in intact males. Hematogenous infection is also possible but less likely. Prostatitis is reported
in all age groups in intact males and is exceedingly rare in
neutered males.
The most common bacterial organism to cause prostatitis is Escherichia coli. Other common infectious
­etiologies include Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcus
spp., Mycoplasma spp., Pseudomonas spp., and Proteus
spp. Brucellosis is possible secondary to venereal and
hematogenous transmission. Prostatic abscesses can
develop secondary to prostatitis or within prostatic
cysts. Chronic prostatitis is reported to be more ­frequent
than acute prostatitis but with less evident clinical
signs.

1161

VetBooks.ir

1162

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

Cytology is necessary for a diagnosis and for targeted
therapy, but caution must be exercised in obtaining samples (see Table 124.1). Typical cytology findings include
free and phagocytosed bacteria, intact and degenerate
neutrophils, macrophages, necrotic debris, and hyperplastic epithelial cells with mild anisokaryosis.
Therapy
Targeted antibiotic therapy is indicated in both acute and
chronic prostatitis and prostatic abscesses. Antibiotics
must be chosen based on culture and sensitivity results
as well as their ability to penetrate prostatic tissue. The
ideal antibiotic needs to be lipid soluble and have lower
serum protein binding to be able to cross into the ­prostate
(Table 124.2). If higher protein binding is a characteristic
of a particular desired antibiotic, using a higher dosage
range is necessary. While awaiting cytology and culture
results, therapy should be started with enrofloxacin.

Figure 124.6 Prostatic abscess and prostatitis as seen on
ultrasound transverse image plane. Note the mottled appearance
of the prostate surrounding the abscessed region. Source: Image
courtesy of Dr Tim Spotswood.

There are unfortunately very few clinical data or trials in
veterinary medicine looking at the efficacy of specific
antibiotics and their effectiveness in crossing into the
dog prostate and treating prostatitis. In the presence of
sepsis, the antibiotic spectrum should be broadened
(beta‐lactam, third‐generation cephalosporin, aminoglycosides, imipenem). The blood–prostate barrier is compromised in these situations and antibiotics that would
not generally penetrate the prostate will do so.
Ciprofloxacin is not indicated in infectious prostatitis
as not only does it have poor oral bioavailability in dogs
and cats, it also does not penetrate the prostate as well
as enrofloxacin. Antibiotic therapy should be continued
for a minimum of 4–6 weeks, and prostatic culture should
be rechecked 3–5 days after discontinuation of antibiotics. Specific treatment for sepsis and peritonitis is detailed
elsewhere, as is the treatment for acute azotemia.
Surgery may be necessary for prostatic abscesses.
Medical drainage of abscesses by percutaneous ultrasound‐guided aspiration combined with targeted
antibiotic therapy rarely results in the resolution of
­
abscesses. However, ultrasound‐guided drainage may
facilitate stabilization of a patient if surgery is delayed.
Multiple surgical techniques have been described
­including omentalization, marsupialization, placement
of drain tubes, and partial or total prostatectomy, with
omentalization seeming to offer the best results and
fewer complications.
It is always recommended to neuter dogs with prostatitis and prostatic abscesses as this can accelerate recovery and also prevent recurrence. Finasteride therapy may
be used in breeding dogs to shrink the prostate but its
efficacy in prostatitis is unknown.
Prognosis
Prognosis is good to guarded in acute prostatitis without
abscessation or sepsis. Chronic prostatitis may be more

Table 124.2 Antibiotics used for bacterial prostatitis
Antibiotic

Dosage

Route

Notes

Enrofloxacin

10 mg/kg q24h

IV, PO, SC

Risk of permanent cartilage damage in large‐breed dogs <18 months;
usually the first‐line drug of choice

Chloramphenicol

50 mg/kg q6–8h

PO

Dosage listed is at higher end of therapeutic range; monitor CBC for
evidence of bone marrow suppression

Trimethoprim‐
sulfamethoxazole

15 mg/kg q12h

IV, PO, SC

Potential complications include keratoconjunctivits sicca, acute
hypersensitivity reactions, polyarthropathy, blood dyscrasias, vomiting,
anorexia, hepatopathy and icterus; rarely used as first‐line therapy

Clindamycin

11–20 mg/kg q12h

PO, IV, IM, SC

Capsules or divided tablets may cause esophagitis; not usually indicated
for prostatitis unless indicated by culture

Erythromycin

10–25 mg/kg q8–12h

PO

May cause anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea; usually not indicated for
prostatitis unless indicated by culture

CBC, complete blood count; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; PO, by mouth (per os); SC, subcutaneous.

VetBooks.ir

124 Prostatic Diseases

difficult and take longer to treat and there may be a
higher incidence of relapse. The prognosis is guarded to
poor with abscessation even with surgical intervention.

­Squamous Metaplasia of Prostatic
Epithelial Cells
This condition is quite rare and usually develops
­secondary to exogenous estrogen administration (such

as to treat BPH or transdermal patches and creams used
as hormone replacement therapy in women) or to an
estrogen‐secreting tumor such as a Sertoli cell tumor.
Dogs may be asymptomatic or develop clinical signs similar to dogs with prostatitis. Diagnosis is obtained via
biopsies. Treatment involves antibiotic therapy for
potential secondary prostatitis, identifying and treating
the cause of the metaplasia (surgery and potentially
chemotherapy for Sertoli cell tumors, discontinuation of
estrogen compounds). Prognosis is guarded as chronic
prostatitis may develop.

­Further Reading
Bradbury CA, Westropp JL, Pollard RE. Relationship
between prostatomegaly, prostatic mineralization,
and cytologic diagnosis. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2009;
50(2): 167–71.
Foster RA. Common lesions in the male reproductive
tract of cats and dogs. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
2012; 42: 527–45.
Johnston SD, Kustritz MVR, Olson PNS. Disorders of the
canine prostate. In: Canine and Feline Theriogenology.
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders, 2001, pp. 337–55.

Kay ND. Diseases of the prostate gland. In: Birchard SA,
Sherding RJ, eds. Saunders Manual of Small Animal
Practice, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders, 2005,
pp. 949–56.
Kutzler MA. Prostatic disease. In: Monnet E, ed. Small
Animal Soft Tissue Surgery. Ames, IA: Wiley‐Blackwell,
2013, pp. 667–79.
Powe JR, Canfield PJ, Martin PA. Evaluation of the
cytologic diagnosis of canine prostatic disorders.
Vet Clin Pathol 2004; 33(3): 150–4.

1163

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1165

125
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease
Jessica Quimby, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM)
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, Ohio State University Veterinary Medical Center, Columbus, OH, USA

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is defined as the presence of structural or functional abnormalities in one or
both kidneys that has been present for three or more
months. In most cases with renal dysfunction, this is a
progressive disease, and currently no treatment short of
renal transplantation has been shown to reverse or halt
declining renal function for any significant period of
time. Renal transplant and dialysis are less widely available and are expensive therapies. Additionally, not all
CKD patients are acceptable candidates for transplantation or dialysis. Medical management therefore is the
mainstay of treatment and can help patients cope with
metabolic complications of the disease and improve
quality of life.

­Disease Staging
The severity of signs associated with kidney disease varies depending on the degree of kidney dysfunction. In
order to better tailor therapy to the individual patient
and to provide some assessment of prognosis, staging of
disease is recommended. The International Renal
Interest Society (IRIS), a panel of experts in veterinary
nephrology, has developed a staging system for chronic
kidney disease in dogs and cats (www.iris‐kidney.com)
that has been accepted by the American and European
Societies of Veterinary Nephrology and Urology. With
this system, once diagnosed with CKD, animals are
grouped into four stages (IRIS 1–4) based on serum creatinine, as well as substages based on proteinuria and
blood pressure. The recent guidelines also incorporate
SDMA results. Assessment of kidney function is based
on fasted serum creatinine measurements assessed on at
least two occasions in a stable, hydrated patient (Table
125.1). Caution should be exercised in staging elderly

patients in poor body condition as muscle mass contributes
to daily creatinine production; very thin animals may
have lower than expected serum creatinine concentrations. The biomarker SDMA is correlated with glomerular
filtration rate (GFR) and as it is not affected by muscle
mass, has been incorporated into the IRIS guidelines to
help determine staging in patients with muscle loss.
Due to variability in normal ranges for serum creatinine, some patients staged as IRIS 1 or 2 may have serum
creatinine within the reference range. The patient’s overall clinical status should be taken into account and serum
creatinine should not be interpreted without a concurrent
urine specific gravity. For example, creatinine >1.6 mg/
dL in a feline patient with a urine specific gravity <1.035
may be indicative of kidney disease even though it is
within a published reference range.
Substaging is performed to further characterize the
disease based on the measurement of arterial blood
pressure and proteinuria, both of which are a concern as
they potentially hasten disease progression. Classification
of proteinuria is determined by measuring urine
protein:creatinine ratio (UPC) in a culture‐negative sample with an inactive sediment (Table 125.2). Unless the
UPC is markedly elevated or less than 0.2, classification
should ideally be based on multiple UPC determinations
(2–3) over at least a two‐week period.
Blood pressure substage is determined by incorporating both arterial blood pressure measurement and
assessment of the presence of end‐organ damage such as
retinal lesions and neurologic signs (Table 125.3). With
the exception of animals who have a blood pressure
>200 mmHg and/or evidence of end‐organ damage,
blood pressure classification should be determined
based on at least three independent measurements, ideally over several days to weeks. The lowest measurement
is the one utilized.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1166

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

Table 125.1 IRIS chronic kidney disease stages in cats and dogs
Serum creatinine values (mg/dL)
Cat

Dog

Stage 1

<1.6

<1.4

Stage 2

1.6–2.8

1.4–2.0

Stage 3

2.9–5.0

2.1–5.0

Stage 4

>5.0

>5.0

www.iris‐kidney.com

Table 125.2 Classification of proteinuria in cats and dogs
Urine protein:creatinine ratio
Cat

Dog

Nonproteinuric

<0.2

<0.2

Borderline proteinuric

0.2–0.4

0.2–0.5

Proteinuric

>0.4

>0.5

www.iris-kidney.com

­Medical Management of Chronic
Kidney Disease
Medical management of CKD consists of treatments
designed to provide supportive and symptomatic care
for the animal, with the goal of correcting nutritional,
fluid, electrolyte, endocrine, and acid–base imbalances.
These treatments aim to minimize the clinicopathologic
and pathophysiologic effects of kidney dysfunction.
Unfortunately, medical management is not expected to
halt, reverse or cure kidney dysfunction or any associated renal lesions. If any treatable underlying cause of
disease is identified, such as infection or obstruction, it is
imperative that it be addressed. The management guidelines presented in this chapter are intended for animals
with stable chronic disease, not those currently undergoing a uremic crisis.
Nutrition and Dietary Therapy
Several studies have documented the therapeutic value
of specially formulated diets in the management of CKD,
including evidence of decreased incidence of uremic crisis and increased survival and modulation of biomarkers.
It is perhaps a common misconception that the sole purpose of these diets is protein restriction. Other modifications present in these diets are as important, or potentially
even more important than protein restriction. In com-

parison to a maintenance diet, renal diets are typically
formulated to contain modified amounts of high‐quality
protein, increased caloric, soluble fiber and B vitamins,
omega‐3 polyunsaturated fatty acid and antioxidant content, reduced amounts of phosphorus and sodium, and
to have a neutral effect on acid–base balance. In addition,
feline renal diets are supplemented with potassium.
Recently, early‐stage renal diets that are phosphorus
restricted but with less restricted protein content have
also become available for cats.
The greatest clinical challenge with recommending a
renal diet is acceptance by the animal. The failure of the
patient to eat the formulated diet negates the benefit of
dietary management, and therefore a key therapeutic
target for these patients is the maintenance of appetite
and food intake. Poor body condition is associated with
decreased prognosis in several species and it also has a
negative effect on owner perception of quality of life. As
animals with CKD often suffer from poor appetite, this
should be actively addressed in a management plan.
Nonacceptance of renal diets can potentially be overcome by addressing underlying metabolic complications
of CKD as well as gradually introducing the renal diet
over several weeks. Many animals will readily accept and
continue eating a renal diet provided the transition
period is adequately slow. Other tips to encourage
acceptance of renal diet include increasing owner compliance with education regarding the benefits of the diet,
avoiding transitioning to the renal diet during a uremic
crisis event to prevent food aversion, trying different
temperatures, textures and brand formulations of food,
and medically managing nausea and inappetence associated with uremic syndrome.
It is particularly important that the patient eat sufficiently to satisfy caloric requirements. A nutritional
assessment should be performed at each visit including
body weight, body condition score, muscle mass score,
and a thorough nutritional history (www.wsava.org/
nutrition‐toolkit). Insufficient caloric intake could
potentially lead to protein malnutrition as evidenced by
decreased muscle mass, anemia and decreased serum
albumin or total protein concentrations.
If caloric requirements are not being met, yet m
­ etabolic
complications are controlled and medical management
of inappetence is unsuccessful, supplementation with a
diet palatable to the animal or assisted feeding should be
considered. Assisted feeding options include placement
of an esophagostomy or percutaneous gastrostomy tube
for long‐term nutritional management. Tube feeding has
the additional advantage of allowing the owner to deliver
oral water and medications to the patient and can be a
valuable tool for long‐term management of CKD.
Disadvantages of tube feeding include the anesthesia
required for placement and tube site complications.

VetBooks.ir

125 Management of Chronic Kidney Disease

Table 125.3 Classification of blood pressure in cats and dogs
IRIS blood pressure (BP) stage

Systolic BP (mmHg)

Diastolic BP (mmHg)

Risk of target organ damage

Normotensive

<150

<95

Minimal

Borderline hypertensive

150–159

95–99

Mild

Hypertensive

160–179

100119

Moderate

Severely hypertensive

>180

>120

Severe

IRIS, International Renal Interest Society.

Antinausea and Appetite Stimulant Therapy
Patients with CKD can suffer from nausea, vomiting, and
inappetence likely as a result of uremic toxins that are
sensed in the chemoreceptor trigger zone in the brain.
Several potent antiemetic/antinausea therapies are now
available. These include the 5‐HT3 receptor antagonists
ondansetron and dolasetron and the NK1 receptor
antagonist maropitant citrate. These drugs work at the
chemoreceptor trigger zone and vomiting center in the
brain, as well as receptors in gastrointestinal tract, and
can be given orally or as an injection.
Maropitant is commonly used for acute vomiting but a
pharmacokinetic and toxicity study in cats indicated that
longer‐term usage appears safe and it is often used for
long‐term therapy in chronically ill patients. When given
daily for two weeks at a dose of 4 mg/cat, maropitant was
demonstrated to palliate vomiting associated with CKD
in cats with stage II and III CKD. Maropitant citrate is
administered at 1 mg/kg.
Ondansetron has been documented to be twice as
effective as metoclopramide in palliating uremic nausea
and vomiting in human CKD patients. Ondansetron and
dolasetron are frequently used as antiemetics, but recent
studies have called into question their efficacy at currently recommended doses in cats (0.5 mg/kg BID).
Pharmacokinetic studies in cats have demonstrated that
oral bioavailability of ondansetron is poor in this species
(~35%) and the half‐life is very short (approximately one
hour), making it most appropriately a q8h medication.
Subcutaneous ondansetron had a slightly longer half‐life
of three hours. Ondansetron is also not appropriate as a
transdermal medication as a recent paper assessing
transdermal absorption in cats demonstrated no clinically relevant blood levels after administration. The ideal
dosing regimen of ondansetron for dogs is also unknown
and there is some evidence that oral bioavailable in dogs
is extremely poor (<10%). However, a recent study demonstrated that ondansetron had superior antinausea
effects in comparison to maropitant in a cisplatin model.
Dolasetron has traditionally been recommended as a
once‐daily medication at doses of 0.5–1 mg/kg; however,
a recent paper demonstrated that after a 0.8 mg/kg

­subcutaneous dose the drug is not detectable in the
serum at 12 hours and does not palliate xylazine‐induced
emesis.
Although more commonly used as an appetite stimulant,
mirtazapine also demonstrates antiemetic properties,
acting at the 5‐HT3 receptor similar to ondansetron. In
cats, mirtazapine has been shown to significantly reduce
vomiting associated with CKD.
Limiting gastric acidity with the use of H2 blockers like
famotidine or proton pump inhibitors such as omeprazole anecdotally appears to palliate inappetence in some
CKD patients. However, these medications have never
been evaluated in a clinical trial despite famotidine being
one of the most commonly prescribed medications in
CKD cats. Recent studies of the effect of omeprazole on
the gastric pH in normal cats indicate that at 1 mg/kg
twice daily, it is superior to famotidine in its ability to
inhibit acid production, but again no clinical trials have
been performed in CKD cats and CKD cats do not
appear to experience hyperacidity as previously assumed.
Additionally, proton pump inhibitors have recently been
linked to an increased risk of kidney disease in humans.
The applicability of this finding to veterinary patients is
entirely unknown, and a recent retrospective study found
no correlation between acid‐suppressing medications
and increased risk for kidney disease or progression of
disease. Due to lack of evidence for a high incidence of
ulcerative gastritis associated with CKD, sucralfate is
recommended only if gastric ulceration and hemorrhage
are suspected as it is sometimes poorly tolerated and
may lead to further inappetence.
In addition to addressing uremic nausea and vomiting,
appetite stimulants can also be used to encourage food
intake, particularly in late‐stage patients. Cyproheptadine
has been used for some time as an appetite stimulant and
has anecdotal efficacy in many patients, although its efficacy has never been scientifically evaluated. Mirtazapine
has become more commonly used, particularly in cats,
and recent exploration of its pharmacodynamics and
pharmacokinetics has provided information for more
effective use in animals. Pharmacodynamic studies in
cats have illustrated that it can be a potent appetite

1167

VetBooks.ir

1168

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

­stimulant, but higher doses are more commonly associated with side‐effects (hyperexcitability, vocalization,
agitation). Smaller, more frequent doses are recommended: 1.88 mg q48h orally in cats with CKD and
0.6–1 mg/kg once to twice daily in dogs. In dogs, twice‐daily
dosing may be required due to relatively shorter half‐life
than in other species. Mirtazapine is also amenable to
transdermal administration, and has recently become
FDA approved for use in cats (Mirataz®, KindredBio).
Owners should be aware that mirtazapine and cyproheptadine cannot be administered concurrently; cyproheptadine is used as an antidote for serotonin effects of
mirtazapine overdose and thus negates the efficacy of
the latter.
Capromorelin (Entyce®, Aratana Therapeutics), a ghrelin agonist, has recently become FDA approved as an
appetite stimulant for dogs.
Systemic Hypertension
Systemic hypertension appears to be common in dogs
(31–54%) and cats (20–65%) with CKD, but the exact
pathophysiologic relationship is unknown. Systemic
hypertension can have deleterious effects such as retinal
hemorrhage and detachment, neurologic and cardiac
impairment. Therefore, the diagnosis and treatment of
hypertension are important in this patient population.
Once hypertension has been classified (see Table
125.3), the decision to initiate therapy is based on the
degree of hypertension and the animal’s IRIS stage.
Patients with CKD stage 2–4 and blood pressure persistently over 160 mmHg are candidates for treatment.
Antihypertensive therapy should be considered for IRIS
1 patients with arterial blood pressure persistently
greater than 180 mmHg. It is unknown what the optimal
arterial blood pressure is for patients with CKD. A general guideline is to reduce the blood pressure to between
100 and 160 mmHg. Aggressive reduction of blood pressure is only necessary in patients experiencing ocular
and neurologic complications and otherwise it may take
weeks, particularly in dogs, to achieve adequate control.
Treatment strategies for cats and dogs differ slightly
based on the efficacy of currently available antihypertensive
medications for each species. Currently utilized antihypertensive medications in dogs include angiotensin‐converting
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors (enalapril and benazepril), calcium channel blockers (amlodipine) or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB) such as telmisartan. These medications
are thought to be most effective at reducing hypertension in
dogs although most patients require multiple medications
and few studies have been done in this area. ACEI and
ARB are also used for the management of concurrent proteinuria. Typical starting doses of ACEI are 0.25–0.5 mg/kg
every 12–24 hours with increases based on effect on blood

pressure up to 2 mg/kg/day. In dogs, amlodipine doses
range from 0.1 to 0.5 mg/kg/day and are typically combined
with an ACEI. Recommended dose for telmisartan is 1 mg/
kg once daily.
Amlodipine is documented to be an effective treatment for hypertension in the cat and has traditionally
been the drug of choice in this species. ACEI have not
been demonstrated to adequately reduce blood pressure
in cats when used as sole therapy. Amlodipine is prescribed at an initial dose of 0.625 mg/cat <5 kg and
1.25 mg/cat >5 kg. Alternative formulations of the drug
have been explored including transdermal amlodipine
and a chewable form which may provide some degree of
efficacy. Amlodipine has also been documented to
decrease proteinuria in cats. Telmisartan is also an effective antihypertensive medication in cats and has recently
become approved for this indication in cats (United
States) as well as an antiproteinuric (UK and Europe).
For all antihypertensive therapy, blood pressure should
be rechecked within 7–10 days after initiating treatment.
Monitoring renal values and electrolytes is also important; ACEI can decrease GFR and result in increasing
azotemia, in which case therapy should be reassessed.
Hyperkalemia is also a common side‐effect of ACEI and
ARB in dogs and may limit the dose that can be administered. Additional guidelines for the use of ACEI and ARB
can be found in the consensus statement for the standard
treatment of proteinuria.
Proteinuria
Proteinuria is associated with poorer prognosis in several species. The renal tubular epithelial cells are responsible for processing protein and this increases their
metabolic load and oxidative stress. Although reducing
proteinuria has been demonstrated to significantly slow
disease progression in humans, studies in dogs and cats
have documented decreased proteinuria secondary to
ACEI administration, but results so far are only suggestive of long‐term benefit. Nonetheless, it is considered
standard of care that dogs and cats with stage 2, 3 and 4
CKD with UPC greater than 0.5 and 0.4 respectively, and
cats and dogs with stage 1 CKD and UPC greater than
2.0 be treated with antiproteinuric drugs such as ACEI or
ARB. Additionally, systemic hypertension exacerbates
proteinuria and should be addressed as previously
described. Therapeutic renal diets are considered to be
standard of care and have been demonstrated to be helpful in the management of proteinuric CKD and typically
are restricted in phosphorus, contain conservative
amounts of high‐quality protein, adequate nonprotein
calories, as well as omega‐3 fatty acids, antioxidants, and
buffers to help control acidemia. Management of nutrition to meet caloric intake is a key goal.

VetBooks.ir

125 Management of Chronic Kidney Disease

Initial dose of ACEI : evaluate serum creatinine (SCr), potassium and blood pressure (BP) in 1–2 weeks

SCr, K and BP acceptable*
Continue at current dose

SCr, K and BP not acceptable; discontinue ACEI and start
alternate therapy (ARB) and monitor as suggested for ACEI

Evaluate SCr, K, BP and UPC in 2–4 weeks

UPC <0.5 or 50% reduction
and SCr, K and BP acceptable;
continute at current dose.

UPC >0.5 or <50% reduction
and SCr, K and BP acceptable;
increase ACEI dose.

SCr, K and BP not acceptable; return
ACEI to initial dose and start
alternate therapy (ARB) and monitor
as suggested for ACEI

Evaluate SCr, K, BP and UPC in 4–6 weeks

UPC <0.5 or 50% reduction
and SCr, K and BP acceptable;
continute at current dose.

UPC >0.5 or <50% reduction
and SCr, K and BP acceptable;
increase ACEI dose in
increments up to max dose.

SCr, K and BP not acceptable; return
ACEI to previous dose and start
alternate therapy (ARB) and monitor
as suggested for ACEI

Figure 125.1 Flowchart for adjusting ACEI therapy. ACEI, angiotensin‐converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker;
UPC, urine protein:creatinine ratio. Source: Modified from Brown S, Elliott J, Francey T, et al. Consensus recommendations for standard
therapy of glomerular disease in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2013; 27(Suppl 1): S27–43.

Angiotensin‐converting enzyme inhibitor or ARB
therapy is instituted with a therapeutic goal of normalizing (<0.5) or, when impossible, at least reducing the
UPC by 50% (Figure 125.1). Dosing, side‐effects, and
monitoring for ACEI are as described for antihypertensive therapy; starting at the low end of the range and cautiously increasing the dose to maximize effect on
proteinuria while monitoring for adverse effects is recommended (see Figure 125.1). Unacceptable side‐effects
of ACEI or ARB therapy include an increase in serum
creatinine >30% in IRIS 1–2 dogs, >10% in IRIS 3 dogs or
any increase in creatinine in stage 4 dogs; serum potassium >6.0 mmol/L; blood pressure <120 mmHg. Extreme
caution should be used in prescribing ACEI or ARB in
dogs with IRIS stage 4 disease. In these patients, side‐
effects may outweigh benefits at this stage of disease
progression.
Additional guidelines for the use of ACEI and ARB can
be found in the consensus statement for the standard
treatment of proteinuria.
Protein‐losing nephropathies are associated with an
increased risk for thromboembolism and the prevalence

in dogs has been reported to be as high as 25%. Few studies
have assessed the efficacy of antithrombotic therapies
specifically in glomerulonephropathy (GN) patients.
Currently consensus recommendations consist of 1–5 mg/
kg low‐dose aspirin daily for thromboprophylaxis.
Clopidogrel (1.1 mg/kg daily) is likely similarly effective
to low‐dose aspirin. No studies have demonstrated
superior efficacy to justify the higher cost.
Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) are antiinflammatory and the underlying process in CKD is inflammatory in nature; supplementation is thought to be
beneficial. Several studies have demonstrated evidence of benefit in human CKD patients and rodent
models demonstrate decreased oxidative stress,
inflammation, and scarring. Many renal diets are now
supplemented with PUFAs in appropriate ratios. The
need to supplement omega‐3 fatty acids beyond that
present in renal diets is not fully known at this time.
However, supplementation at 0.25–0.5 g of omega‐3
PUFA/kg containing eicosapentaenoic acid and
docosahexaenoic acid has been described as a dose
extrapolated from human literature.

1169

VetBooks.ir

1170

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

Approximate 50% of dogs with protein‐losing nephropathy have immune‐mediated disease. The goals of performing a renal biopsy are to identify subtypes of GN
that involve immune complexes, guide the decision
regarding the necessity of immunosuppressive therapy,
and assess prognosis. Renal biopsy should be avoided in
patients with bleeding disorders, uncontrolled hypertension, chronic end‐stage disease and in very small patients
(cats and dogs <5 kg). It is highly recommended that if
taking the time and trouble to biopsy, samples are sent to
a nephropathologist (International Veterinary Renal
Pathology Service, Ohio State University, https://vet.osu.
edu/vmc/international‐veterinary‐renal‐pathology‐
service‐ivrps). Immune suppression is indicated when
electron‐dense deposits are seen on electron microscopy
or if there is positive immunofluorescent staining. A typical therapeutic regimen is mycophenolate 10 mg/kg BID
and adding prednisolone when rapidly progressing
(1 mg/kg BID). Steroids should not be used as monotherapy and the goal in using them is to taper relatively
quickly. If biopsy is not possible or safe, empiric immunosuppressive therapy can be considered in patients
where standard therapy is not effective, serum creatinine
is >3 mg/dL, and there is rapid progression of disease or
severe hypoalbuminemia. It is generally considered that
if a response to immunosuppressive therapy is not seen
in eight weeks, it is unlikely to occur.
Fluid Therapy
As CKD progresses, GFR decreases and azotemia worsens, yet the patient is not able to compensate by concentrating urine and maintaining hydration. Dehydration is
therefore a common complication of CKD and can lead
to inappetence, lethargy, weakness, constipation, and
increased susceptibility to uremic crisis. Owners should
be aware that concurrent illness, vomiting and diarrhea,
household changes/stress or inadequate water sources
promote dehydration and can have more serious effects
in CKD patients, potentially precipitating a uremic crisis.
Maintaining hydration by administering subcutaneous
balanced electrolyte solutions appears to anecdotally
improve appetite, activity, and quality of life and reduce
constipation in CKD patients, although no clinical trials
have been performed. Subcutaneous fluid administration
is generally feasible in cats and small dogs and can be a
very helpful tool for owners in management of disease,
particularly in stage 3 and 4. With instruction, many owners find the procedure to be feasible, and tolerated by the
patient. Additionally, feeding canned food instead of dry
kibble, or adding water to food is another way to increase
water consumption. Paying special attention to water
sources in the house – fresh, accessible, water fountains
for cats, etc. – is also an important tip for owners.

Anemia
As kidney disease progresses, renal production of
erythropoietin decreases and anemia can result. Other
factors that can contribute to anemia include poor nutrition, blood loss, concurrent infection, and reduced red
blood cell lifespan. Anemia may exacerbate the hypoxic
environment in the kidney by reducing oxygen delivery
to the area, thus potentiating oxidative stress, renal damage, and progression of disease. Anemia has been identified as a negative predictor of survival in CKD.
Therapeutic action should be taken when hematocrit
nears or drops below 20%. Although gastric ulceration is
thought to be relatively uncommon with CKD, chronic
gastrointestinal hemorrhage is suspected when melena,
elevated BUN, iron deficiency or anemia disproportionate to level of azotemia is noted. Empiric treatment with
antacid and sucralfate with an increase in hematocrit
supports the diagnosis.
Hormone replacement therapy is the most effective
treatment for anemia secondary to CKD and can be
addressed with artificial products such as recombinant
human erythropoietin (Epogen®, Amgen) or darbepoetin
alpha (Aranesp®, Amgen). Epogen is given as a SC injection and is effective in treating anemia secondary to
CKD. However, as it is a foreign protein, approximately
one‐third of animals will develop antibodies against both
the foreign erythropoietin and their own, and potentially
become transfusion dependent. For this reason, the
product is not recommended until packed cell volume
(PCV) falls below 20% and owners should be informed of
this risk. Close monitoring of hematocrit is crucial so
that possible antibody formation and subsequent drop
in hematocrit are caught quickly. If therapy is stopped
appropriately, suppressed erythropoiesis may be reversible.
Darbepoetin is a longer‐acting form of erythropoietin
and appears to have less association with anti‐epo antibodies. It is currently the product of choice, but expense
can limit its use for some owners. Therapy with darbepoetin consists of an induction phase and a maintenance
phase. Initially, darbepoetin is administered 0.5–1.0 μg/
kg subcutaneously once weekly. Blood pressure as well as
PCV should be checked weekly during the initiation
period; hypertension associated with too quick an
increase in PCV is the main side‐effect. Other reported
side‐effects include pure red cell aplasia, arthralgia, fever,
seizures, polycythemia, and iron deficiency. Previous
estimates of treatment success have been 60–65% in cats
(multiple concurrent disease) and 85% in dogs. Typical
response time is 2–4 weeks.
Once the hematocrit has reached the lower end of the
normal range, the frequency of administration can be
decreased to every other week to maintain the animal
long term. Stimulating erythropoiesis is associated with

VetBooks.ir

125 Management of Chronic Kidney Disease

a high iron demand and due to the functional iron deficiency associated with CKD, iron supplementation is
recommended when therapy is initiated, as well as every
few months through the course of therapy. Iron injections (iron dextran 50 mg/cat IM, 10–20 mg/kg dogs IM,
typically well tolerated) are considered better that oral
iron supplementation as the latter tends to be bitter and
likely to exacerbate an already poor appetite, as well as
being poorly absorbed from the GI tract. B vitamins are
necessary for red blood cell (RBC) synthesis and the
degree to which they are deficient in CKD patients and
an active contributor to anemia is poorly understood.
Given their benign nature, supplementation is unlikely
to be harmful but no information about efficacy currently exists. However, B vitamins are not considered
effective as sole therapy for anemia.
Hypokalemia
Hypokalemia is a common finding in cats with stage 2
and 3 CKD likely due to a combination of increased urinary loss, inadequate dietary intake, and activation of the
renin‐angiotensin‐aldosterone system. Hypokalemia is
less common in stage 4 cats due to markedly decreased
glomerular filtration, and less common in dogs due to
ACEI therapy. In cats, common presenting signs of profound hypokalemia are hypokalemic myopathy and constipation. Fortunately, profound hypokalemia is less
common since the advent of renal diets supplemented
with potassium. Hypokalemia is associated with development and worsening of CKD in humans and appears
to exacerbate damage to tubular epithelial cells.
Potassium supplementation may be provided orally as
potassium gluconate (1–4 mEq/cat twice daily), or potassium citrate (40–75 mg/kg PO divided twice daily), to
effect. Various forms of potassium supplements are
available including pill, powder, and gel. Potassium citrate has the added advantage of being an alkalinizing
agent, but the degree to which this is effective for treatment of metabolic acidosis has not been evaluated.
Potassium chloride is not recommended as an oral supplement because it is acidifying and unpalatable, but may
be added to subcutaneous fluids at concentration up to
30 mEq/L (higher concentrations can be associated with
irritation).
Serum potassium levels are not representative of systemic tissue potassium levels and animals with low normal serum potassium may be systemically depleted,
which is exacerbated by metabolic acidosis. Some clinicians advocate prophylactic supplementation even when
serum potassium is in the low normal range, with a goal
of maintaining serum potassium levels above 4 mg/dL.
The value of prophylactic potassium supplementation
has not yet been established.

Mineral and Bone Disorder:
Hyperphosphatemia
The disturbances in calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium,
and associated clinical syndromes in CKD are referred
to as CKD‐mineral and bone disorder (CKD‐MBD).
Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism is a major component in this process involving excess phosphorus,
parathyroid hormone (PTH), and fibroblast growth
factor (FGF)23. The kidneys are the main route of
phosphorus excretion and as kidney function declines,
hyperphosphatemia develops. Hyperphosphatemia is
detrimental because it contributes to renal secondary
hyperparathyroidism, ­
tissue mineralization, and progression of CKD. Thus, controlling phosphorus intake
through diet and phosphate binders is an important part
of CKD management. Feeding a phosphorus‐restricted
diet is the first recommended step for managing CKD‐
MBD and studies have demonstrated efficacy in decreasing serum concentrations of phosphorus, PTH, and
FGF23 as well as improved outcome. Evidence suggests
that feeding a phosphorus‐restricted diet even if serum
phosphorus is normal is potentially beneficial. If a renal
diet is initiated and phosphorus is still elevated after 4–6
weeks, then a phosphate binder is recommended with the
goal of keeping serum phosphorus in the low normal
range if possible (Table 125.4). These medications bind
the phosphorus in the food, making it less bioavailable,
so it is critical that the medication is given with each
meal. Several different phosphate binders are available,
including aluminum hydroxide, calcium carbonate, and
lanthanum carbonate, but the main problem with administration is palatability.
Therapy is initiated with a starting dose of 30–100 mg/
kg/day for aluminum hydroxide, 150 mg/kg/day for
calcium carbonate, and 30 mg/kg/day for lanthanum
­
­carbonate. Doses are to effect, and generally therapy
begins at the lower end of the dose range and is increased
every 4–6 weeks until serum phosphorus concentrations
are within the desired range. Use of calcium‐containing
phosphate binders is potentially associated with the
development of hypercalcemia, particularly if calcitriol is
also being administered. Serum ionized calcium should
be monitored during use.
Table 125.4 Recommended serum phosphorus concentrations at
each IRIS stage
Stage

Target serum phosphorus concentration

2

3.5–4.5 mg/dL

3

3.5–5.0 mg/dL

4

3.5–6.0 mg/dL

1171

VetBooks.ir

1172

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

Calcitriol
Calcitriol, the active form of vitamin D, is produced in
the kidney. Production is decreased in CKD and hyperphosphatemia further inhibits its synthesis. Calcitriol is
an important inhibitor of parathyroid hormone and low
levels lead to renal secondary hyperparathyroidism
which has multiple deleterious consequences. In early
CKD, controlling phosphorus levels may be sufficient to
maintain levels. As kidney disease progresses, supplementation of calcitriol may be necessary. In dogs and
people, supplementation of calcitriol has been shown to
be beneficial, resulting in slower progression of disease;
however, a preliminary study performed in cats was not
supportive of supplementation. Further evaluation of
calcitriol therapy, or other types of vitamin D analogs is
necessary to determine efficacy.
When prescribed, calcitriol therapy is initiated at a dosage of 2.0–2.5 ng/kg daily and should not exceed 5 ng/kg/
day. Calcitriol should be given on an empty stomach as
administration with food increases calcium absorption
and the risk of hypercalcemia. Cost may be a concern for
many owners as the drug and required monitoring are
costly; careful monitoring of ionized calcium, phosphorus, and PTH levels is required as hypercalcemia can
result from oversupplementation. If hypercalcemia
results, the daily dose can be doubled and given every
other day to decrease intestinal absorption of calcium.
Alkalinization Therapy
Metabolic acidosis is common in animals with overt
signs of uremia and may promote progression of disease.
In humans with CKD, bicarbonate therapy has been
demonstrated to slow progression and improve nutritional status. Blood gas analysis should be used to
determine acid–base status and whether treatment is
warranted. Therapy is initiated when blood pH and
bicarbonate concentration drop below the normal range.
Changing to a renal diet may improve acid–base balance
as these diets are pH neutral. Potassium citrate administration has the advantage of serving both as an alkalizing
agent and a potassium supplement; typical doses are
40–60 mg/kg two to three times daily, but degree of efficacy has not been demonstrated.
Antioxidant Therapy
The kidney is the site of substantial aerobic metabolism that
results in the production of reactive oxygen species.
Additionally, several processes in the diseased kidney potentially result in increased oxidative stress, including hypoxia,
anemia, proteinuria, and inflammation. Oxidative stress has
been documented in humans with CKD and potentially

contributes to the progression of disease. Oxidative stress
and decreased antioxidant capacity have been demonstrated
in cats with CKD, and vitamins E, C, and B‐carotene have
been shown to decrease oxidative stress in CKD cats. Animals
with CKD may benefit from antioxidant therapy, but randomized clinical trials are needed to determine the effect on
progression and survival.
Fatty Acid Therapy
Omega‐3 fatty acids are antiinflammatory and the
underlying process in CKD is inflammatory in nature, so
supplementation is thought to be beneficial. Several
studies have demonstrated evidence of benefit in human
CKD patients and rodent models demonstrate decreased
oxidative stress, inflammation, and scarring. Many renal
diets are now supplemented with fatty acids.
Enteric Dialysis and the Microbiome
Alterations in the gut microbiome and increased production of uremic toxins have been associated with CKD
in several species, including cats. Enteric dialysis refers
to the oral administration of prebiotic‐probiotic bacteria
which metabolize urea, creatinine, indoles, and phenols
in the gut, preventing absorption and therefore decreasing azotemia (Azodyl®). Enteric dialysis has some demonstrated efficacy in humans and rat models and it is a
popular supplemental therapy in feline CKD. A recent
study demonstrated that sprinkling the pill in the food,
contrary to manufacturer’s instructions, negated any
potential benefit. Controlled clinical studies are still
needed to determine the effect of enteric dialysis on
serum creatinine or uremic toxins in dogs and cats.

­Monitoring CKD Patients
Chronic kidney disease is progressive and as such,
patients’ metabolic state, clinical signs, and supportive
care needs change over time. Factors such as hypertension and proteinuria may not initially be present at diagnosis, but can develop later in the course of the disease.
Patients in stage 1 and 2 CKD are typically monitored
every 4–6 months once stable kidney function has been
established. Patients in stage 3 and 4 require more frequent monitoring, especially if metabolic complications
are present, and should be assessed minimally every 3–4
months. A typical visit should include clinical history,
medication review, physical examination, nutritional
assessment, and labwork consisting of CBC, serum biochemistry, urinalysis, and blood pressure. Urine cultures
and UPC are performed at regular intervals as well.
Establishing a relationship and providing client education

VetBooks.ir

125 Management of Chronic Kidney Disease

regarding the importance of monitoring and follow‐up
will improve compliance.

­Prognosis
Predicting prognosis in CKD can be somewhat challenging as the progression of disease varies substantially
between individuals. Poor body condition, proteinuria,
hypertension, hyperphosphatemia, and anemia have all

been associated with a poorer prognosis and should be
targets for disease management to maximize survival.
Typically, CKD progresses much more slowly in cats
than in dogs. Dogs with stage 3 and 4 CKD quickly
­progress and within months to a year or two may be
euthanized due to the disease. Cats with early CKD can
have stable disease, typically for years, and may die of
another disease process. Cats with stage 3 and 4 typically
­progress more slowly than dogs at a similar disease stage
and may still live months to years.

­Further Reading
Brown S, Elliott J, Francey T, et al. Consensus
recommendations for standard therapy of glomerular
disease in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2013; 27(Suppl 1):
S27–43.
Cianciolo RE, Brown CA, Mohr FC, et al. Pathologic
evaluation of canine renal biopsies: methods for
identifying features that differentiate immune‐mediated
glomerulonephritides from other categories of
glomerular diseases. J Vet Intern Med 2013; 27(Suppl 1):
S10–18.

Foster JD. Update on mineral and bone disorders in
chronic kidney disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2016; 46: 1131–49.
Quimby JM, Lunn KF. Mirtazapine as an appetite
stimulant and anti‐emetic in cats with chronic kidney
disease: a masked placebo‐controlled crossover clinical
trial. Vet J 2013; 197: 651–5.
Sparkes AH, Caney SM, Chalhoub S, et al. ISFM consensus
guidelines on the diagnosis and management of feline
chronic kidney disease. J Feline Med Surg 2016; 18: 219–39.

1173

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1175

126
The Role of Dialysis
Adam E. Eatroff, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)
ACCESS Specialty Animal Hospitals, Los Angeles, CA, USA

Peritoneal dialysis, intermittent hemodialysis, and
­continuous renal replacement therapy are being used in
companion animal medicine with increasing frequency
for the treatment of both acute kidney injury and chronic
kidney disease. Peritoneal dialysis, intermittent hemodialysis and hemofiltration, and continuous renal replacement therapy (the three modalities are hereafter referred
to as “dialysis,” unless they are discussed as separate
­entities) are employed with the goals of removing accumulated uremic toxins and fluid and reestablishing physiologic acid–base and electrolyte balance when the kidneys
are damaged to an extent that renders them incapable of
performing these duties. The goal of this chapter is to
introduce the reader to the indications, treatment goals,
complications, and prognostic considerations relevant to
dialysis. A discussion of the technical aspects of each
therapeutic modality is beyond the scope of this chapter,
but excellent resources exist for the ­interested reader.

­Dialysis Modalities
Renal replacement therapy is a term used to describe
various treatment modalities designed to perform the
excretory, regulatory, and, in some cases, synthetic
responsibilities of the kidney. Renal replacement therapies can be classified as intracorporeal (e.g., renal transplantation, peritoneal dialysis) and extracorporeal (e.g.,
intermittent hemodialysis and hemofiltration, continuous renal replacement therapy). Renal transplantation
relies on the provision of a donor kidney graft intended
to perform the function of the native kidneys, and is
reserved for cases of end‐stage kidney disease. This
modality is not discussed further here.
The remaining modalities are based on the principles of
diffusion, convection, and adsorption for uremic solute

clearance and restoration of acid–base and ­electrolyte
balance. Diffusion occurs when uremic solutes redistribute in solution from areas of higher concentration (blood)
to lower concentration (dialysate). The use of a semipermeable membrane to separate the dialysate from the
blood allows for the restriction of movement of larger
substances (protein and cellular components), while
smaller substances (uremic toxins) are able to redistribute
freely through the pores of the membrane. Convection
utilizes the application of a hydrostatic or osmotic force to
blood to promote fluid (plasma water) movement across a
membrane. Any substances dissolved in the plasma water
that are small enough to pass through the pores of the
membrane are removed. When the removal of fluid,
rather than solute, is the primary indication for convective
clearance, this modality is referred to as ultrafiltration.
Adsorption, which quantitatively contributes the least to
uremic solute removal, occurs when s­ ubstances adhere to
the membrane due to physiochemical interactions.
Peritoneal dialysis is performed by infusion of a solution (dialysate) into the peritoneal cavity. The peritoneal
membrane serves as a membrane across which uremic
solutes diffuse from the blood into the dialysate; solutes
(e.g., bicarbonate) of which the patient is deficient can
be administered via diffusion from the dialysate across
the peritoneal membrane into the patient’s blood.
Convective clearance of uremic solutes and excess fluid
can be achieved by use of hypertonic dialysate, which
exerts an osmotic force, drawing plasma water across
the p
­ eritoneal membrane into the dialysate. Dialysate is
intermittently infused and removed from the peritoneal
cavity in cycles during peritoneal dialysis. Intermittent
hemodialysis and continuous renal replacement rely on
the movement of blood through fibers composed of a
semipermeable membrane housed in a cartridge (dialyzer for intermittent hemodialysis; filter for continuous

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1176

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

renal replacement therapy). The fibers are bathed in
dialysate, thus providing an arrangement analogous to
peritoneal dialysis, with three major exceptions: solute
and fluid exchange occur outside the body, the membrane across which exchange takes place is not native to
the patient, and blood and dialysate are typically moved
in countercurrent directions (as opposed to dialysate
remaining stagnant in the peritoneal cavity) to maximize
the concentration gradient for diffusion. For intermittent
hemodialysis and continuous renal replacement therapy,
convective clearance is achieved by application of negative hydrostatic pressure, which draws plasma water
across the dialyzer or filter membrane.

­Dialysis for Acute Kidney Injury
In companion animal medicine, dialysis is most frequently employed to treat acute kidney injury of various
etiologies, including leptospirosis (dogs), ureteral
obstructions (cats), and nephrotoxicity (dogs and cats).
However, in a recent publication, the etiology was undetermined in 43 of 93 (46%) dogs treated with intermittent
hemodialysis for acute kidney injury. While the high proportion of undiagnosed cases was likely due, in part, to
an inability to obtain a serologic diagnosis of leptospirosis or confirm the presence of the organism in tissue or
fluid, this statistic underscores the degree of prognostic
uncertainty that is frequently present when dialysis is
initiated in cases of acute kidney injury. The same study
reported ureteral obstructions as the most common
underlying etiology in cats undergoing intermittent

hemodialysis. Figure 126.1 demonstrates the use of intermittent hemodialysis for the treatment of a cat with
bilateral ureteral obstruction, and Figure 126.2 demonstrates the use of continuous renal replacement therapy
for the treatment of leptospirosis.
Regardless of the underlying cause of acute kidney
injury, the decision to implement dialysis is made based
on a multitude of factors, all of which are discussed below.
Azotemia/Uremia
Historically, severe uremia (e.g., blood urea nitrogen and
creatinine concentrations of ≥100 mg/dL and ≥10 mg/dL,
respectively) was considered a major indication for dialysis. However, recent trends favor initiation of dialysis at
less severe degrees of azotemia. The reasons for the lessening of this threshold are twofold. First, as the veterinary community gains experience and proficiency with
dialytic techniques, the safety and feasibility of this treatment have improved significantly. Consequently, the
value in preventing severe complications (e.g., gastrointestinal, neurologic, pulmonary) of uremia has become
evident, and favorable outcomes have become more
likely when dialysis is initiated in efforts to prevent these
complications, rather than reverse them. The window
for prevention of severe uremia usually is present at less
severe degrees of azotemia than the thresholds reported
above. Therefore, the degree of azotemia should be
assessed every 24–48 hours, so that dialysis can be initiated when consecutive days of worsening renal function
are documented, despite appropriate conventional medical and/or surgical therapy. Second, analogous to the
Figure 126.1 This cat had hyperkalemic
acute kidney injury secondary to bilateral
ureteral obstruction. Prior to surgical
intervention, the patient was given three
intermittent hemodialysis treatments
which resulted in resolution of
hyperkalemia and azotemia.

VetBooks.ir

126 The Role of Dialysis

Figure 126.2 This dog was diagnosed
with leptospirosis and was initially treated
with conservative medical management.
Worsening azotemia and volume
overload, however, prompted initiation of
continuous renal replacement therapy.

decision to administer a packed red blood cell ­transfusion
(i.e. the “transfusion trigger”), the decision to implement
dialysis is based on a variety of factors in addition to the
degree of azotemia (the correlate of azotemia, in the
transfusion example, would be the hematocrit). These
factors include co‐morbid conditions, such as cardiovascular disease, pulmonary disease, or a low seizure threshold, which may be exacerbated with less severe degrees
of renal dysfunction.

­Fluid Overload/Oliguria/Anuria
Parenteral fluid administration is considered a cornerstone of treatment for acute kidney injury and a variety of
other kidney diseases. However, misconceptions regarding the potential benefits and adverse effects of aggressive fluid administration are widespread. In cases of
severe renal dysfunction, aggressive fluid therapy with
the goal of achieving a positive fluid balance has not been
shown to improve renal clearance of uremic solutes.
While the serum or plasma creatinine concentration may
improve with achievement of a positive fluid balance, this
improvement is more likely related to accumulation of
fluid in the extracellular compartment, which results in
an increase in the volume of distribution of creatinine
and a dilutional effect on the serum or plasma creatinine
concentration. In human patients with acute kidney
injury (AKI), a decrease in serum or plasma ­creatinine
concentration has been shown to be directly proportional
to the degree of fluid accumulation. Fur­thermore, fluid
overload has been associated with negative outcomes,

including increased mortality and decreased renal recovery. Additional data suggesting the association between
fluid overload and outcome exists in a canine intensive
care unit (renal and nonrenal cases) are emerging. While
fluid overload can occur in a patient with normal urine
production or polyuria, this complication is most frequently encountered in oliguric or anuric patients. Even
restriction of all parenteral fluid therapy cannot prevent
fluid overload in anuric patients, due to the obligate fluid
load administered with medications and nutrition.
Once fluid overload occurs and manifestations, such
as pulmonary, gastrointestinal, and neurologic complications, are recognized, restoration of normal fluid balance
can be difficult to achieve. Diuretic therapy (e.g., loop or
osmotic diuretics) is frequently ineffective at promoting
fluid excretion in severely compromised kidneys, and
some diuretics (e.g., mannitol) may even be contraindicated due to the obligatory solute load that accompanies
administration. Therefore, dialysis (ultrafiltration) may
be the only effective means of removing excess fluid.
Hyperkalemia
Hyperkalemia is frequently the most immediate life‐
threatening complication of severe acute kidney injury.
Arrhythmias that negatively affect cardiac output or
result in death can occur when the serum or plasma
potassium increases above 6 mmol/L. The likelihood of a
clinically significant arrhythmia is increased when acidemia, uremia, or fluid overload is severe. While there
are several pharmacologic approaches to the treatment
of hyperkalemia in AKI (e.g., intravenous dextrose ±

1177

VetBooks.ir

1178

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

­regular insulin and intravenous calcium gluconate, β2
agonists), the effects of these treatments are typically
modest and transient when renal function is severely
compromised. In these cases, rapid restoration of renal
function (e.g., surgical removal of ureteral obstructions)
or provision of dialysis are frequently necessary to
­normalize serum or plasma potassium concentration.
It should be noted, however, that restoration of renal
function is superior to intermittent forms of dialysis in
restoring whole‐body potassium balance, due to the
­predominantly intracellular distribution and slow redistribution of potassium when it is removed from the
extracellular space (as is the case in dialysis).
Severe Acidemia
In humans, provision of supplemental sodium bicarbonate in solution has not been proven to be of benefit in
cases of severe acidemia accompanying acute kidney
injury. Furthermore, in cases of oliguria or anuria, the
fluid volume administered once sodium bicarbonate has
been diluted to a physiologically tolerable osmolality
may result in complications associated with fluid overload. Bicarbonate, however, can be administered in therapeutic concentrations as an alkali buffer to patients
without an obligatory fluid load when the bicarbonate is
a component of the dialysate. During dialysis, bicarbonate diffuses from a medium in which it has a high concentration (the dialysate) to a fluid with a lower
concentration (the patient’s plasma water), resulting in
administration of sodium and bicarbonate ions without
fluid. The provision of alkali without a concomitant fluid
load can safely restore the extracellular pH to within the
normal range, allowing for normal function of metabolic
machinery in various tissues.
While these four factors are commonly encountered in
cases of AKI, the decision to employ dialysis does not
only depend on each factor’s presence but its degree of
severity. In human medicine, the optimal timing of initiation of dialysis for acute kidney injury has been vigorously
debated, and no consensus has been reached regarding
the benefit of early versus late initiation of therapy. The
data presented in the human literature likely cannot be
extrapolated to veterinary patients because the degree of
renal dysfunction that falls into the “late” category (typically defined as serum creatinine concentrations in the
range of 3.5–5 mg/dL and urea concentrations in the
range of 60–100 mg/dL) would be considered “early” or
“mild to moderate” dysfunction by most veterinarians. It
is the author’s impression that in veterinary cases of AKI
for which dialysis is initiated early, when the serum creatinine concentration is in the mild to moderate range,
outcomes are much improved compared to when dialysis

is initiated later (serum ­creatinine concentration >10 mg/
dL). Earlier initiation of dialysis allows for the prevention
of the sequelae of fluid overload, hyperkalemia, and
severe acidemia. Preventing these complications provides
the patient with optimal metabolic stability to facilitate
renal recovery and reduces the costs associated with
measures required to address complications such as pulmonary edema and cardiac arrhythmias. Initiation of
dialysis prior to decompensation of the patient may even
allow for a rapid transition to outpatient dialysis treatments, which can reduce client costs even further and
extend the client’s available financial resources.

­Dialysis for Chronic Kidney Disease
Although chronic kidney disease is an infrequent indication for dialysis, compared with acute kidney injury, dogs
and (less frequently) cats have been treated successfully
with chronic intermittent hemodialysis for prolonged
periods of time, ranging from a few months to over a
year. For patients with end‐stage chronic kidney disease,
dialysis may be thought of as analogous to palliative
chemotherapy or radiation therapy for patients with
oncologic diseases. The goals of treatment are maintenance of an acceptable quality of life, rather than the
metrics of tumor response in the case of cancer treatment or precise regulation of uremic, acid–base, electrolyte, and fluid balance in the case of chronic dialysis.
Patients that receive the greatest benefit from chronic
hemodialysis are typically those with International Renal
Interest Society (IRIS) stage 4 chronic kidney disease
(CKD) that are free of co‐morbidities (e.g., significant
cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, neurologic, or orthopedic disease). Dogs that weigh greater than 5 kg typically
tolerate chronic treatment better than smaller dogs or
cats. The reason for smaller animals’ inability to tolerate
chronic hemodialysis as well as larger patients has not
been determined. However, the author speculates that
this difference may be due two possible factors: (1) the
large volume of blood, relative to the body mass, that
must be outside the patient’s systemic circulation at any
given time to fill the dialysis circuit, and (2) the repeated
loss of blood endured by the patient, caused by residual
blood trapped in the dialysis circuit that cannot be
returned at the end of each treatment. Despite treatment
with erythropoiesis‐stimulating agents, smaller patients
are reliant upon multiple red blood cell transfusions that
must be administered before, during, or after some or all
dialysis treatments. The repeated administration of red
blood cell transfusion in such a short period of time (the
first 2–3 weeks of treatment) can lead to an increasing
probability of clinically devastating transfusion reactions
during the subsequent weeks/months of treatment. An

VetBooks.ir

126 The Role of Dialysis

additional limitation of chronic hemodialysis is the
financial and logistic responsibility of the owner. Not
only can chronic hemodialysis be cost prohibitive for
most owners, but the practical considerations may be
overwhelming. Patients treated with chronic hemodialysis typically require treatments, lasting as long as six
hours, three times per week. If a scheduling conflict prevents as few as one treatment from being performed, the
patient may have a high probability of suffering from
severe uremic complications (e.g., nausea), fluid overload, or hyperkalemia. Despite these limitations, a properly selected patient and its owner can enjoy an excellent
quality of life for several months to years when treated
with chronic hemodialysis.

­Alternative Indications for Dialysis:
Acute Intoxications and Therapeutic
Plasma Exchange
An additional, often overlooked indication for dialysis is
decontamination following acute toxin exposure. There
are a variety of intoxications that can be treated effectively with dialysis. However, treatment success is highly
dependent on the pharmacokinetic properties of the
toxin and timing of treatment in relation to ingestion/
exposure. Small (<500 daltons), freely circulating toxins
are efficiently removed from the blood compartment
with conventional hemodialysis, which utilizes diffusion
as the predominant clearance mechanism. Toxins with
small volumes of distribution are typically retained in the
vascular or extracellular compartment, and are more
efficiently accessed for clearance. However, retention of
toxins within the vascular compartment is typically a
result of a high degree of protein‐binding.
Because dialysis employs membrane‐based separation
techniques that, for most dialyzers and filters, exclude
the movement of proteins across the membrane, alternative techniques must be employed for toxins that are
highly protein bound. Charcoal hemoperfusion and
therapeutic plasma exchange are alternatives to conventional dialysis modalities, and can be employed to circumvent the limitations associated with dialytic removal
of protein‐bound toxins. Charcoal hemoperfusion
employs a large cartridge that, rather than housing membrane‐bound fibers bathed in a dialysate solution, contains activated charcoal around which blood percolates
as it is moved through the dialysis circuit. Binding interactions between toxins and the activated charcoal are
stronger than between the toxins and plasma proteins,
resulting in the transfer of the toxin from the plasma protein to the activated charcoal (adsorption). The large volume of blood that is required to fill the commercially

available charcoal columns, along with hematologic
changes associated with interactions of cellular blood
components with the charcoal, are sources of possible
adverse effects of this treatment (e.g., hypotension and
thrombocytopenia, respectively). There are multiple
hemoperfusion columns in the development of veterinary patients that utilize a more biocompatible substrate
for adsorption of exogenous toxins. These columns are
also of smaller volume than the previous charcoal
­cartridges, making them an attractive alternative to the
existing charcoal cartridges. Therefore, both the potential harm posed to the patient by the toxin to which it has
been exposed and the possible adverse effects of charcoal
hemoperfusion must be considered if this ­treatment is
to be employed.
Therapeutic plasma exchange may be considered in
lieu of charcoal hemoperfusion due to the smaller dialysis circuit size required and the avoidance of exposure of
cellular blood components to a substance as reactive as
charcoal. Therapeutic plasma exchange employs the
same equipment and convective clearance principles
described above to remove an offending substance from
the blood. However, it differs from conventional dialysis
in that semipermeable membranes have pores that are
large enough to allow passage of plasma proteins.
Therefore, therapeutic plasma exchange allows for
removal of a protein‐bound toxin, along with its carrier
protein. Disadvantages of this technique include the
requirement for replacement of the removed plasma
with a fluid that has a similar oncotic pressure to the
removed plasma and, if the protein composition of the
replacement fluid differs significantly from the removed
plasma, the potential for coagulopathy associated with
clotting factor depletion.
With regard to the financial considerations of these
two treatments, the cost is comparable. Charcoal hemoperfusion and therapeutic plasma exchange have been
used most commonly by the author for blood purification following ingestion of massive quantities of various
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. The reader is
referred elsewhere for an extensive listing of intoxications that can be treated with dialysis.
In addition to blood purification for the treatment of
acute intoxication, therapeutic plasma exchange may
also be of benefit for a variety of immune‐mediated
­diseases. Due to the large pore size of the membranes
used, blood components as large as immunoglobulins
and immune complexes are easily cleared with convection using these membranes. Historically, therapeutic
plasma exchange was performed with dedicated equipment that utilized a centrifugal technique for blood
­component separation. Availability of this equipment is
still limited in veterinary medicine. However, the development of dialysis equipment with a wide selection of

1179

VetBooks.ir

1180

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

­interchangeable filters and software has provided the
capability to perform this procedure with devices primarily designed for renal replacement therapy. In the
past several years, reports of therapeutic plasma
exchange performed for the treatment of diseases such
as myasthenia gravis and immune‐mediated hemolytic
anemia have appeared in the veterinary literature, heralding a new era in the evaluation of this modality for the
treatment of immune‐mediated diseases.

­Availability of Dialysis and Prognosis
for Dialysis Patients
The veterinary community has witnessed exponential
growth in the number of facilities offering dialysis for
small animal patients. Peritoneal dialysis requires equipment that is readily available, and this modality is performed in many emergency and specialty hospitals that
offer 24‐hour care. Effective implementation of intermittent hemodialysis and continuous renal replacement
therapy is limited to hospitals that not only have the
proper equipment but also employ properly trained individuals. Nonetheless, due to the low cost and ease of
acquisition of the necessary equipment, many veterinary
facilities now offer intermittent hemodialysis and continuous renal replacement therapy.
Despite the paucity of literature available describing
outcome, it appears that the prognosis for veterinary
patients treated with dialysis is variable, and dependent
on the underlying disease etiology, severity of illness, and
co‐morbid conditions. In cases of acute kidney injury of
any etiology, the survival to hospital discharge for both

dogs and cats is approximately 50% with the use of intermittent hemodialysis. When considering all possible
­etiologies, choice of modality does not appear to dramatically affect survival rate. Certain etiologies of acute kidney
injury treated with dialysis, such as leptospirosis in dogs
and ureteral obstructions in cats, have higher survival
rates, reaching 80–90%. In contrast, the prognosis for
acute kidney injury secondary to ethylene glycol intoxication is poor, with only 20% of dialysis patients regaining
sufficient renal function to allow discontinuation of
dialysis.
While the current overall success rate for treatment
of acute kidney injury with dialysis appears disappointing, closer evaluation of the situation provides cause for
optimism. The survival rates achieved in veterinary
medicine are similar to those achieved in human medicine. This accomplishment is likely due, in large part, to
the etiologic differences between human and veterinary
acute kidney injury. Human acute kidney injury most
commonly arises as a complication of disorders (e.g.,
sepsis, advanced cardiac disease) that alone carry a
poor prognosis. Therefore, when acute kidney injury
does occur, the likelihood of a poor outcome is multiplied. In veterinary medicine, however, many dialysis
candidates presented for acute kidney injury secondary
to leptospirosis or select intoxications have no preexisting co‐morbid conditions that may affect prognosis.
Therefore, if the potential benefit of dialysis is recognized early, and these patients are treated with dialysis
prior to the onset of severe complications, there is the
potential for the veterinary community to significantly
improve the current success rate for treatment of acute
kidney injury.

­Further Reading
Bouchard J, Soroko SB, Chertow GM, et al. Fluid
accumulation, survival and recovery of kidney function
in critically ill patients with acute kidney injury. Kidney
Int 2009; 76:422–7.
Cooper RL, Labato MA. Peritoneal dialysis in cats with
acute kidney injury: 22 cases (2001–2006). J Vet Intern
Med 2011; 25: 14–19.
Diehl SH, Seshadri R. Use of continuous renal replacement
therapy for treatment of dogs and cats with acute or

acute‐on‐chronic renal failure: 33 cases (2002–2006). J
Vet Emerg Crit Care 2008; 18: 13.
Eatroff AE, Langston CE, Chalhoub S, et al.Long‐term
outcome of cats and dogs with acute kidney injury
treated with intermittent hemodialysis: 135 cases
(1997–2010). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 241: 1471–8.
Langston CE. Hemodialysis In: Bartges J, Polzin DJ, eds.
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Chichester,
UK: Wiley‐Blackwell, 2011, pp. 255–85.

VetBooks.ir

1181

127
Micturition and Associated Disorders
Julie K. Byron, DVM, MS, DACVIM (SAIM)
College of Veterinary Medicine, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA

­Physiology of Micturition
The primary purpose of the lower urinary tract is to store
urine and facilitate its elimination at an appropriate time.
The bladder is in storage phase 99% of the time and in
emptying phase only 1% of the time. Coordination of
both storage or filling and emptying requires a complex
interaction between the somatic and autonomic nervous
systems, as well as normal function of the tissues involved.
The three divisions of the peripheral nervous system
innervate the urethra. The pudendal nerve carries
somatic signals to the striated muscle that makes up the
outer layer of the urethral muscles. The pelvic nerve,
which is parasympathetic, and the hypogastric nerve,
which is sympathetic, innervate the two smooth muscle
layers that surround the urethra. Both the somatic and
parasympathetic innervation arise from the sacral spinal
cord segments, while the sympathetic innervation arises
from the lumbar spinal cord. Local reflex arcs exist as
well as central controls. Signals are processed in the pon­
tine micturition center of the brainstem and the cerebral
cortex to sense bladder distension and determine con­
scious control of voiding (Figure 127.1). The primary spi­
nal segments involved in micturition are L1–L2, S1–S2
(storage phase), and S1–S3 (emptying phase).
During the normal storage phase, stretch receptors in
the bladder wall send afferent signals along the pelvic
nerve, which activate a reflex arc through the hypogas­
tric nerve to the urethra. Norepinephrine (NE) is released
by postganglionic neurons to activate beta‐adrenergic
receptors in the bladder wall, allowing for relaxation and
continued filling. NE also stimulates alpha‐1‐adrenergic
receptors in the urethra and causes contraction of the
smooth muscle surrounding the urethra, thus preventing
urine leakage.
An additional urethral reflex, called the guarding reflex
in humans, is the somatic‐mediated contraction of the

striated muscle surrounding the urethra in response to a
sudden increase in abdominal pressure, such as during a
cough or sneeze. Afferent signals travel up the pelvic
nerve and initiate efferent signals down the pudendal
nerve, releasing acetylcholine (ACh) and activating nico­
tinic cholinergic receptors, causing contraction of the
striated muscle.
In addition to normal neurologic mechanisms, several
other factors are important for maintenance of urinary
continence. The integrity of the smooth muscle of the ure­
thra, normal urethral mucosa which creates a watertight
seal, associated vasculature, and the support of connective
tissues are also key. In females, estrogen appears to have a
significant impact on these tissues. Its withdrawal after
neutering appears to play a role in urethral sphincter
mechanism incompetence seen in neutered female dogs.
During initiation of voiding, stretch receptors send
afferent signals along the pelvic nerve to the pontine
micturition center. Signals from the cerebral cortex and
the hypothalamus are processed to determine if the situ­
ation is appropriate for initiation of micturition. If so,
signals are sent down the pelvic nerve, leading to ACh
release at the postganglionic parasympathetic neurons.
ACh binds to receptors and stimulates bladder smooth
muscle contraction. At the same time, inhibitory signals
are sent to the hypogastric nerve and the urethra relaxes,
allowing normal emptying.
Micturition disorders can be divided into those
­primarily related to storage and those related to e­ mptying
of urine.

­Disorders of Storage
Storage disorders primarily result in the leakage of urine
without intent by the animal. These may result from an
anatomic or developmental abnormality or acquired

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1182

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

(a)
Storage Phase

S1–3

L1–4
Voluntary
control

Sympathetic
Pontine
micturition
center

Parasympathetic

Somatic
Pudendal
nerve

Pelvic nerve
and ganglia

Caudal
mesenteric
ganglia

ACh(+)

ACh(+)

Smooth
muscle

Hypogastric nerve

β(–)
α1(+)

β(–)

Urethralis
muscle

(b)
Voiding Phase

L1–4
Voluntary
control

S1–4

Sympathetic
Pontine
micturition
center

Parasympathetic

Somatic
Pudendal
nerve

Pelvic nerve
and ganglia

Caudal
mesenteric
ganglia

ACh(+)

ACh(+)

Smooth
muscle

Hypogastric nerve

β(–)

β(–)
α1(+)
Urethralis
muscle

Figure 127.1 An overview of the neural control of micturition consisting of the storage phase (a) and the voiding phase (b).

dysfunction in the spinal cord, urinary bladder, or ure­
thra and surrounding tissues.
Urethral Sphincter Mechanism Incompetence
Urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence (USMI) is
the most common storage disorder in dogs. The urethral
sphincter mechanism involves the smooth muscle of the
urethra as well as the surrounding support tissues, sub­
mucosal vasculature, and urothelium. USMI is thought
to result from a breakdown in this complex through

reduced muscular responsiveness and tone, and
­structural changes in the periurethral tissues. In female
dogs, these changes appear to be associated with a
­reduction in estrogen and alterations in follicle‐stimulat­
ing hormone and luteinizing hormone after neuter­
ing – thus the term “hormone‐responsive incontinence.”
Previously thought to be distinct processes, it is now
understood that USMI and hormone‐responsive incon­
tinence are the same entity. The pathophysiology of its
development in male dogs is poorly understood, but
there may be a relationship to decreased testosterone

VetBooks.ir

127 Micturition and Associated Disorders

levels, and increased follicle‐stimulating hormone and
luteinizing hormone, since it appears more frequently in
neutered than in intact males.
Urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence is most
common among neutered female dogs. It is less common
in neutered males and rare in cats. It appears to affect up
to 20% of neutered females and up to 30% of large‐breed
dogs over 20 kg. Several breeds have been found to have
increased risk including the Doberman pinscher, giant
schnauzer, Old English sheepdog, Rottweiler, Weima­
raner, and boxer, but any breed may be affected. Recent
literature has demonstrated an increased risk of develop­
ment of USMI in dogs neutered either before 3 months
of age or after the first estrus. In addition, it appears that
dogs over 15 kg have an increased risk of USMI the ear­
lier they are neutered. It is possible that this is related
to the development and sensitivity of the sphincter
mechanism tissues to estrogen and other hormones, but
the mechanism is incompletely understood. Predisposing
factors such as a pelvic bladder, short urethra, or recessed
vulva may also be associated with increased risk of devel­
oping USMI, but the presence of one of these does not
necessarily lead to incontinence.
Signs of incontinence may begin at any time, but
appear most often within a few years of neutering. Dogs
with USMI usually have normal bladder capacity and are
able to urinate normally with complete emptying of the
bladder. While most of these dogs are otherwise healthy,
clinical signs can worsen dramatically if co‐morbidities
develop, leading to polyuria or difficulty posturing to
urinate. The increased volumes of urine in the bladder,
and for longer periods of time, may lead to increased
pressure on the already weakened sphincter mechanism
and leakage. Lower urinary tract infection can also lead
to increased frequency of clinical signs. It is suspected
that USMI, and urinary incontinence of any cause, is
associated with increased risk of urinary tract infection
(UTI), but no studies have been conducted to fully evalu­
ate this.
Owners often seek veterinary care when the frequency
becomes bothersome, although on further questioning,
it is apparent the signs have been occurring for months
or years. It is essential to establish that the animal is pass­
ing urine unconsciously. Many owners will complain of
“incontinence” when the animal is demonstrating sub­
missive urination or is otherwise consciously urinating
in inappropriate places. Dogs with USMI may leak urine
when recumbent, sleeping, or after exertion. Although
the passage of urine is involuntary, dogs may increase
grooming of the perivulvar or preputial area to remove
the urine. USMI is an acquired condition, so questioning
of the owner regarding the onset of clinical signs is
important. Animals that have been incontinent from
birth or prior to neutering should be assessed for con­

genital malformations such as ectopic ureters, prior to
making a diagnosis of USMI.
Physical examination of these animals is often nor­
mal, with the exception of perivulvar or preputial urine
staining. As mentioned above, the conformation of the
vulva should be noted, although its contribution to
USMI is unclear. The presence of perivulvar dermatitis,
regardless of conformation, may increase the risk of uri­
nary tract infection. Rectal examination and palpation
of the urethra are normal. Urination is observed to be
normal and complete, with little or no residual volume.
The assessment of residual urine is essential in male
dogs to differentiate USMI from detrusor urethral dys­
synergia, a disorder of incomplete bladder emptying
(see later).
The presence of urinary incontinence in an otherwise
healthy neutered female dog that was previously conti­
nent is often adequate for presumptive diagnosis of
USMI and a trial of empiric therapy. Due to its lower
incidence, intact females, males, and cats with similar
histories and clinical signs require additional evaluation
before making a diagnosis of USMI (Figure 127.2).
The animal should be observed urinating, if possible.
Normal posturing and a full stream without stranguria
should be noted. Assessment of residual urine volume
may be made by bladder catheterization or estimated
using abdominal ultrasound of the bladder. A urinalysis
and urine culture should be performed. The presence of
isosthenuria or hyposthenuria may contribute to sever­
ity of incontinence and may require additional evalua­
tion for an underlying cause. Animals with polyuria may
not respond to medical treatment as well as those mak­
ing normal volumes of urine. As noted above, the risk of
urinary tract infection in animals with USMI has not
been evaluated, but its presence may lead to worsening
signs. Therefore, screening for and treatment of an
infection may increase therapeutic success. A complete
blood count and serum biochemistry panel may be indi­
cated but are not always necessary for diagnosis of
USMI, although they may be helpful when making ther­
apeutic choices, and are important in evaluating animals
with polyuria.
If anatomic abnormalities are suspected, imaging such
as contrast radiography, abdominal ultrasound, or con­
trast computed tomography is indicated. Cystoscopic
evaluation of the lower urinary tract allows assessment
of the entire urethra, ureter placement, and bladder
mucosa. Advanced diagnostics, such as urodynamic
studies, are designed to quantify the pressure produced
along the urethra and the compliance and detrusor func­
tion of the urinary bladder. These are available at many
referral institutions and are most often indicated in
patients with equivocal signs and poor response to ther­
apy, as well as in urologic research.

1183

VetBooks.ir

1184

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

Urinary Incontinence Algorithm
PU/PD or UTI?
No

Yes
Evaluate and
treat accordingly

PPA: 1.0–1.5 mg/kg, q 8–24 h, monitor BP
IncurinTM: 2 mg, q 24h × 14 days, then 1 mg q 24h × 7 days,
then 0.5 mg q 24h
DES: 0.1–0.2 mg/kg, q 24 h × 5 d, then 1–2 x/wk, monitor CBC
Premarin: 20 ug/kg, q 24 h × 7 d, then q 1–3 d, monitor CBC
Not effective
or relapse

PPA + Estrogen

Repeat U/A, urine culture

Abnormal

Normal

Appropriate
treatment

Abdominal U/S, cystoscopy,
contrast cystourethrogram
Normal

Detrusor,
hyperreflexia

Urodynamic
evaluation

Anticholinergic Tx:
Oxybutynin: 0.2 mg/kg, q 8–12 h
Imipramine: 2–4 mg/kg, q 12–24 h

USMI

Urethral bulking
or
artificial sphincter

Figure 127.2 Diagnostic approach to the patient with urinary
incontinence. The presence of urinary incontinence in an
otherwise healthy neutered female dog that was previously
continent is often adequate for presumptive diagnosis of USMI
and a trial of empiric therapy before proceeding with additional
diagnostics. BP, blood pressure; CBC, complete blood count; DES,
diethylstilbestrol; PPA, phenylpropanolomine; PU/PD, polyuria/
polydipsia; U/S, ultrasound; USMI, urethral sphincter mechanism
incompetence; UTI, urinary tract infection.

Medical treatment of USMI in the neutered female dog
consists of increasing number and sensitivity of alpha‐
receptors in the urethral sphincter with estrogen, or by
stimulating those receptors with an alpha‐agonist
(Table 127.1).
The most commonly used estrogens are diethylstilbes­
trol (DES) and estriol (Incurin™). DES is not available
commercially so it must be compounded. Adverse effects
associated with estrogen use include mammary gland
development, vulvar swelling, and attractiveness to
males. These are usually dose related and subside with

dose reduction. The more serious adverse event associ­
ated with estrogen use is irreversible bone marrow
­suppression, although the doses most associated with
bone marrow suppression are much higher than those
recommended to treat USMI.
Phenylpropanolamine (PPA, Proin™) is the alpha‐­
agonist most widely used for the treatment of USMI. It is
commercially available in sizes designed for use in dogs.
The dose and frequency needed for each animal tend to
vary widely and may need to be increased over time to
maintain continence. Adverse effects associated with
PPA include restlessness, aggression, changes in sleeping
patterns, and gastrointestinal signs. These are also
­usually alleviated by a reduction in dose or frequency.
Frequently, both an estrogen and PPA are used in the
same patient for severe or refractory incontinence. There
is little evidence supporting a synergistic increase in
efficacy, but there are anecdotal reports of greater
­
improvement than on a single medication regimen.
Phenylpropanolamine is also frequently used in male
dogs and cats with USMI. In addition, neutered male
dogs may be treated with testosterone cypionate as
monthly injections, although its efficacy is not well doc­
umented. Although male dogs with USMI are most
responsive to PPA, only 43% show good to excellent
response, much lower than in female dogs. Estrogen
compounds should not be used in males and are rarely
used in cats. Care should be taken to monitor the mam­
mary glands for neoplasia in cats receiving estrogens.
In patients that fail medical therapy, surgical options
may be necessary. These are generally only pursued if
the animal does not respond to, or cannot tolerate, medi­
cal treatment. A number of surgical procedures have
been used to treat USMI, many based on the theory of
increasing the transmission of abdominal pressure to the
proximal urethra. These include colposuspension, tran­
sobturator vaginal tape, and urethropexy. These have
had variable outcomes and are considered to have poor
long‐term efficacy. The most promising surgical proce­
dure for USMI is placement of an artificial urethral
sphincter which may be adjusted via a subcutaneous
port. Recent studies have shown it to lead to a significant
increase in continence in female dogs that had failed
medical therapy for USMI. In addition, it has been suc­
cessfully placed in male dogs and, recently, a female cat.
Lower Motor Neuron Bladder
Incontinence as a disorder of storage can also occur sec­
ondary to spinal cord injury or disease. Lesions in the
S1–S2 region will lead to weakness of the striated mus­
cular sphincter. Disruption of the local reflex arc at these
segments leads to an easily expressible bladder which
may empty with minor increases in abdominal pressure.

VetBooks.ir

Table 127.1 Commonly used medical therapies for urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence
Drug

Class

Dose

Side‐effects

Caution

Phenylpropanolamine
(PPA) (Proin™)

Alpha‐agonist

1.0–2 mg/kg PO q8–12h

Hypertension, aggression,
restlessness, gastrointestinal
upset, anxiety

Hypertension,
Hyperadrenocorticism,
renal disease

Diethylstilbestrol (DES)

Estrogen

0.1–1.0 mg/dog PO q24h for
5–7 days then weekly or as
needed

Myelosuppression (rare at
these doses), attractiveness
to males, mammary/vulvar
swelling, behavior changes

Males (can develop
prostatic metaplasia)

Estriol (Incurin™)

Estrogen

2 mg/dog PO q24h × 14 days,
then reduce to 1 mg q24h

Same as DES

Same as DES

Testosterone cypionate

Testosterone

2.2 mg/kg IM q4–8 weeks

Behavior change,
aggression, perianal
adenoma, prostatic
hyperplasia

Cardiac disease, renal
disease, hepatic
disease, prostatic
disease

IM, intramuscular; PO, by mouth (per os).

VetBooks.ir

1186

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

These animals are identified by decreased anal tone and
a poor perineal reflex as well as their easily expressible
bladder. Most of these animals are unable to voluntarily
void and require intermittent catheterization or manual
expression by the owner. Correction of the underlying
cause may lead to some return to normal function.
Because of the tendency to have incomplete emptying of
the bladder with manual expression, these animals are at
increased risk of developing urinary tract infection and
appropriate monitoring must be in place.
Detrusor Hyperreflexia/Overactive Bladder
Detrusor hyperreflexia/overactive bladder (OAB) is the
most common form of urinary incontinence in people,
but it has been poorly characterized in domestic species.
The true incidence of OAB and its importance as a cause
of urinary incontinence in dogs and cats are unknown. In
people, it is characterized by sudden urgency to urinate
and involuntary loss of urine associated with bursts of
detrusor contractions at bladder volumes far below capac­
ity. In dogs, it may manifest as an animal that loses blad­
der compliance and capacity and thus may need to urinate
more often than before without an increase in urine pro­
duction or inflammation of the lower urinary tract. OAB
may be a cause of treatment failure in some dogs treated
for USMI, and should be considered in these cases.
Diagnosis of OAB in animals can be challenging and is
only definitively made using urodynamic studies such as
cystometrography. Response to therapy with antimus­
carinic drugs is often used to presumptively diagnose
OAB in veterinary species. The most commonly used
include oxybutynin and imipramine, the latter of which
also has alpha‐agonist effects. Adverse effects of these
medications include gastrointestinal abnormalities such
as diarrhea and constipation, as well as parasympatholy­
tic signs like tachycardia and hyposalivation.

­Disorders of Emptying
The inability to completely empty the bladder during a
normal void can result from either a functional or
mechanical obstruction of the outflow tract and urethra,
or an abnormality of the detrusor which impairs its com­
plete contraction. Overflow incontinence can result
from the lack of complete emptying, often when the ani­
mal is at rest. An owner may not be able to differentiate
this from an animal with a storage disorder (e.g., USMI),
and it is up to the clinician to determine the underlying
process so that appropriate therapy can be instituted.
Inability to completely empty the bladder is a risk factor
for UTI, and these animals should be monitored for
infection.

Detrusor Atony
Complete emptying of the urinary bladder is dependent
on normal contraction of the detrusor muscle. In the
normal animal, the bladder relaxes during filling with
only small increases in intravesical pressure. As the blad­
der continues to fill, the pressure increases to a threshold
which triggers a detrusor contraction and emptying.
Loss of adequate detrusor contraction can result from
neurogenic or nonneurogenic abnormalities. Injury to
the sacral spinal cord S1–S3 or pelvic nerves can lead to
bladder atony, and is often associated with weakened
urethral tone. These animals often have decreased per­
ineal reflexes and easily expressed bladders.
Treatment of the underlying lesion, if possible, may
lead to improved voiding function. However, until nor­
mal function returns, careful management of urination
must be followed. Male dogs are usually aseptically cath­
eterized 2–4 times a day either in the hospital or at home,
and cats and female dogs are often manually expressed.
Parasympathomimetic drugs such as bethanechol are
not useful in these animals as they require a functional
pelvic nerve and associated spinal segments for clinical
efficacy.
Direct damage to the detrusor muscle can occur from
overdistension due to mechanical or functional outflow
obstruction of acute or chronic nature. The muscle fibers
of the detrusor transmit action potentials which initiate
contraction via tight junctions. With overdistension,
these tight junctions are interrupted, leading to an absent
or ineffective contraction. The overdistension may be
acute, as with obstructive feline idiopathic cystitis in a
male cat, or chronic, as with a dog with a functional
obstruction of the urethra. Relief of the obstruction and
maintenance of a small bladder volume for up to two
weeks may allow the junctions to reestablish and the
return of coordinated detrusor function. This is usually
managed by either indwelling or frequent sterile cathe­
terization of the bladder. Bethanechol may be used in
these patients to enhance stimulation of the detrusor
contraction since the pelvic nerve is intact. Other medi­
cations that have been shown to enhance detrusor func­
tion are cisapride and metoclopramide. It is essential
that relief of any urethral obstruction, functional or
mechanical, be attained before starting medical therapy
to enhance detrusor contraction.
Functional Obstruction – Detrusor
Urethral Dyssynergy
Functional urethral obstruction, or detrusor urethral
dyssynergy (DUD), arises from an abnormality in the
reflex arc at the neurologic or muscular level which
allows the urethral sphincter to relax at the initiation of

VetBooks.ir

127 Micturition and Associated Disorders

detrusor contraction and urination. It may affect the
smooth muscle internal urethral sphincter, the striated
external sphincter, or both. It is possible that the lesion is
cranial to the associated spinal segments and involves
the loss of inhibitory signals to the pudendal and
hypogastric nerves, but may be a more local lesion to the
nerves, the neuromuscular junction, or the sphincter
itself. Unlike the “upper motor neuron bladder” seen in
animals with thoracolumbar intervertebral disc disease
and other spinal cord lesions, these animals typically
have an otherwise normal neurologic examination.
The disorder affects primarily middle‐aged, large‐ and
giant‐breed male dogs. One case series of 22 dogs
reported a mean age of 4.9 years. Clinical signs are simi­
lar to those of mechanical obstruction. The animal often
postures to urinate and is able to produce a urine stream
that quickly becomes attenuated or stops completely.
The animal may continue to posture to urinate or make
several attempts without fully emptying the bladder. The
presence of large amounts of residual urine typically
leads to overflow incontinence and may be mistaken for
USMI. This leakage can occur because the hypertonicity
of the involved sphincter is often dynamic and is trig­
gered by the act of voiding. In chronic cases, bladder
overdistension and subsequent atony may develop.
Unlike animals with mechanical obstruction, these dogs
are typically easy to catheterize and usually do not show
increases in urethral pressure on urodynamic evaluation
unless actively voiding. Contrast urethrography may be
normal or reveal areas of narrowing of the urethra
(urethrospasm).
Presumptive diagnosis of DUD is often made by
observing the dog urinate with a typical interrupted pat­
tern, documentation of a large residual urine volume,
easy passage of a urinary catheter, and ruling out of a
mechanical obstruction. Normal residual urine volume
in 48 normal dogs was reported to be 0.1–3.4 mL/kg
body weight with a mean of 0.2 mL/kg. The author uses
<0.5 mL/kg as a general guideline. Ultrasonography is
recommended to assess the ureters and renal pelves for
dilation secondary to chronic obstruction and ureterore­
nal reflux of urine. Additional diagnostics, including
contrast urethrography, urethroscopy or urodynamic
evaluation, may be necessary to verify the diagnosis in
patients who fail to respond to medical therapy.
Treatment of the hypertonic urethral sphincter
­generally consists of alpha‐adrenergic blockade with
prazosin, an alpha‐1‐specific antagonist with demon­
strated effects on both the internal and external ure­
thral sphincter. Tamsulosin, which is specific for the
alpha‐1A ­subtype found in the internal urethral sphinc­
ter, has also been successful in these dogs. Some dogs
will require additional therapy if the striated muscle is
more ­significantly affected. Benzodiazepines, such as

midazolam, or other skeletal muscle relaxants, includ­
ing ­acepromazine and methocarbemol, may be more
effective if the external urethral sphincter is involved.
Midazolam or diazepam is typically administered 30
minutes before voiding to decrease external urethral
sphincter pressure. Dantrolene and baclofen have been
used in the past as skeletal muscle relaxants; however,
the potential for adverse effects has decreased their use
in veterinary patients. In severe and refractory cases,
intermittent sterile catheterization by the owner at
home may be necessary. Medical therapy of associated
bladder atony should only be started after adequate
relief of the functional urethral obstruction has been
reached. Close monitoring of these patients for residual
urine volume and UTI is needed to assess efficacy of
treatment and prevent complications.
It is possible that patients with controlled DUD will
experience relapse in times of stress such as hospitaliza­
tion or boarding. These animals may need periodic addi­
tional therapy or catheterization even if usually able to
urinate normally.
Prognosis for recovery of normal voiding is good, but
most dogs will require life‐long therapy for DUD.
Attempts to taper medications to the lowest effective
dose may be hampered by relapse of clinical signs after
months of normal voiding. Prognosis appears to be
worse in patients with bladder atony or UTI secondary
to urine retention. Anecdotally, urethral stenting may
improve clinical signs, but this is considered a salvage
procedure with several potential complications, and
indicated only in the most refractory of cases.
Functional Obstruction – Neurogenic
Neurogenic functional urethral obstruction is generally
caused by spinal cord lesions cranial to the sacral seg­
ment. This leads to loss of inhibitory signals to the
hypogastric and pudendal nerves which prevents sphinc­
ter relaxation upon voiding. This is the classic “upper
motor neuron bladder” in which the patient is unable to
urinate normally and is difficult to express manually. The
most commonly affected patients are those with interver­
tebral disc disease and associated paresis. These animals
typically have additional neurologic deficits, including
paresis and nociceptive loss. Treatment of the underly­
ing lesion typically leads to partial or complete return to
normal voiding function after days to weeks. Until nor­
mal voiding resumes, the patients are managed as for
DUD with alpha‐adrenergic blockade, and manual
expression or catheterization. Monitoring for overdis­
tension and UTI is critical in these patients, as is nursing
care, particularly since the overflow incontinence that
can accompany this process may lead to skin breakdown
in these recumbent patients.

1187

VetBooks.ir

1188

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

Dysautonomia
Dysautonomia is a rare condition involving degeneration
of the neurons of the autonomic nervous ganglia, leading
to sympathetic and parasympathetic dysfunction. It has
been most commonly reported in both dogs and cats in
the UK and Scandinavia, but small clusters of cases in
both species have been seen in the US. Its underlying
cause is unknown, but neurotoxin exposure is strongly
suspected.
In addition to the classic findings of unresponsive
mydriasis and prolapsed nictitans, the abnormalities
seen with dysautonomia can range from ileus and consti­
pation to decreased systolic function of the heart. These

dogs and cats often have significant voiding dysfunction
and urine retention due to bladder atony and overflow
incontinence secondary to urethral sphincter incompe­
tence. There is no specific treatment for dysautonomia
and spontaneous remission is uncommon.
The prognosis is related to the severity of the clinical
signs and the specific organ functions affected.
Management of the urinary complications is usually
possible, involving bladder expression and/or urethral
catheterization, along with parasympathomimetic
agents. It is the challenging management of the gastro­
intestinal components of the disease which often leads
to euthanasia.

­Further Reading
Beauvais W, Cardwell JM, Brodbelt DC. The effect of
neutering on the risk of urinary incontinence in
bitches – a systematic review. J Small Anim Pract 2012;
53(4): 198–204.
Delisser PJ, Friend EJ, Chanoit G, et al. Static hydraulic
urethral sphincter for treatment of urethral sphincter
mechanism incompetence in 11 dogs. J Small Anim
Pract 2012; 53(6): 338–43.
Khorzad R, Lee JA, Whelan M, Brutlag AG, et al. Baclofen
toxicosis in dogs and cats: 145 cases (2004–2010). J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2012; 241(8): 1059–64.
Reeves L, Adin C, McLoughlin M, et al. Outcome after
placement of an artificial urethral sphincter in 27 dogs.
Vet Surg 2013; 42(1): 12–18.
Reynolds BS, Chetboul V, Nguyen P, et al. Effects of dietary
salt intake on renal function: a 2‐year study in healthy
aged cats. J Vet Intern Med 2013; 27: 507–15.
Aaron A, Eggleton K, Power C, Holt PE. Urethral sphincter
mechanism incompetence in male dogs: a retrospective
analysis of 54 cases. Vet Rec 2006; 139(22): 542–6.
Atalan G, Barr FJ, Holt PE. Frequency of urination and
ultrasonographic estimation of residual urine in normal
and dysuric dogs. Res Vet Sci 1999; 67(3): 295–63.

Diaz Espaneira MM, Viehoff FW, Nickel RF. Idiopathic
detrusor‐urethral dyssynergia in dogs: a retrospective
analysis of 22 cases. J Small Anim Pract 1998; 39(6):
264–70.
Fischer JR, Lane IF, Cribb AE. Urethral pressure profile
and hemodynamic effects of phenoxybenzamine and
prazosin in non‐sedated male beagle dogs. Can J Vet Res
2003; 67(1): 30–8.
Holt PE, Thrusfield MV. Association in bitches between
breed, size, neutering and docking, and acquired urinary
incontinence due to incompetence of the urethral
sphincter mechanism. Vet Rec 1993; 133(8): 177–80.
Kidder AC, Johannes C, O’Brien DP, Harkin KR,
Schermerhorn T. Feline dysautonomia in the
Midwestern United States: a retrospective study of nine
cases. J Feline Med Surg 2008; 10(2):130–136.
Stocklin‐Gautschi NM, Hassig M, Reichler IM, et al. The
relationship of urinary incontinence to early spaying in
bitches. J Reprod Fertil 2001; 57(Suppl): 233–6.
Thrusfield MV, Holt PE, Muirhead RH. Acquired urinary
incontinence in bitches: its incidence and relationship to
neutering practices. J Small Anim Pract 1998; 39(12):
559–66.

VetBooks.ir

1189

128
Urinary Tract Infections
Nicole Smee, DVM, MS, DACVIM
Las Vegas Veterinary Specialty Center, Las Vegas, NV, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
The most common isolate from canine urine is Escherichia
coli which accounts for one‐third to half of all positive
urine cultures. The next major group of uropathogens
includes gram‐positive cocci, Staphlyoc­occus, Streptoc­
occus, and Enterococcus. Remaining uropath­ogens include
Proteus, Klebsiella, Pasteurella, Mycoplasma, Enterobacter,
and Pseudomonas. These 10 genera accounted for 95%
and 97% of all urinary isolates in male and female dogs,
respectively. A retrospective analysis of feline urine cultures submitted to a teaching hospital also found E. coli
to be the most common pathogen (47%), followed by
Staphlyococcus (18%), Streptococcus (13%), and Klebsiella
(4%). In both dogs and cats with bacterial urinary tract
infection (UTI), 75% of the time there is a single pathogen, in 20% of cases there are two pathogens and ≤5% of
the time there are three species. Multiple organism infections are more commonly observed in female dogs.

­Epidemiology/Signalment
Bacterial UTI is common; approximately 5–27% of dogs
will experience infections of the urinary tract at some point
during their lifetime. Female dogs are more commonly
affected than males. In contrast to dogs, bacterial UTI is
relatively rare in cats. In young, otherwise healthy cats with
signs of lower urinary tract inflammation, bacterial UTI is
rare (<2%). Incidence of bacterial UTI in cats increases
with age and occurs more often in cats older than 10 years.
Urinary tract infections are common in dogs and cats
with systemic diseases that may compromise normal
antimicrobial defenses. In a retrospective study of 101
dogs with diabetes mellitus (DM) or hyperadrenocorticism or both, 42 (41.6%) had a UTI. Dogs receiving long‐
term glucocorticoids are also at risk with a reported

incidence of 18–39%. Similarly, systemic disease can predispose cats to UTI. In retrospective studies evaluating
known predisposing conditions in cats, positive urine
cultures were found in 17–30% of cats with chronic kidney disease (CKD), 12–13% of cats with DM, and 12–22%
of cats with hyperthyroidism. In one of these studies,
decreasing urine specific gravity (USG) was not associated with positive urine culture; however, pyuria and
hematuria were associated with positive urine cultures.
In addition, Persian breed, females, increasing age, and
decreasing body weight were associated with positive
cultures.

­History and Clinical Signs
Clinical signs associated with a UTI depend on bacterial
virulence, status of the host immune system, duration of
the infection, and site or sites of infection. The most common clinical signs associated with lower UTI include pollakiuria, stranguria, dysuria, hematuria, and inappropriate
urination or periuria. If a UTI occurs secondary to a micturition disorder, such as an ectopic ureter, urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence (USMI), or urine retention,
clinical signs associated with the primary condition may
predominate. Similarly, in dogs and cats with systemic disease and compromised host defense mechanisms, clinical
signs associated with the underlying disease may predominate and the UTI may be relatively asymptomatic.
Dogs with uncomplicated UTI often have unremarkable physical examination findings. Predisposing causes
such as vulvar involution, severe perivulvular dermatitis,
vaginal stenosis, cystic or urethral calculi, or urethral
thickening may be identified in patients with a complicated UTI. Whenever possible, female dogs that present
with a UTI should have a digital vaginal examination
performed in order to identify an anatomic abnormality

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1190

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

that may alter normal host defense mechanisms. For
example, palpation of a persistent paramesonephric
remnant may prompt further investigation for ectopic
ureters and palpation of vaginal strictures may prompt
further investigation for urine retention. Rectal examination may also identify abnormalities such as pelvic
trauma, urethral stones, or urethral thickening associated with neoplasia or granulomatous urethritis.
Acute bacterial pyelonephritis, prostatitis, and metritis are often associated with systemic signs such as fever,
an inflammatory leukogram, lethargy, and anorexia. In
contrast, patients with chronic prostatitis and pyelonephritis may not exhibit systemic signs and therefore it
may be more difficult to localize the infection.

­Diagnosis
Urinalysis may be helpful in differentiating a UTI from
other disorders causing lower urinary tract signs (e.g.,
bladder neoplasia), making initial antibiotic recommendations, and in some cases identifying potential predisposing disorders (e.g., glucosuria and crystalluria). Urine
specific gravity can be variable in patients with a UTI.
Dilute or minimally concentrated urine may be observed
in patients with concurrent disease predisposing to UTI
(e.g., DM or hyperadrenocorticism), or may be observed
if the infection involves the upper urinary tract. With a
UTI, hematuria and proteinuria are frequently observed
on dipstick analysis. The dipstick analyses for nitrite
(bacteria) and leukocyte esterase (white blood cells
[WBCs]) are designed for use in people, and are not reliable tests for canine and feline patients.
A urine sediment examination should be performed to
identify pyuria and bacteriuria. If urine is dilute or the
patient is immunocompromised (e.g., suffers from
hyperadrenocorticism, or is receiving exogenous corticosteroids), it may be difficult to identify WBCs or bacteria on urine sediment examination. Air‐dried, stained
sediment evaluations were more accurate than wet,
unstained mounts for identification of bacteria when
urine culture results were used as the gold standard. This
air‐dried, stained technique is easily performed in practice by placing one drop of sediment on a glass slide,
allowing it to air dry without spreading, and then staining the sample with a commercially available modified
Wright’s stain. It is important to remember, however,
that a culture is required for definitive diagnosis, and
will provide additional information (e.g., bacterial
­identification, number of organisms/mL of urine, and
antimicrobial susceptibility results).
Cystocentesis is the method of choice for collection of
urine samples, especially if a urine culture is anticipated.
In patients presenting with lower urinary tract signs

(e.g., pollakiuria and stranguria), collection by cystocentesis may be difficult due to the small size of the urinary
bladder. Alternative methods of urine collection may be
acceptable if cystocentesis cannot be performed or is
contraindicated (e.g., thrombocytopenia, suspected
­transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) of the urinary bladder
or pyoderma of the ventral abdomen). Urethral catheterization provides a superior sample compared with a free‐
catch voided sample but requires more technical skill,
especially in female patients. Care should be taken during
catheterization to prevent contamination from external
structures by ­clipping surrounding hair and cleansing the
external genitalia prior to the procedure. Based on current recommendations, free‐catch urine samples are not
acceptable for culture. Urinalysis and urine culture results
should always be interpreted in light of the urine collection method.
Although clinical signs and urinalysis findings may
increase the index of suspicion for a UTI, a urine culture is
the definitive diagnostic test. Ideally, the urine sample for
culture should be obtained prior to starting treatment. In
patients already receiving antimicrobial therapy, it may
be necessary to discontinue treatment for 3–5 days before
collection of urine culture. It is also important to consider
storage and transport of samples for culture in practices
where immediate culture processing is not possible. Sterile
containers that do not contain ­additives or preservatives
should be used. Commercially available urine collection
kits may be acceptable for up to 72 hours if sample processing is delayed. Bacterial counts can increase in urine
stored at room temperature within a few hours. In refrigerated samples, quantitative bacterial counts differed after
six hours of storage; however, this was not associated with
a change in interpretation of the clinical significance. It is
recommended that urine samples be cultured immediately but it is acceptable for urine to be refrigerated in a
closed container for up to six hours prior to culture.
Alternatives to sending a urine sample to a commercial
laboratory for culture include using a calibrated bacterial
loop (0.01 or 0.001 mL volume) to inoculate blood or
MacConkey’s agar plates in‐house. Culture plates are then
incubated for 24 hours and if significant numbers of colonies are produced in light of the urine collection method,
the plate can be sealed and shipped to a microbiology
­laboratory for bacterial identification and a­ntimicrobial
sensitivity testing. Alternatively, products like UriCult® culture paddles may also be used. In most cases, a quantitative
urine culture will aid interpretation of results. In addition
to bacterial numbers/mL of urine, knowledge of the
­normal flora may also be helpful in determining contamination versus infection when methods other than
­cystocentesis are used.
Not all species of bacteria will induce clinical signs or
cause disease.

VetBooks.ir

128 Urinary Tract Infections

­Classification of Urinary Tract
Infections

Uncomplicated UTI

Asymptomatic Bacteriuria
Bacteriuria is expected in patients with UTI, but may also
be observed in healthy dogs and cats if the urine sample has
been contaminated with normal flora and/or pathogens from
the distal urethra/urogenital tract (voided sample or during
urethral catheterization) or if the sample contacts a contaminated surface (e.g., cage floor, examination table). It is
important to differentiate urine contamination from a UTI
since the former does not need to be treated. Certain organisms are known to be commensal within the lower urinary
tract (Table 128.1). There is, however, overlap between
­normal flora and potential pathogens. Contamination can
be ruled out by repeating a urinalysis with urine obtained
via cystocentesis or by performing a quantitative urine
­culture on a voided or catheterized sample. Depending on
the method of urine collection, the number of bacterial
colony‐forming units (cfu)/mL of urine will vary between
contamination and UTI (Table 128.2).

Uncomplicated UTI occurs in patients where no underlying structural, neurologic, or functional abnormalities
exist. A UTI becomes complicated when host defense
mechanisms are compromised (e.g., CKD, hyperadrenocorticism, DM, cystolithiasis, USMI). In addition, UTIs
are often considered complicated if they occur in cats,
male dogs, and intact female dogs, or if they involve the
kidneys or prostate.
Recurrent or Reinfection
Recurrent UTIs can be defined as either relapses or reinfections. A relapse is an infection caused by the same
bacteria that caused the original infection, and usually
occurs within days of cessation of treatment. Relapses
are most frequently associated with ineffective antimicrobial treatment. This may be due to improper antibiotic usage (inappropriate selection, dose, duration, or
poor owner compliance), emergence of drug‐resistant
pathogens, or failure to eliminate predisposing causes

Table 128.1 Commensal bacterial genera in the urogenital tract of dogs
Genus

Distal urethra of males

Acinetobacter

Prepuce

Vagina

+

+

Bacteroides

+

Bacillus

+

Citrobacter
Corynebacterium

+
+

+

+

Enterococcus

+
+

Enterobacter

+

Escherichia

+

+

+

Flavobacterium

+

+

+

Haemophilus

+

+

+

Klebsiella

+

+

+

Micrococcus

+

Moraxella
Mycoplasma

+

+

+

+

+

Neisseria

+

Pasteurella

+

+

Proteus

+

+

Pseudomonas

+

Staphylococcus

+

+

+

Streptococcus

+

+

+

Ureaplasma

+

+

+

Source: Barsanti JA. Genitourinary infections. In: Greene CE, ed. Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edn. St Louis, MO: Saunders, 2006,
pp. 935–61. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.

1191

VetBooks.ir

1192

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

Table 128.2 Quantitative urine cultures in dogs and catsa
Significant

Suspicious

Contaminant

Method of collection

Dogs

Cats

Dogs

Cats

Dogs

Cats

Cystocentesis

≥1000

≥1000

100–1000

100–1000

≤100

≤100

Catheterization

≥10 000

≥1000

1000–10 000

100–1000

≤1000

≤100

Midstream voiding

≥100 000b

≥10 000

10 000–90 000

1000–10 000

≤10 000

≤1000

Manual expression

≥100 000b

≥10 000

10 000–90 000

1000–10 000

≤10 000

≤1000

a

Values are given in colony‐forming units per milliliter of urine (cfu/mL). Data represent generalities. Occasionally bacterial UTI may be detected
with fewer organisms (i.e., false‐negative results).
b
Because the contamination level of midstream samples may be 10 000 cfu/mL or higher (i.e., false‐positive result), these samples should not be
used for routine diagnostic culture.
Source: Pressler B, Barges JW. Urinary tract infections. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds. Textbook of Small Animal Veterinary Internal Medicine,
7th edn. St Louis, MO: Saunders, 2010, pp. 2036–47. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.

that alter normal host defense mechanisms and allow the
persistence of bacteria. Relapse UTIs may be associated
with a higher degree of antimicrobial resistance compared to the original infection.
Reinfections occur when the initial infection was effectively treated (documented by negative culture after
therapy and resolution of clinical signs) and repeat culture confirms another infection. Typically, the time
between reinfections is greater than the time between
relapses. Reinfections usually indicate that host defense
mechanisms are compromised.

­Therapy
Ideally, antimicrobial administration should be based on
results from culture and susceptibility. Unnecessary or inappropriate usage of antibiotics can lead to antimicrobial
resistance, or delay the diagnosis of noninfectious cause
of lower urinary tract signs (e.g., like identification of
underlying TCC). In addition to susceptibility results,
the route and ease of administration, potential adverse
effects, cost, and concentration in the urine (or other targeted tissues, e.g., prostate, kidney) should be considered
when choosing an antibiotic.
To determine the minimum inhibitory concentration
(MIC), serial dilutions of an antibiotic are used to discover the lowest concentration that will inhibit bacterial
growth. This concentration is the MIC and although
results are reported as susceptible, intermediate, and
resistant, they usually also include the actual MIC followed by the breakpoints used to determine susceptibility. The goal of the breakpoint is to predict clinical
outcome for an individual patient. Breakpoints are determined by a combination of information including the
species, bacteria, disease, antibiotic, dose, route, and frequency. It is important to keep in mind that there are

limited data available for veterinary medicine; therefore
breakpoints are often determined by using information
available from human breakpoints.
A result reported as “susceptible” indicates a high likelihood of treatment success (>80%) with most antibiotics; “intermediate” indicates possible success in treatment
with potential alterations in normal dosing; and a “resistant” result indicates that a clinical cure is unlikely to
occur with that antimicrobial. The result is considered
susceptible if the MIC is in the breakpoint range or
below, intermediate if it is at the high end of the breakpoint, and resistant if it is above the breakpoint.
Urine antibiotic concentrations are usually more
important than plasma concentrations when treating a
UTI. Minimum inhibitory antibiotic concentrations and
the anticipated urine antibiotic concentration may be
used to guide treatment choices. Clinical efficacy is
expected if urine concentration is maintained at greater
than four times the MIC of the pathogen between doses.
For example, the MIC of ampicillin for a Staphylococcus
organism is approximately 10 μg/mL. The expected
serum and tissue concentrations of ampicillin are 1–2 μg/
mL whereas the expected urine concentration of
­ampicillin is >300 μg/mL. Since the expected urine concentration is >4 times the MIC, sensitivity for a superficial UTI should exist. Minimum inhibitory antibiotic
concentration testing based on anticipated urine concentrations is not appropriate for deeper tissue infections (e.g., pyelonephritis, thickened bladder wall) where
serum and tissue antibiotic concentrations are expected.
Interpretation of Results
The Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI)
is a committee of experts that examines pharmacokinetics, microbiology, pharmacodynamics, bacterial
population, MIC distribution, and clinical trial results.

VetBooks.ir

128 Urinary Tract Infections

Recommendations from this committee are considered
the gold standard for breakpoint determination. Veterinary
laboratories (or human laboratories with appropriate
susceptibility panels for commonly used veterinary antibiotics) that follow CLSI guidelines should be used for
culture and sensitivity testing.
Depending on the laboratory, comparing antibiotics
with similar susceptibility (e.g., cephalexin and cefazolin)
may be necessary but requires making assumptions. For
example, when comparing cefazolin with cephalexin,
cefazolin is typically administered intravenously q6h
whereas cephalexin is typically administered orally
q8–12h. It is also important to remember that in vitro
culture and sensitivity results may not correlate with in
vivo efficacy. For example, regardless of the susceptibility
results for Enterococcus, certain antibiotics including
cephalosporins, trimethoprim‐sulfamethoxazole, clindamycin, and aminoglycosides should always be considered resistant since they are not effective clinically and
do not correlate with in vitro results.
In many cases, antibiotic sensitivity testing results provide a clear direction for treatment with an antibiotic
that is orally administered, has few potential adverse
effects, and reasonable cost. In some cases, sensitivity
results demonstrate a high degree of bacterial resistance,
and route of administration, high cost, or potential
adverse effects of the potentially effective antibiotic may
be a concern. Although MIC may be used as a guideline
for antibiotic selection, veterinary breakpoints for most
antibiotics in the urinary tract of dogs and cats have
not been determined. When intermediate results are
obtained, it may be possible to achieve a cure if no alternative antimicrobial exists. This would most likely be
achieved by using a higher dose of an antimicrobial that
is excreted in the urine. In resistant infections, requesting an expanded antimicrobial sensitivity profile (e.g.,
ceftazedime, carbenicillin) may suggest alternative treatment regimes. Most commercial bacteriology laboratories have a second and third tier of antibiotics for
expanded sensitivity testing; however, high cost and parenteral administration may be trade‐offs.
Inappropriate antibiotic dosages or unnecessary usage
can lead to resistant organisms, affecting not only the
individual patient but potentially bacterial resistance in
other veterinary patients and owners. Antimicrobials
that are excreted in the urine are the mainstay of UTI
treatment and initial antibiotic considerations should
include amoxicillin, cephalexin or trimethoprim‐sulfadiazine. When host defense mechanisms are compromised, previous or current sensitivity results indicate
potential resistance, or when the infection involves the
prostate or kidneys, second tier antibiotic choices
should be considered including potentiated beta‐lactams
(e.g., amoxicillin‐clavulanic acid), fluoroquinolones, or

extended‐release cephalosporins (e.g., cefovecin). Second‐
tier antibiotics are not recommended as a first‐line treatment for an uncomplicated UTI, without appropriate
culture and sensitivity results. However, these may be
considered when rapid treatment is necessary to return
to function, prevent systemic spread of bacteria, or when
penetration into a specific tissue, such as the prostate, is
needed. For penetration into prostatic tissue, antibiotics
should be lipid soluble, not highly protein bound, and
ionize at the pH of the prostatic tissue. Good prostate
gland penetration can usually be achieved with fluoroquinolones, trimethoprim‐sulfa, and chloramphenicol.
Uncomplicated UTI
Dogs and cats with uncomplicated are typically treated
with a 7–14‐day course of antibiotics. It is reasonable to
assume that shorter durations of appropriate antibiotics
(≤7 days) may be effective but clinical trials are needed to
further evaluate shorter duration treatments. It is always
ideal to treat on the basis of urine culture and sensitivity
results, although economic constraints may preclude this
in first‐time patients with suspected uncomplicated UTI.
In these cases, antimicrobial selection should be based on
bacterial characteristics observed in the urine sediment
(e.g., gram positive vs gram negative, cocci vs rods).
For example, if a gram‐negative rod or bacillus is seen
(e.g., E. coli, Enterobacter, Klebsiella, Proteus), cepalosporins would be a good option. With gram‐positive cocci
(e.g., Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, Enterococcus), amoxicillin and cephalosporin would be options. Clinical signs
should resolve within 48 hours with appropriate treatment. Along with resolution of clinical signs, evidence of
inflammation in urine sediment should also resolve in 3–5
days of antibiotic treatment.
When empiric antibiotic treatment is used, instructions to owners regarding what to expect as well as follow‐up plans are critical. If presenting clinical signs do
not resolve quickly, owners should be aware of the need
for a follow‐up urinalysis and culture and sensitivity.
Owners should also be aware of the importance of completing the entire antibiotic regime, even if signs resolve
early in the course of treatment. Finally, owners should
be instructed to observe their pets closely for signs of
UTI recurrence after the treatment regime is complete.
Clear communication and understanding of the “game
plan” will result in improved treatment outcome and
increased client willingness to return in cases of empiric
treatment failures.
Short‐Course/High‐Dose Protocol

Due to concerns with owner compliance during longer
treatment protocols, short‐course/high‐dose protocols
have been proposed for the treatment of uncomplicated

1193

VetBooks.ir

1194

Section 10 Renal and Genitourinary Disease

UTI in dogs. In a recent study in dogs, a short‐course/
high‐dose protocol of enrofloxacin (18–20 mg/kg once
daily for three days) was as effective as traditional‐dose
amoxicillin‐clavulanate (13.75–25 mg/kg twice daily for
14 days) in treating uncomplicated UTI. Preliminary evidence suggests this may be an effective option but additional research may be necessary to incorporate this into
routine clinical practice.
Complicated UTI
Antibiotic treatment of complicated UTIs should be prolonged (typically four weeks) and always based on urine
culture and sensitivity results. It is possible that shorter
duration of therapy may be effective in some or all clinical situations, but further studies are needed to provide
more specific recommendations. One week into treatment and one week prior to discontinuing antimicrobials,
reevaluation of the urine sediment can help determine
response to therapy. When effective, no bacteria or white
cells should be observed on sediment exam. Recheck
urine culture is again recommended 5–7 days after completion of therapy to confirm successful resolution of the
UTI. Prolonged treatment of a complicated UTI may be
necessary to sterilize the urinary tract but “buying time”
for correction of host defense mechanism abnormalities
is another important consideration. If host defense
mechanism abnormalities are not corrected, it may be
difficult to clear the current infection or, more likely, the
patient will experience reinfections.
Ancillary Therapies
Ancillary therapies designed to prevent recurrent UTI
are considered in patients where breaches in host
defenses are present but are not correctable or in cases
where an underlying cause for reinfection is not identified. Care should be taken to treat any underlying infection prior to starting any prevention measures. Owners
should watch closely for clinical signs and be advised that
frequent rechecks will be necessary to detect and treat
any breakthrough infections.
Urinary Antiseptics

The most commonly used urinary antiseptic is methenamine which is converted to formalin in an acidic environment. Methenamine may be considered in patients
with recurrent infections or those with potentially
untreatable or unresolved breaches in immunity. Just as
with the use of cranberry extract, this prophylactic treatment is not recommended as a sole treatment for UTIs.
Methenamine should only be used in conjunction with
antibiotics for the treatment of current infections or as a
preventive once the previous UTI has been cleared. Use

should be avoided in patients on sulfonamides or medications that cause alkaline urine. Urine acidifiers added
to methenamine cause acidic urine that can also decrease
activity of fluoroquinolone and aminoglycoside antibiotics. High doses can cause irritation to bladder mucosa
but this is more common in people than dogs.
Prophylactic Antimicrobial Protocols

Prophylactic antimicrobial treatment involves long‐term
daily administration of low‐dose antimicrobials in order
to inhibit or minimize uropathogen growth, thus
decreasing the opportunity for bacterial adhesion and
colonization of the uroepithelium. Unfortunately, there
are no studies in dogs that have evaluated the efficacy
and adverse effects of these protocols. Due to the risk of
creating resistant infections, prophylactic, low‐dose
antibiotic administration should be reserved for refractory cases and then only after all attempts to resolve
­correctable problems have been exhausted.
Prophylactic, low‐dose antibiotic treatment should
only be initiated after standard‐dose antibiotic treatment
has been successful (negative urine culture). Best results
are expected with drugs that are excreted in the urine.
Other considerations should include potential side‐
effects of the drug and previous culture and sensitivity
results. Commonly used protocols include fluoroquinolones, cephalosporins, or beta‐lactam antimicrobials.
The dose used should be one‐half to one‐third the therapeutic daily dose administered immediately after the last
voiding before bedtime. This protocol is typically recommended for a minimum of six months and urinalysis and
culture should be performed every 4–8 weeks. If at any
point during the treatment a UTI occurs, it is treated as
a complicated UTI. Prophylactic, low‐dose therapy can
be restarted after the reinfection has been resolved.
Cranberry Extract

Proanthrocyanidins, specifically A‐type isoforms, found
in cranberry juice inhibit E. coli attachment by blocking
interaction of bacterial P‐fimbriae with the surface of
uroepithelial cells. Canine studies evaluating the efficacy
of cranberry extract (CE) are limited, but some in vitro
data show promising results. One study demonstrated
that E. coli in urine from dogs receiving oral CE had
decreased ability to agglutinate to human red blood cells.
Similarly, a second study demonstrated that E. coli in
urine from dogs receiving oral CE had decreased ability
to adhere to Madin‐Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells.
Based on these in vitro studies, oral administration of CE
may help reduce E. coli reinfections in patients with
compromised host defense mechanisms. Due to large
variations of the active compound in over‐the‐counter
products, it may be of benefit to use canine products
dosed according to manufacturer recommendations.

VetBooks.ir

128 Urinary Tract Infections

Box 128.1 Ideal steps to follow in the management of UTIs in dogs and cats
1) Diagnosis should be determined on the basis of history, urine sediment, and, ideally, urine culture and
sensitivity results. Rule out contamination in voided/
catheterized samples with quantitative culture.
Cystocentesis is the ideal way to collect urine for culture.
2) Select an antimicrobial agent based on culture and sensitivity. Without culture and sensitivity results, use air‐
dried sediment findings to guide antibiotic choice (e.g.,
cocci vs rods).
3) Reculture urine (or at least examine the urine sediment)
in 3–5 days to ascertain effectiveness of selected antimicrobial agent. Urine culture should be negative and/or
there should be no white blood cells in the urine
sediment.

4) Examine urine sediment 3–4 days before discontinuing
antibiotic treatment.
5) Repeat urinalysis and culture 5–7 days after cessation of
antibiotic therapy. (Steps 4 and 5 are especially important for recurrent UTI.)
6) Patients with recurrent UTIs should undergo imaging
studies (e.g., plain and/or contrast‐enhanced radiography
and/or ultrasonography), a complete blood count, and
serum biochemistry profile to determine whether they
have local/systemic underlying predisposing factors.
7) Frequent reinfections may need to be treated with low‐
dose nighttime antibiotic regimes or cranberry extract
after the initial inflammation has been cleared up in
response to standard‐dose antibiotic treatment.

Box 128.2 Reasons for poor therapeutic response in dogs and cats with UTI
Use of ineffective drugs or ineffective duration of therapy
(relapse).
●● Failure of owner to administer prescribed dose at proper
intervals (relapse).
●● Gastrointestinal tract disease, concurrent intake of food
and drug resulting in decreased drug absorption, or
impaired renal concentrating ability resulting in decreased
antibiotic concentrations in the urine (relapse).
●● Impaired action of drugs, either because bacteria are
not multiplying or because they are sequestered in

an inaccessible site (e.g., prostate, neoplasia, or
­uroliths) (relapse).
●● Failure to recognize and eliminate predisposing causes
(reinfection).
●● Presence of mixed bacterial infections in which only one
of the pathogens is eradicated by antimicrobial therapy
(relapse).
●● Iatrogenic
reinfection caused by catheterization
(reinfection)
●● Development of drug resistance in bacteria (relapse).

­Prognosis

tance to correct underlying defects in host defenses
whenever possible to achieve the best outcome with a
complicated UTI. Following protocols for ideal UTI
management and monitoring will improve treatment
success and decrease the incidence of recurrent UTI
(Boxes 128.1 and 128.2).

●●

Most UTIs are uncomplicated and appropriate antibiotic
treatment rapidly clears the infection, resulting in a
good prognosis. However, the prognosis for a complicated UTI may be guarded. It is of the utmost impor-

­Further Reading
Pressler B, Barges JW. Urinary tract infections. In: Ettinger
SJ, Feldman EC, eds. Textbook of Small Animal
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edn. St Louis, MO:
Saunders, 2010, pp. 2036–47.
Wayne P. Performance Standards for Antimicrobial
Susceptibility Testing: Twentieth Informational
Supplement. CLSI document M100‐S20. Clinical and

Laboratory Standards Institute. file:///C:/Users/Owner/
Downloads/CLSI2011.pdf (accessed July 3, 2019).
Weese JS, Blondeau J, Boothe D, et al. Antimicrobial use
guidelines for treatment of urinary tract disease in dogs
and cats: Antimicrobial Guidelines Working Group of
the International Society for Companion Animal
Infectious Diseases. Vet Med Int 2011; 2011:2 63768.

1195

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1197

Section 11
Oncologic Disease

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1199

129
Approach to the Cancer Patient
Lisa DiBernardi, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology), DACVR (Radiation Oncology)
Gulf Coast Veterinary Specialists, Houston, TX, USA

The goal of this chapter is to present an overview of
current cancer terminology, patient evaluation, diagnostic techniques, management strategies, and treatment
options with emphasis on the application of radiation
therapy.
Cancer is a group of diseases that are defined by the
uninhibited growth and replication of cells. Cancer arises
from an abnormal single cell that has suffered a disruption in its regulatory mechanism for proliferation and
self‐elimination. Cancer biology will be discussed in subsequent chapters.
Unregulated cellular proliferation is a characteristic of
both benign and malignant tumors. Metastasis distinguishes a malignant from a benign tumor. Metastasis is
the spread of cancer from one location to a regional or
distant location. A tumor is named based on its cell of
origin. A cancer that initiates from embryologically
derived endoderm, more commonly termed skin or epithelium of the internal organs, is a carcinoma. Carcinoma
will have a descriptor, a prefix, based on histology. An
example of a carcinoma of the oral cavity is a squamous
cell carcinoma. A benign mass within skin or epithelium
may be an adenoma, cystadenoma or papilloma. A
malignancy of mesoderm – bone, muscle, fat, cartilage,
or other supportive structures – is termed a sarcoma.
Benign examples include fibroma, lipoma, hemangioma,
chondroma, and osteoma. Central nervous system cancers involve the brain and spinal cord and are named
after the cells lining the interior and exterior of the brain
(glial, meningeal, ependymal cells) or cells from vascular
structures (choroid plexus). Lymphoma (lymphosarcoma) and multiple myeloma are malignancies involving
immune regulatory cells.
Discrete cell tumor is a term applied to tumors that
exfoliate as individual (discrete) cells, which are generally round in shape. This category includes mast cell

tumor, plasmacytoma, transmissible venereal tumor,
lymphoma, and histiocytic tumors, but is not limited to
these tumors. Leukemia results from malignant blood‐
forming tissues of the bone marrow.
The terminology for some malignancies may be misleading. Examples include those used for lymphoma and
melanoma. Lymphosarcoma and lymphoma are terms
for the same malignant process. Melanoma may be
benign or malignant depending on location, level of
invasiveness, and species. A histopathologic description
will state malignant melanoma versus melanocytoma
(benign melanoma).
The overall mortality due to cancer in dogs is 20–30%,
approximately one in four. The dog breed with the highest cancer prevalence in the United States is the golden
retriever. Currently the Golden Retriever Lifetime Study
is underway in the United States. The study’s purpose is
to identify the nutritional, environmental, lifestyle and
genetic risk factors for cancer and other diseases in dogs
(https://www.morrisanimalfoundation.org/goldenretriever-lifetime-study). In Sweden, a retrospective
study found boxer and Bernese mountain dogs to be
overrepresented in cancer deaths compared with other
breeds, including the golden retriever. The selection of
desired traits may lead to breed‐specific risks for the
development of cancer. Boxers, bulldogs, and retrievers
are prone to cancer of the skin and subcutaneous tissues.
The Siamese cat is predisposed to the development of
cutaneous mast cell tumors. Osteosarcoma is historically
a cancer of large and giant breeds. The power to identify
hereditary influences lies in the pure‐bred dog’s reduced
genetic complexity (diversity). Identification of pathway
dysregulation(s) will elucidate potential upstream or
downstream therapeutic targets. Current multiinstitutional consortium research is focused on the rapid identification and translation of novel therapies to benefit

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1200

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

dogs and humans. (For more information see www.
ccogc.net, www.vai.org, www.akcchf.org and for pet
owners wishing to register their affected dogs, http://
nationalveterinarycancerregistry.org/).

­Initial Assessment
History
Pertinent information should be obtained through
open‐ended questions using reflective listening and
­confirming the information by paraphrasing important
points. Taking a thorough history incorporates both
nonverbal and verbal communication skills. This should
include the onset of the current problem, the anatomic
location of the problem or body system affected,
descriptors of the nature of the problem such as quality,
quantity, severity, onset, duration, timing of occurrence, frequency, as well as inciting factors that trigger
the occurrence, alter the frequency and severity or
improve the event. The duration of the presence of a
mass and the rate of growth may facilitate differentiation between benign and m
­ alignant processes. Previous
medical and surgical conditions, vaccination and
administration location, allergies, exercise, travel history, housing, feeding practices, elimination details,
administration of medications, ­
vitamins, nutraceuticals, and supplements should also be investigated. This
information is vital and may ­circumvent adverse events
associated with p
­ olypharmacy. Once the information is
obtained and organized, the organ system affected
should become evident.
Patient Evaluation
The physical examination is an essential portion of every
patient evaluation and should include all major organ systems. Leaving the affected body system for the final portion of the exam may permit minimal patient resistance.
Attention should be paid to the demeanor and behavioral
responses of the patient for pain assessment, location of
primary and/or metastatic disease, site of surgical interventions, musculoskeletal conditions and mobility, neurologic function, and dermatologic conditions. Once the
history and physical examination data have been integrated, the subsequent chapters will guide the reader
through the most probable differential ­diagnoses. It is
important to bear in mind that the presenting problem
may not always reflect the origin of the tumor but rather
be a consequence of a tumor‐associated change(s) in
function. For example, a dog may present for polyuria and
polydipsia when the inciting factor is humoral hypercal­ araneoplastic syndrome
cemia of malignancy (HHM), a p
associated with particular tumors.

Diagnostic Testing
Based on the generated list of differentials, tailored diagnostic testing may be recommended to support or refute
a diagnosis. Clinical features suggestive of a malignant
tumor include rapid growth, invasion into deep tissues
or overlying skin, fixation, ulceration, and poorly defined
margins. If a tumor lacks these clinical features, it should
not be assumed to be benign as malignant mesenchymal
tumors may appear demarcated when surrounded by
compressed normal tissue (pseudocapsule). Through the
use of cytology or histopathology, sampling of a mass is
required for differentiation.
An open dialogue is paramount when faced with evidence of a malignancy. The general public often has
unrealistic expectations regarding the diagnosis and
treatment of cancer. It is important to discuss the likelihood of a malignancy versus other diseases, as some
families may not have the emotional or financial wherewithal to proceed. Once a diagnosis is made, the anticipated biologic behavior will influence further
gnostics to identify to what extent the body is
dia­
affected locally, regionally, and distantly. This process is
termed staging.
Staging
Staging is necessary prior to treatment for accurate
assessment of overall condition, prognosis, and treatment response. The following chapters will illustrate the
predicted biologic behavior for specific malignancies.
Clinical staging using the World Health Organization
(WHO) classification system of tumor‐node‐metastasis
(TNM) has been applied to many canine and feline
tumor types. This classification has proven useful in the
prognostication of many but not all malignancies.
Clinical stage of specific tumor types will include the
size of the primary tumor (T), the identification of
spread to regional lymph nodes (N), and the presence of
metastasis (M). The subsequent chapters will reveal the
tumor types for which stage has been shown to be predictive for prognosis. A few examples are canine oral
melanoma, apocrine gland anal sac adenocarcinoma,
and lymphoma.
Grading
Grading of a tumor is based on the histopathologic features, in particular mitotic index, percent necrosis, invasiveness, nuclear size, overall cellularity, and the presence
of inflammation. Grading has also been shown to be predictive for particular tumors. The search for advanced
prognostic markers and predictive factors is currently
focused on molecular processes such as altered cell cycle
progression, cellular proliferation, programmed cell

VetBooks.ir

129 Approach to the Cancer Patient

death (apoptosis), and angiogenesis (generation of blood
vessels). Identification and understanding of the altered
molecular tumor processes will ultimately reveal reliable
markers for diagnosis, and predict the clinical behavior,
prognosis, and response to therapy.

­Diagnostics
Primary assessment should include evaluation of tumor
extent, by clinical examination and appropriate diagnostic imaging or endoscopic techniques. Baseline
blood testing and urinalysis rarely lead to a cancer diagnosis but may reveal any co‐morbidity, and so revise the
decision‐making process or prognosis. Species differences must be taken into consideration. A dog with
HHM may have lymphoma or an apocrine gland anal
sac adenocarcinoma. In contrast, the inciting cause of
feline hypercalcemia is more likely a direct action of
tumor‐induced bone destruction as in multiple myeloma or a carcinoma invading bone rather than HHM
which is the result of cytokine‐ or hormone‐induced
hypercalcemia. The baseline blood testing for felines
should always include retroviral testing. Cats with lymphoma and feline leukemia virus will likely have half the
anticipated survival time.
Imaging
Tumor imaging concentrates on assessing the essential
morphologic features. Radiography, sonography, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are applied routinely to identify local tumor
extent and patient staging. When faced with a choice of
diagnostic testing, the sensitivity and specificity should
be considered. For instance, clinical examination of a
limping Rottweiler with localization of pain to the proximal humerus may suggest a less extensive bone tumor
where radiography may be adequate. However, radiography is less sensitive than CT, which is less sensitive than
MRI. Be mindful that unless the owner is interested in a
limb‐sparing procedure, a radiograph may offer enough
evidence to proceed with tissue sampling or surgery. Of
note is that regional accessible lymph node sampling
should be performed when malignant masses are suspected. Sampling completes staging and may assist in
establishing a diagnosis.
When a tumor is expected to metastasize through the
circulatory system to the pulmonary parenchyma, three‐
view thoracic radiographs are recommended. In tumors
likely to metastasize through lymphatics such as mast
cell tumors and lymphoma, ventral‐dorsal and right lateral views will often suffice. The importance of clinical
staging may be unintentionally disregarded, especially
when exploratory surgery uncovers a mass. Any

­suspicious lesion should be sampled through biopsy or
fine needle aspiration (FNA). As mentioned previously,
sampling of the regional lymph nodes should also be
­performed. Any instruments contaminated with tumor
or intestinal contents should be discarded. Fresh tissue
should be cultured if granulomatous disease is
anticipated.
Advanced Diagnostics
Recent advancement in veterinary oncology has provided us with insight into disease processes and an
e volution toward targeted treatments. Prognostic
­
­information regarding survival time and disease‐free
interval in canine osteosarcoma was identified through
monitoring of serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and
bone ALP. Diagnostic tests for specific tumors are
available: PetScreen® test for lymphoma, CADET®
BRAF, CADET® BRAF Plus and V‐BTA™ (urine test for
bladder tumor analytes/mutations) for bladder cancer
diagnosis and monitoring. CADET® HM is a diagnostic
test utilizing cytological preparations or formalin fixed
parrafin embedded tissue to identify histiocytic diseases. Tests evaluating antibodies for thymidine kinase
and serum levels of the protein lactate dehydrogenase
can identify an ongoing malignant process. Once sufficient data are accrued, mainstream implementation
such as screening, diagnostic, prognostic and as treatment management tools may become possible.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and flow cytometry
have yielded prognostic ­information, and guided our
treatment choices in lymphoreticular cancers and mast
cell tumors. Please refer to these specific ­chapters for
more detail.

­Therapy
Curative techniques are treatments that are intended to
induce remission of the cancer and may include various
therapeutic options such as chemotherapy, surgical
extirpation, radiation therapy, and immunotherapy, all
with the goal of long‐term tumor control. Definitive
therapy will both accomplish tumor control and result in
alleviation or elimination of pain, whereas palliative
therapy is an important tool for control of oncologic pain
and improved function, generally with minimal control
over the tumor itself.
Ultimately, the treatment choice should be based on
several factors that will be individual to each family: time
available for hospital visits, feasibility of administering
in‐home medications, anticipated survival time with and
without treatment, acceptable side‐effect profile, emotional and financial wherewithal to tolerate treatment,
and disease‐related side‐effects.

1201

VetBooks.ir

1202

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Chemotherapy
Fundamentally, local disease requires a treatment to be
directed to a specific area, typically surgery or radiation
therapy. Chemotherapy is often indispensable when presented with widely disseminated but chemoresponsive
disease (lymphoma) or when the development of metastatic disease is highly anticipated (canine osteosarcoma). The application, administration, and response
rates achievable through the use of chemotherapy are
addressed in their respective chapters.
Treatment Advances
Recent treatment advances have provided the veterinarian with orally administered targeted treatments
for mast cell tumors (Palladia™ and Kinavet‐CA1®).
TANOVEA®-CA1 (rabacfosadine) is the first FDA conditionally approved drug for the treatment of lymphoma
in dogs. This drug is delivered intravenously and has
been found to inhibit the proliferation of lymphoma
cells in vivo. Inter­ventional radiology utilizes fluoroscopy and endoscopy, placing expandable metallic stents
in the urethra of dogs with neoplasia, resulting in
increased urine flow with tumor obstruction or near‐
obstruction. Chemoembolization refers to the angiography guided administration of a vascular occluding
substance and chemotherapy through a catheter into a
pinpointed vessel within the tumor. This technique has
shown promise for the treatment of unresectable liver
tumors. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HCT)
is available for dogs with hematopoietic malignancies.
Immunotherapy research collaboration has provided
the first USDA‐approved canine melanoma vaccine
(Oncept®) indicated for aiding in extending survival of
dogs with stage II or stage III oral canine melanoma.
Other available conditionally licensed vaccines include;
Canine Lymphoma Vaccine, a xenogeneic murine
CD20 DNA therapeutic vaccine for use in dogs with
B-cell lymphoma upon achieving remission through
chemotherapy. Canine Osteosarcoma Vaccine for the
treatment of dogs one year or older diagnosed with
appendicular osteosarcoma. The vaccine is a lyophilized formulation of a modified-live,attenuated, recombinant HER2/neu–expressing strain of Listeria that
activates cytotoxic T cells. Lastly for our felines, Feline
Interleukin-2 (IL-2) Immunomodulator Vaccine may
delay postsurgical recurrence of feline fibrosarcoma in
adult cats with stage I disease.
We have also had advancements in treatment‐related
side‐effects, with reports revealing protection from tissue necrosis associated with administration of dexrazoxane in patients with chemotherapy extravasation.
Entyce®, capromorelin is an orally active small molecule
that mimics the action of ghrelin, which causes growth

hormone secretion and appetite stimulation. This has
significant potential to treat inappetence related to
therapy and/or underlying cancer in dogs and
chemo­
possibly cats. Maropitant citrate (Cerenia®) offers an economical addition to the armament for the prevention
and treatment of chemotherapy‐induced nausea and
vomiting. In an effort to avoid chemotherapy related toxicity primarily found in herding breeds an assay is available. These breeds have a higher risk of toxicity from
chemotherapeutic agents that are actively transported by
the p‐glycoprotein pump (e.g., vinca alkaloids, doxorubicin, dactinomycin, taxanes). The assay is noninvasive,
and is simply performed through either a blood sample
or cheek swab. For more information visit www.vetmed.
wsu.edu/depts‐vcpl/.
Surgery
Surgical intervention is the backbone of localized cancer
treatment and is often used adjunctively in metastatic
cancers. Surgical oncology will be addressed in the
respective chapters for which is applies.
Interestingly, perioperative anesthetic and analgesic
practices, including administration of opioid analgesics
and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), use
of local anesthetic techniques, precipitation of the neuroendocrine stress response, temperature regulation,
and transfusion of blood products may influence long‐
term outcomes such as recurrence and metastasis.
Radiation Therapy
Radiation therapy (RT) utilizes the delivery of radiation
from a distance. The delivery of radiation therapy in veterinary medicine is through the use of three machine
types: orthovoltage (infrequently employed), cobalt‐60
(widely used), and linear accelerators (most common).
Pedestal machines are limited to up‐and‐down
­movement while isocentric machines rotate around the
patient. The advantage permits treatment from a variety
of angles. The prescribed radiation dose is expressed as
­tissue absorbed dose in units of gray (Gy). The total
­prescribed radiation is delivered in small defined doses
called fractions. Radiation therapy is often employed
when surgical resection of a tumor is limited by normal
surrounding structures, and it is not possible to eliminate microscopic cells. In select cases when normal
­tissue structures preclude adequate surgical removal,
radiation may be performed prior to surgery (preoperative). The majority of radiation therapy is performed
10–14 days postoperatively.
It is important that the radiation oncologist be aware
of the original tumor site, including the dimensions and
extent of invasion, so as to include all the affected tissue in the planned radiation field. When microscopic

VetBooks.ir

129 Approach to the Cancer Patient

residual disease is outside the treatment field, it is left
untreated and recurrence is likely; this is referred to as a
geographic miss. The risk increases with multiple surgeries by means of distortion of normal tissue structures.
Placement of hemoclips (radiopaque clips) at the margins of the resected tissue benefits treatment planning,
decreasing the likelihood of a geographic miss. The
majority of radiation‐induced adverse effects are often
mild and self‐limiting. Advanced imaging developments
have enhanced our ability to delineate tumor tissue
extent and have led to improved treatment outcomes
and fewer patient side‐effects.

­several terms under the umbrella term SRT. SRS (stereotactic radiosurgery) treats the CNS, brain and spine.
Despite having surgery in the name, the procedure is
noninvasive,and no surgery is involved. SBRT (stereotactic body radiation therapy) treats all other structures
than the brain and spine. SRT is used to treat tumors that
would otherwise be considered inoperable and classically it is not used to address microscopic disease. At
present, SRT use in veterinary patients is expanding
beyond the initially treated bone tumors, central and
peripheral nervous system tumors.

Intensity‐Modulated Radiation Therapy (IMRT)

Radiopharmaceuticals are radioactive substances used to
image and/or treat particular cancers. One example is
iodine‐131, a frequently employed treatment of thyroid
adenoma/carcinoma in the cat. Samarium‐153 and
related compounds have been used for treatment of
­multilobular osteochondrosarcoma, and osteosarcoma.

The majority of radiation treatments in veterinary oncology are delivered with radiation beams of uniform intensity in a static field. Collimators are used to limit the
treatment beam and provide a rectangular treatment
field. Further development has led to the more complex
multileaf collimator (MLC) which is made of many metal
slats capable of independent movement to shape the
field. IMRT has the ability to specifically modulate the
weights of small segments within an individual radiation
beam. This is referred to as intensity distribution, and
allows the beam to conform to the three‐dimensional
shape of complex tumor target volumes. This technique
of RT delivers a nonuniform fluence (beam intensity) to
the patient, allowing optimization of dose distribution to
the target volume while sparing critical tissues. The
MLC uses the superimposition of many subfields that
deliver the prescribed dose. The use of IMRT has permitted the radiation oncologist to treat tumors (nasal
and prostate) that would otherwise be difficult to control
without significant patient side‐effects.
Stereotactic Radiation Therapy

Stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) involves precision delivery of one or several high doses of radiation to the target
(tumor) by means of a linear accelerator with a sophisticated treatment planning system, delivery, and positioning device (frame). The conformal nature of SRS permits
avoidance of toxicity to normal surrounding tissues. The
CyberKnife® Radiosurgery System delivers radiation
through a manipulated robot‐mounted linear accelerator. At present, SRS is primarily utilized in select canine
osteosarcoma patients and veterinary patients with central and peripheral nervous system tumors. Stereotactic
radiation therapy (SRT) involves precision delivery of
one or several high doses of radiation therapy delivered
to the target (tumor) by means of a linear accelerator
with a sophisticated treatment planning system, delivery,
and positioning device(s). Most linear accelerators are
floor mounted and revolve 360 degrees around the
patient. The conformal nature of SRT permits avoidance
of toxicity to normal surrounding tissues. There are

Radiopharmaceuticals

Palliative Medical Care
Metronomic Chemotherapy

Metronomic chemotherapy, which is intended to prevent tumor angiogenesis, is based on frequent, low‐dose,
continuous cytotoxic drug administration lacking the
rest period included with conventional chemotherapy. It
results in minimal toxicity, is often cost‐effective, and
convenient. In veterinary medicine, metronomic therapy
has become an affiliate to many protocols and usually
combines an orally administered cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agent with an NSAID. It is most frequently applied
in the treatment of visceral hemangiosarcoma (HSA),
transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder, nasal
tumors, and metastatic cancers.
Pain Management
It is often difficult for clients to recognize the signs of
pain or discomfort in their pets. Unrelieved pain is a
major cause of suffering in patients with cancer.
Veterinarians managing cancer patients must be vigilant
about monitoring for and providing relief from pain,
whether caused by the neoplastic process itself or coincidental in nature. Providing adequate management of
pain is central to oncologic care and will improve the
quality of life of the animal patient.
Palliative Radiation Therapy
Palliative radiation therapy (PRT) is the administration
of a radiotherapy dose in a smaller number of treatments
(fractions) than would be used in the delivery of curative
intent RT (CRT); however, the fraction dose is higher
and less percise than SRT. The appeal of PRT lies in

1203

VetBooks.ir

1204

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

improved quality of life through symptom relief and
when compared to CRT, the cost incurred is minimal. The
mechanism of radiation‐induced pain amelioration is
currently undefined. Reduction of inflammatory cells
through irradiation inhibits the release of chemical pain
mediators and is probably responsible for the rapid
reduction in pain seen in some patients. Decreased activity of osteoclasts in the bone microenvironment reduces
bone destruction and predicts the relief of pain through
irradiation.
Most patients treated with PRT will not be afforded
long‐term survival. Symptom relief may last 1–3 months.
The common early side‐effects associated with RT are
often easily ameliorated and patient tolerated. While
uncommon, late reactions associated with PRT may be
undesirable and life‐threatening. Tumor reirradiation
may be possible but continued treatment will increase
the likelihood of deleterious late effects. Aside from the
successful alleviation of discomfort in bone tumors, PRT
may offer relief for a variety of tumor types especially in
patients with tumor‐induced pain and limited function.
Adjunctive Techniques
Complementary techniques including acupuncture,
massage, and herbal remedies are being evaluated. The
actual practice of acupuncture incorporates many forms,
including dry needling, laser acupuncture, and electroacupuncture, and may incorporate acupressure or herbal
medicine. Specific considerations for acupuncture in the
presence of cancer include avoidance of insertion of needles into or near tumors, and attention to the risk of
infection in patients who are immunocompromised.

­End‐of‐Life Management
The hospice movement originated in the late 1960s when
Dame Cicely Saunders established the first medical

hospice that focused on palliative care of the whole
­
patient in an attempt to control distressing symptomatology while also managing the psychosocial aspects of
dying for the patient and the patient’s family. These
ideas are quite applicable to veterinary medicine. The
American Veterinary Medical Association’s established
guidelines for hospice care are available at: www.avma.
org/public/PetCare/Pages/hospice‐care.aspx
Euthanasia is a valid therapeutic tool in the management of progressive and intractable pain or disease in
veterinary patients but it is not one that is applied easily
in most situations. Many owners have questions about
timing and fear making the wrong decision. The veterinarian managing a terminal patient must be prepared to
handle a wide range of physical, financial, and emotional
issues. The grieving process is an individual experience,
making it essential to be supportive, permitting clients
to grieve in a manner we may not understand. Clients
may also need encouragement to speak openly with
children.
Veterinarians must perform many functions during
the course of treatment and palliative care of the oncology patient:
listening to the goals, fears, and contextual experience
of the owners
●● demonstrating awareness of the difficult nature of
the situation; reflective listening and empathy
can help build trust between the client and the
veterinarian
●● guiding the owners through the expected course of the
disease and helping them define an appropriate quality
of life for the patient
●● providing a peaceful and dignified release from suffering through appropriate methods of euthanasia.
●●

Veterinarians have an inordinate amount of pressure to
provide for patients, especially those under protracted
care. Attention should be given to the internal struggles
that may ensue should compassion fatigue arise.

­Further Reading
Afsharimani B, Cabot P, Parat MO. Morphine and tumor
growth and metastasis. Cancer Metastasis Rev 2011;
30(2): 225–38.
Craig LE. Cause of death in dogs according to breed: a
necropsy survey of five breeds. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
2001; 37: 438–43.
Ehrhart N, Dernell W, Hoffmann W, et al. Prognostic
importance of alkaline phosphatase activity in serum
from dogs with appendicular osteosarcoma: 75 cases

(1990–1996). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998; 213:
1002–6.
Fleming JM, Creevy KE, Promislow DEL. Mortality in
North American dogs from 1984 to 2004: an
investigation into age‐, size‐, and breed‐related causes of
death. J Vet Intern Med 2011; 25: 187–98.
Gottschalk A, Sharma S, Ford J, et al. Review article: the
role of the perioperative period in recurrence after
cancer surgery. Anesth Analg 2010; 110(6): 1636–43.

VetBooks.ir

1205

130
Biology of Cancer and Cancer Genetics
Mary‐Keara Boss, DVM, PhD, DACVR (Radiation Oncology)
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA

Veterinary patients develop cancer in all tissues of the
body, and these neoplasms are characterized according
to their cell type of origin: carcinoma – epithelial;
­sarcoma – mesenchymal; round cell tumor – typically of
the hematopoietic system. Cells can transition from a
normal phenotype to malignancy through acquisition of
mutations of certain types of genes. Oncogenes are
defined as those which code for proteins that allow
­dysregulated tumor cell growth and proliferation, while
tumor suppressor genes, which normally restrain cell
growth, allow cancer cells to grow and divide indefinitely
when absent or inactivated by mutation. The abnormal
characteristics and behaviors of cancerous cells and
­tissues share commonalities, such that the neoplastic
transformations and progression pathways have been
defined according to various hallmarks of cancer.
In their 2011 review, Hanahan and Weinberg revised
and expanded upon their initially described hallmarks.
The original six hallmarks are:
enabling replicative immortality
evading growth suppressors
●● resisting cell death
●● sustaining proliferative signaling
●● inducing angiogenesis
●● activating invasion and metastasis.
●●
●●

As new developments in cancer biology were discovered,
emerging hallmarks that involve the complex tumor
microenvironment were added:
avoiding immune destruction
deregulating cellular energetics and enabling characteristics crucial to the acquisition of the original
­ allmark capabilities
h
●● genome instability and mutation
●● tumor promoting inflammation.
●●
●●

This chapter on the biology of cancer and cancer
­genetics is organized in accordance with the hallmarks
of cancer. Each section will review the cancer biology
and genetics underlying the particular neoplastic characteristic being discussed, followed by examples of the
­relevance of the abnormality in clinical small animal
oncology today. Topics were assigned to a particular
­hallmark, and although it is recognized that overlaps in
content exist, this organization allowed a concise but in
no way comprehensive account of how the biology and
genetics of veterinary cancer may be conceptualized.
Further, the hallmarks are organized in an order that
allows the topics to progress from cellular to microenvironmental effects. Clinical aspects of each category
will be highlighted; however, for more detailed discussions, see chapters devoted to specific tumor types.

­Enabling Replicative Immortality
Cancer cells require the ability to replicate unlimitedly,
uninhibited by normal space restrictions, to form a
­macroscopic tumor. Normal cells will progress through
a tightly regulated, limited number of cell divisions;
thereupon, they face either senescence, which is an
­
­irreversible, nonproliferative, viable state, or crisis (cell
death). Cancer cells do not respect the bounds of senescence or crisis, and attain a state of immortality.
The classic in vitro demonstration of unlimited replication is the ability to continuously grow and passage tumor
cells in cell culture in the laboratory setting. The development and maintenance of cancer cell lines in vitro have
allowed for molecular characterization of specific tumor
types and evaluation of therapeutic responses through
experimental manipulations at the cellular level. Recent
research utilizing veterinary cancer cell lines includes

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1206

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

­studies of canine osteosarcoma, B cell lymphoma, mammary carcinoma, prostate carcinoma, and mast cell tumors,
as well as feline vaccine‐associated fibrosarcomas.
There are several fields of study devoted to understanding the uncontrolled nature of tumor cell replication. An underlying mechanism by which a cell regulates
the number of divisions tolerable over time is through
the integrity of chromosomal telomeres. Telomeres are
specialized nucleoprotein complexes that “cap” and protect the end of every eukaryotic chromosome against
chromosomal fusion, recombination, and terminal DNA
degradation. Telomeres become progressively shorter
with each doubling until they reach a critically short
length and induce replicative senescence. The enzyme
telomerase maintains telomeres by synthesizing and
replenishing telomeric DNA. Cancer cells exploit this
function by expressing telomerase and perpetually
replace their telomeres. It is through this mechanism that
most cancer cells gain replicative immortality. It has been
shown in dogs that telomerase activity is upregulated in a
majority of cancers and is absent in normal adult tissue.
In fact, according to veterinary oncologic studies, telomerase is present in greater than 90% of canine cancers and
is absent from most normal tissues, with the exception of
germ cells. Further, it has been suggested that a different
form of telomere maintenance, known as alternative
lengthening of telomeres (ALT) via homologous recombination, may occur in canine osteosarcoma cells.
Important to the concept of replicative immortality,
there has been great interest in studying cancer stem
cells. The basis of the cancer stem cell model is that
tumor development relies on a subset of stem cells that
have the ability to self‐renew and generate the diverse
cells that comprise the tumor through differentiation.
As such, the tumor exists as a heterogenous structure,
maintained by cancer stem cells, which are inherently
resistant to traditional chemotherapy and radiotherapy.
Recently, cancer stem cells have been identified, isolated,
and characterized from canine osteosarcoma cells in vitro.

to the treatment during mitosis and most resistant when
in the S phase. If treated in or prior to G1 or G2 phase, a
temporary arrest or “block” in the cell cycle occurs. It is
felt that the G1 and G2 blocks are necessary in order to
repair damage done to fragile DNA prior to duplication of
a faulty template or distribution of defective genes to a
daughter cell in mitosis. These transient delays are also
known as checkpoints. These checkpoints exist as safety
mechanisms to limit the propagation of heritable errors
and promote the survival of the cell. A well‐known tumor
suppressor protein, p53, plays a critical role in the G1
checkpoint and controlling the fate of injured cells. It has
been determined that a majority of cancers are affected
with mutated p53, which allows cells that have been damaged to proceed through the cell cycle and replicate, creating daughter cells with flawed genetic content.
Chemotherapy drugs can be defined as cell cycle phase
specific or cell cycle phase nonspecific. Examples of
chemotherapeutics that are cell cycle phase specific
include antimetabolites (i.e., gemcitabine, cytosine arabinoside, 5‐fluorouracil), which are S phase specific, interfering with the incorporation of nucleotides during DNA
synthesis, and vinca alkaloids (i.e., vincristine, v­ inblastine)
which are M phase specific, as they disrupt the assembly
of tubulin into microtubules and inhibit cell division.
Understanding these interactions, combination treatment plans, in which chemotherapy and radiation therapy are administered concurrently, can exploit the
sensitive phases of the cell cycle, with the goal of improving therapeutic efficacy. A clinical illustration of this
practice is the combination of gemcitabine, which kills
cells specifically in S phase, with radiation therapy, where
cells in S phase are the most resistant. The chemotherapy
dose must be reduced with this approach to limit the
severity of normal tissue toxicity; however, the combination has been reported for treatment of canine sinonasal
carcinoma and feline oral squamous cell carcinoma.

­Evading Growth Suppressors

Conventional cancer therapeutics may kill cells by
­inducing a lethal, cellular division, known as mitotic
catastrophe, or triggering an organized, ­
controlled
cell death, known as apoptosis.
Playing a dual role, the p53 tumor suppressor gene,
which was described in the previous section as controlling the G1 checkpoint in managing the cell cycle, is also
critical in activating the apoptotic response following
cellular damage. As it is very common for malignancies
to exist with mutant p53, cancer cells are adept at
­avoiding death by apoptosis. For example, the incidence
of p53 mutations in canine osteosarcoma varies from
24% to 47%.

The cell cycle is an organized balance of signals promoting and restricting replication and division; however,
neoplastic cells exist with dysfunctional growth control
mechanisms. The basic phases of the cell cycle have been
defined as S phase (DNA synthesis), M phase (mitosis),
and gaps, G1 (between M and S), G2 (between S and M),
G0 (senescence).
When cells are exposed to damaging agents, such as
ionizing radiation or certain chemotherapy drugs, the
therapeutic efficacy varies with respect to the phase of the
cell cycle. For example, irradiated cells are most sensitive

­Resisting Cell Death

VetBooks.ir

130 Biology of Cancer and Cancer Genetics

An alternative mechanism of resisting cell death by
cancer cells is through manipulating antiapoptotic pathways. These antiapoptotic pathways are intended to
maintain the natural homeostasis of cellular proliferation and deletion within tissues. Widely studied inhibitors of apoptosis include members of the Bcl‐2 family
and survivin. The distribution of Bcl‐2 protein in normal
and neoplastic feline tissues has been studied, as well as
the expression of survivin in canine urinary bladder
transitional cell carcinoma.
In general, mitotic catastrophe is the primary method
of cellular killing by radiation exposure and a significant
component of cell death by certain chemotherapy
agents. A major mode of action of chemotherapy‐
induced death is the activation of apoptosis. To provide
a clinical example, a class of drugs incorporated in
­cancer therapy protocols which induces apoptosis in a
specific cellular population are the bisphosphonates.
Bisphosphonate drugs used in veterinary oncology
include pamidronate and zoledronate, and these are prescribed for patients that have developed malignancies
which involve the destruction of bone. Bone undergoes
constant turnover. Homeostasis of the tissue is maintained by the a­ ctivity of osteoblasts, which create bone,
and osteoclasts, which destroy bone. Bisphosphonates
inhibit the destruction of bone by reducing osteoclast
activities and stimulating these cells to undergo apoptosis. The therapeutic effect of osteoclast inhibition is to
slow the malignant destruction of the affected bone,
which results in alleviation of pain and improvement of
quality of life. Recent examples of clinical research utilizing bisphosphonate drugs for the treatment of veterinary cancer patients include the use of pamidronate in
the management of canine appendicular osteosarcoma
and ­zoledronate for treatment of oral squamous cell
­carcinoma in cats.

­Genome Instability and Mutation
In an established neoplasm, mutations have evolved to
circumvent effective cell cycle checkpoints and DNA
repair mechanisms. This allows the tumor to reproduce
in a state of genetic instability, further driving an aggressive phenotype. In veterinary oncology, such genetic
instability has recently been studied in canine mammary
tumors, where variable rates of microsatellite sequence
aberrations were documented among the mammary
cancer samples.
A given population of tumor cells is heterogenous by
nature, with variable distributions of genetic mutations
and phenotypic manifestations of these abnormalities.
Genetic and pathologic evaluations of tumors with the
same clinical diagnosis exhibit intertumoral h
­ eterogeneity

due to multiple mutations in oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes, varying environmental conditions, and
inherited germline variations. The combination of these
factors leads to immense natural heterogeneity in tumor
phenotypes, disease outcomes, and response to therapies. The development of new molecular biological tools
has expanded the understanding of genetics and the
pathophysiology of tumorigenesis.
Gene expression profiling with the use of microarray
technology has greatly improved our ability to classify
tumors by generating unique molecular fingerprints that
have delineated tumor subtypes. DNA microarray technology allows the study of gene activity and gene function at the genome level as a means to analyze the
molecular phenotypes and clinical heterogeneity of
tumors. The emergence of genome sequences for a variety of veterinary species has allowed for the development of new microarray‐based technologies that
facilitate whole genome, or gene‐targeted, profiling to be
performed at a considerably higher resolution and
throughput.
The use of microarray‐based technology in the veterinary field has become more prevalent. Recently, the
utility of gene expression analysis using a cDNA microarray to differentiate metastatic and nonmetastatic soft
tissue sarcomas in dogs was investigated. Further,
microarray technology was used to characterize the
gene expression profile of tumors in a population of
dogs with soft tissue sarcomas being treated with radiation therapy and hyperthermia to predict therapeutic
response. Comparisons were made between the gene
changes that occurred, tumor volume, and functional
MRI parameters. Significant correlations were identified between tumor responses and genes involved in telomerase ­activity, DNA repair, inflammation, and growth
factor signaling. In this cohort of canine sarcomas, the
gene expression of tumors was affected significantly,
but not uniformly, by the combination of radiation and
hyperthermia.

­Tumor Promoting Inflammation
While it is important to understand the cellular characteristics of a tumor, we must consider that the cells exist
in a complex microenvironment. Tumor cells are intimately associated with supporting stromal cells, immune
cells, and microvasculature. Solid tumors exist in a state
of active inflammation, and conventional cancer therapy
can both promote and reduce inflammation. Tumor
tissue reacts as a unit to therapeutic interventions;
­
­however, responses to treatments are not limited to the
neoplasm. There are unique localized and systemic
responses to chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and other

1207

VetBooks.ir

1208

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

treatments that can result in transient or chronic effects.
Clinical examples of local and systemic inflammatory
reactions to oncologic treatments in veterinary medicine
would include localized oral mucositis within the radiation field and generalized intestinal inflammation with
certain chemotherapeutic agents, respectively.
The association between chronic inflammation and
neoplasia is well established. Some recent interesting
examples of chronic inflammatory lesions that progress
to cancer in veterinary medicine include biliary tract
trematode infection leading to cholangiocarcinoma in
cats, superficial corneal squamous cell carcinoma occurring in dogs with chronic keratitis, and traumatic or
­surgical fracture‐associated osteosarcoma development
in dogs.
A nonspecific and complex host response to inflammation that has been investigated for its potential use as
a prognostic and monitoring tool is the formation of
acute phase proteins (APP). APPs are induced by proinflammatory cytokines, and tumor cells produce large
amounts of transforming growth factor beta, cytokines
including interleukins 6 and 10, and prostaglandin E2.
Veterinary studies evaluating the use of APPs include trials with canine and feline lymphoma, canine mammary
carcinoma, mast cell tumors, soft tissue sarcoma, and
combinations of tumor‐bearing dogs and cats.
A targeted approach to inhibiting the inflammatory
component of cancer that is commonly used in veterinary oncology is the use of cyclooxygenase (COX)
inhibitors, specifically those that inhibit the enzyme
­
COX‐2. Overexpression of COX‐2 in tumors drives
many cancer‐associated mechanisms and COX‐2 inhibitors are prescribed to prevent or reduce the neoplastic
proinflammatory state. The effects of the COX‐inhibitor piroxicam have been evaluated in the treatment of
canine urinary bladder transitional cell carcinoma, as
well as canine oral malignant melanoma, inflammatory
mammary carcinoma, prostatic carcinoma, and oral
­
­squamous cell carcinoma.

­Avoiding Immune Destruction
Cancer develops in the host through deception of the
immune system. The roles of the immune cells are
defined by their involvement in either innate or adaptive
immunity. Cells of the innate pathway include phagocytic, antigen‐presenting cells (APC), such as macrophages and dendritic cells, and those of the adaptive
pathway consisting of cells with randomly generated
antigen receptors, like B and T lymphocytes. Generally,
APCs are activated by immunogenic stimuli, migrate to
lymphoid organs to present antigen to T cells, and stimulate the adaptive immune response.

The function of effector T cells and APCs can be disrupted by a T lymphocyte type, known as regulatory T
cell (Treg). Treg cells are important for immune tolerance through downregulation of self‐reactive lymphocytes; however, suppression of antitumor immune
responses by Tregs can promote tumor progression and
development. Large populations of Tregs have been
shown to be present in various human cancers and to
correlate with poor prognosis. The involvement of
Tregs in veterinary oncology has been investigated in a
number of different canine tumor types. In these studies, the numbers of Treg cells in the peripheral blood
and tumor‐draining lymph nodes were increased in
dogs with ­cancer compared to healthy dogs. Further,
Treg cell infiltration was statistically correlated with
high histologic grade in canine mammary carcinoma.
Many therapeutic approaches have been developed
that utilize the immune system to target and treat cancer,
and these techniques have been explored in veterinary
oncology. Nonspecific tumor immunotherapies, including biologic response modifiers, such as bacterial strains,
oncolytic viruses, and recombinant cytokines, growth
factors, and hormones, have been used to treat several
veterinary malignancies. Also, specific targeted immunotherapies, such as cancer vaccines, where the immune
system detects tumors through tumor‐associated antigens, have been utilized for veterinary patients. Clinical
examples of veterinary cancer vaccines include the
­xenogeneic DNA vaccine for canine melanoma and the
autologous tumor RNA‐loaded, activated B cell vaccine
for canine lymphoma.

­Inducing Angiogenesis
Tumor vasculature is unique and abnormal. In order for
a developing solid tumor to grow into a macroscopic
mass, it must induce the surrounding normal tissue to
either share its oxygen and nutrient supply or create its
own vascular network. The processes by which a tumor
forms new blood vessels, known as vasculogenesis, and/
or remodels existing vasculature, known as angiogenesis,
involve highly integrated signaling and communication
between cells of the microenvironment. Tumors stimulate persistent angiogenesis through expression of many
factors, one of the most important being the family of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) proteins.
Vascular endothelial growth factor is a growth factor
and its signal is transmitted through the tyrosine kinase
activity of transmembrane VEGF receptors. Most cancer
cells and certain tumor stromal cells express VEGF, and
stimulation of VEGF leads to endothelial cell proliferation, migration, and survival. In veterinary oncology,
VEGF expression has been recognized as a negative

VetBooks.ir

130 Biology of Cancer and Cancer Genetics

prognostic marker for a number of tumors, such as
canine intracranial meningiomas, osteosarcoma, lymphoma, oral malignant melanoma, and feline invasive
mammary carcinoma.
Abnormal tumor vessel morphology includes aberrant
architecture and function of blood vessels which often
leads to low oxygenation within the tumor, known as
intratumoral hypoxia. Tumor hypoxia may stimulate
angiogenesis through expression of the transcription
factor hypoxia inducible factor‐1 (HIF‐1). HIF‐1 induces
several proangiogenic factors such as VEGF. Hypoxic
regions within tumors are a significant issue in radiation
therapy because hypoxic cells are more resistant than
oxygenated cells to treatment. Hypoxic cells are also
more resistant to chemotherapy as hypoxic cells are farther from the vasculature and may not be exposed to
lethal drug concentrations. Importantly, hypoxia may
increase the biologic aggressiveness of a tumor by HIF‐1
activation of several neoplastic pathways.
Targeted therapeutic approaches have been developed
recently which are intended to disrupt tumor angiogenesis. The use of continuous, low‐dose chemotherapy is
commonly referred to as “metronomic chemotherapy.”
Three aspects of angiogenesis that are affected by metronomic chemotherapy are direct cytotoxic effects on the
endothelial cells of the tumor blood vessels indirect
effect of tipping the influence from proangiogeneic
growth factors to inhibitors, thus preventing further
­vessel expansion, and reducing the recruitment of bone
marrow‐derived endothelial progenitor cells. The efficacy of metronomic chemotherapy protocols has been
studied in veterinary oncology through clinical trials
with canine patients treated for splenic hemangiosarcoma and soft tissue sarcoma with the drug combination
of cyclophosphamide and piroxicam.

­Sustaining Proliferative Signaling
In normal tissues, growth factors regulate cellular proliferation and differentiation. Cancer cells, however,
develop a reduced requirement for exogenous growth
factors as they become capable of autonomous activation
of autocrine and paracrine growth pathways. As the
goals for cancer therapy include tumor regression and
eradication, this aberrant proliferation must be inhibited
to prevent resistance and recurrence.
Some of the key proteins regulating cell survival and
proliferation are the transmembrane epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) and ligand epidermal growth factor (EGF). EGFR is overexpressed in many tumor types
and is associated with aggressiveness and resistance to
therapies. EGFR and EGF have been studied in veterinary medicine as potential prognostic indicators and

possible therapeutic targets in canine mammary cancer,
glial brain tumors, nasal carcinomas, and feline oral
squamous cell carcinoma.
Epidermal growth factor receptor belongs to a group
of proteins that form the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)
superfamily. Tyrosine kinases are transmembrane receptors that regulate normal cell signal transduction and
maintain cell growth and differentiation. Additional
examples of receptor tyrosine kinases include Kit, Met,
VEGFR, PDGFR, and FGFR. RTKs are commonly
­abnormally activated and dysregulated in human and
veterinary cancer. For instance, Kit is a receptor found
on mast cells, and mutations to Kit in canine mast cell
tumors (MCTs) have been shown to drive unregulated
proliferative signaling. Up to 30% of all canine MCTs are
affected with Kit mutations, and these have been shown
to be significantly associated with tumor grade, as the
more malignant tumors are more likely to have abnormal
Kit receptors. Further, canine gastrointestinal stromal
tumors (GIST) have also been characterized as carrying
Kit mutations.
Recently, a variety of small molecule inhibitors that
target tyrosine kinases, known as tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), have been approved for the treatment of
human cancer. The use of these inhibitors has resulted
in significant clinical efficacy, being used as sole
therapeutics or in combination therapy protocols.
­
Importantly, TKIs have now been incorporated into
veterinary oncology care. Examples of these drugs
include Palladia™ (toceranib), and Gleevec® (imatinib).
Gleevec has been used to treat cancers in dogs and cats,
and Palladia has undergone registrational studies in
dogs with MCTs. The molecular targets inhibited by
these drugs consist of Kit, VEGF, and PDGFR and
they have been used to treat MCTs and sarcomas in
dogs and cats, as well as carcinomas, melanoma, and
myeloma in dogs.

­Deregulating Cellular Energetics
It has been discussed with the preceding hallmarks that
tumors adapt and proliferate despite harsh conditions of
inflammatory stress and disorganized, ineffective microcirculation. The tumor microenvironment is not only
characterized by varying degrees of hypoxia, but also
nutrient deprivation and low extracellular pH. The unusual metabolism of cancer cells is intimately involved in
creating such an abnormal physiologic state.
Normal tissues are able to sustain routine cellular
functions through the oxidation of nutrients to provide
energy in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
Glucose metabolism is regulated in response to changes
in cellular oxygen levels. Initially, glucose is converted to

1209

VetBooks.ir

1210

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

pyruvate by glycolytic enzymes. Under well‐oxygenated
conditions, pyruvate is oxidized in the tricarboxylic acid
cycle to form water and a substantial amount of ATP
(oxidative phosphorylation); however, under hypoxic
conditions, lactate dehydrogenase A converts pyruvate
to lactate and generates very little ATP (glycolysis).
It has been shown that glycolysis, under aerobic conditions, is particularly high in aggressive tumors when
compared with benign tumors and normal tissues. This
discovery of tumor‐specific, oxygen‐independent glycolysis was labeled the Warburg effect. This peculiar metabolic preference of tumor cells drives a significantly
inefficient breakdown of glucose for ATP and creates an
acidic microenvironment through the build‐up of the
byproduct lactic acid.
The increased dependence of cancer cells on the glycolytic pathway provides a biochemical basis for the
functional imaging technique positron emission tomography (PET). PET imaging has become increasingly
invaluable in human and veterinary oncology. Using the
glucose analog fluorine‐18‐fluorodeoxyglucose (18FDG),
the detection of glucose metabolism with PET is associated with the presence of malignant tissue before anatomic evidence occurs. While traditional methods for
determining response to therapy in veterinary oncology
centers on anatomic changes in measurable target
­
lesions, 18FDG‐PET combined with a CT scan can
be used as a sensitive marker of tumor response to anticancer therapies via interrogation of cellular glucose
metabolism.
Positron emission tomography plays an important
role in the diagnosis, staging, image‐guided treatment
planning, and monitoring of malignant diseases.
A recent preliminary study described the use of serial
18
FDG‐PET/CT to assess the response to toceranib
­therapy in canine cancer. Multiple types of canine tumors
have been evaluated for their avidity for FDG, including
mast cell tumor, lymphoma, mammary carcinoma, and
hemangiosarcoma. FDG‐PET has identified the involvement of metastatic sites not detected on physical examination and has been reported to provide more accurate
disease detection for improved diagnosis, staging, and
restaging with treatment of companion animals with
cancer.

­Activating Invasion and Metastasis
The final hallmark to be reviewed is invasion and metastasis, the processes of which are incredibly convoluted
and intricate. The properties required to attain the phenotype of an invasive and metastatic neoplasm involve

the multistep, coordinated foundation of the previously
discussed hallmarks.
Experimental molecular oncology studies suggest that
the progression of a solid tumor to a metastatic phenotype is not simply the result of dysregulated signal transduction pathways, but instead is achieved through a
stepwise selection process. The adaptation of populations of neoplastic cells to their harsh microenvironment
facilitates cancer cell dissemination through the up‐ or
downregulation of critical metastasis‐associated genes,
such as E‐/N‐cadherin for epithelial‐mesenchymal transition (EMT), uPAR for degradation of the basement
membrane and extracellular matrix, HGF/MET for cell
motility, and VEGF for stromal interactions, intra/
extravasation, and angiogenesis. The systematic alteration of these phenotypic regulators allows cells to escape
the hostile microenvironment of the primary tumor and
colonize a secondary location.
The role of E‐cadherin in metastasis of veterinary cancer has been investigated. E‐cadherin is a transmembrane glycoprotein involved in cell‐to‐cell adhesions of
two adjacent cells and is typically expressed by epithelial
cells. Metastatic epithelial malignancies are associated
with loss of E‐cadherin expression and connectivity with
their neighboring cells; this leads to EMT, where epithelial tumor cells obtain mesenchymal characteristics, as
well as invasive and metastatic properties. In veterinary
medicine, studies that have investigated E‐cadherin
expression have evaluated canine mammary carcinoma
and anal sac gland adenocarcinoma for associations with
clinical malignancy.
Dissemination of primary tumor cells to a secondary
location may result in colonization of any number of
anatomic locations. One of the most common metastatic
sites is the first regional lymph node or nodes to which
the lymphatics from the primary tumor drain; therefore,
the disease status of what is known as this sentinel
lymph node (SNL) is important in cancer screening.
Lymphoscintigraphy, the injection of a radioactive tracer
at the tumor site to identify lymphatic drainage, and
intratumoral/peritumoral blue dye injection have been
used to locate SNLs in veterinary oncology. The SNL can
then be evaluated via histopathology for the presence of
metastatic disease. In veterinary practice, lymph nodes
are generally aspirated or biopsied if palpably enlarged;
however, since metastases occur in lymph nodes of normal clinical appearance and in lymph nodes other than
those routinely assessed according to the anatomic location of the primary tumor, this advanced technique for
metastasis identification has been recommended.
Reports describing SNL identification in veterinary
medicine include studies investigating canine head and
neck tumors and mammary carcinoma.

VetBooks.ir

130 Biology of Cancer and Cancer Genetics

­Conclusion
Hanahan and Weinberg’s hallmarks of cancer provides
an incredibly useful conceptual framework for understanding the complex biology of cancer, and it is evident
that intimate associations link each. The categorical
focus of these cancer principles allows the specialized
refinement of molecular mechanisms; however, the

appreciation that each hallmark operates as part of a
greater circuit will promote discoveries that further
advance the study of veterinary cancer and clinical oncology. The advancements made by veterinary researchers
and clinician scientists featured in this chapter have contributed to a greater understanding of translational
oncologic concepts between human and companion animal cancer patients.

­Further Reading
Boss M‐K, Bristow R, Dewhirst MW. Linking the history of
radiation biology to the hallmarks of cancer. Radiat Res
2014; 181(6): 561–77.
Grassi Rici RE, Alcantara D, Fratini P, et al. Mesenchymal
stem cells with rhBMP‐2 inhibits the growth of canine
osteosarcoma cells. BMC Vet Res 2012; 8: 17.
Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next
generation. Cell 2011; 144(5): 646–74.

Ruetgen BC, Willenbrock S, Reimann‐Berg N, et al.
Authentication of primordial characteristics of the
CLBL‐1 cell line prove the integrity of a canine B‐cell
lymphoma in a murine in vivo model. PLoS One 2012;
7(6): e40078.
Seguin B, Zwerdling T, McCallan JL, et al. Development of
a new canine osteosarcoma cell line. Vet Compar Oncol
2006; 4(4): 232–40.

1211

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1213

131
Endocrine Manifestations of Cancer
Ectopic Hormone Production
Cory Brown, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)
VetScan Mobile Diagnostics, Powell, OH, USA

Ectopic hormone production of endocrine origin from
nonendocrine tumors is a particular type of paraneoplastic syndrome. Some of the more common manifestations, such as hypoglycemia and hypercalcemia, are
covered in Chapter 132. Those more particular to the
endocrine system are covered in this chapter.

­Cushing Syndrome
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Corticotropin (also known as adrenocorticotropic hormone – ACTH) is produced by the anterior pituitary and
stimulates cortisol production by the adrenal cortex.
Corticotropin has been demonstrated to be produced by
a variety of tumors in human medicine, resulting in a
Cushing‐like syndrome. Although primarily reported
with small cell lung carcinoma, other tumor types
include carcinoid tumors of the thymus, gastrointestinal
tract, thyroid, pancreas, and adrenal medulla. Ectopic
production of corticotropin is not well described in veterinary medicine, although sporadic case reports exist. It
is theorized by some that ectopic corticotropin production is underestimated in animals due to diagnostic
­limitations. Routine pituitary imaging is not typically
pursued in dogs diagnosed with Cushing disease.
Therefore, dogs with ectopic production of the hormone
may be assumed to be pituitary dependent and treated
accordingly. Based on this assumption, ectopic corticotropin production may be more prevalent than is
­currently reported in the veterinary literature.
Diagnosis and Treatment
At a minimum, ectopic corticotropin production should
be considered in dogs with neoplastic disorders that
show concurrent symptoms of hyperadrenocorticism.

The diagnosis of ectopic ACTH production is based on
hormonal evidence of pituitary‐dependent hyperadrenocorticism (PDH), normal to high endogenous ACTH
levels, and normal pituitary imaging. Therapy for ectopic
corticotropin production has not been well defined in
animals, although treatment of the primary tumor
should be attempted. Treatment with trilostane, an adrenal enzyme blocker, resulted in adequate resolution of
symptoms in one dog.
Recently, production of sex hormone steroid precursors
from adrenal cortical tumors has been identified as a
source of Cushing symptoms. These animals may demonstrate typical signs of Cushing disease, including polyuria/
polydipsia, polyphagia, weight gain, potbellied appearance, thin skin, and alopecia. Despite the clinical findings
consistent with hyperadrenocorticism, these animals
test negative for hyperadrenocorticism by ­conventional
screening methods (ACTH stimulation, low‐dose dexamethasone suppression test). However, an assay for particular cortisol precursors (such as progesterone and
17‐OH‐progesterone) may reveal elevated concentrations.
Although this condition is classically related to the presence of an adrenal cortical tumor, cortisol precursors may
be noted with pituitary‐dependent disease as well. This is
considered eutopic hormone production as opposed to
ectopic, as the hormone produced by the tumor is a product of the tumor itself. However, as the particular hormone being produced is atypical for expected forms of
hyperadrenocorticism, it is worthy of mention.
In the presence of a cortical tumor, surgical excision is
generally recommended if presurgical staging allows.
Abdominal ultrasonography is particularly useful to
identify a tumor, local vascular invasion, and metastases.
Approximately 50% of adrenal cortical tumors are malignant, and presurgical screening may identify local
­vascular invasion, metastatic disease to distant organs
(particularly the liver), and irregularity of the affected

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1214

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

gland. If surgery cannot be performed, clinical symptoms may be managed with trilostane (Vetoryl®) or op‐
DDD (Lysodren®). Trilostane is a competitive inhibitor of
3‐beta‐hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, thereby reducing
cortisol synthesis from the adrenal gland. The inhibition
of steroid production is rapidly reversible and dose
dependent. Effects on cortisol production will wane
within 10–20 hours after cessation of the drug. Lysodren
is directly cytotoxic to the cells of the zona fasciculata
and zona reticularis of the adrenal cortex. As approximately 50% of cortical adrenal tumors are malignant, op‐
DDD is the theoretical medical therapy of choice though
studies evaluating survival and disease‐free interval of
dogs with adrenocortical carcinoma treated with trilostane vs op‐DDD are lacking.
Management of symptoms may be made easier by the
use of trilostane, as the side‐effects are generally found to
be less severe. Lysodren may be difficult to administer in
a clinically ill animal, as it causes nonselective adrenal
cortical necrosis and could result in a relative hypoadrenocortical state. This could be difficult to manage in
the ill patient due to the length of time needed to recover
from excessive adrenal gland destruction. Trilostane,
however, will have no effect on delaying the progression
of metastatic disease.
Therefore, in the case of nonsurgical metastatic disease, Lysodren may be more effective at prolonging survival due to the cytotoxic effects on metastatic tissue.
Trilostane has been used successfully to control clinical
symptoms of Cushing disease caused by an adrenal
tumor in the absence of metastases. The use of trilostane
or op‐DDD for the medical management of an adrenal
tumor should be carefully considered by the clinician if
surgery is not feasible.

­Syndrome of Inappropriate
Antidiuretic Hormone Secretion
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) is commonly discussed but rarely diagnosed in the small animal patient. Much more common
in human medicine, SIADH is frequently diagnosed in
patients with pulmonary cancer (oat cell carcinoma).
Excessive production of ADH by the tumor cells results
in inappropriate free water retention. This leads to one of
the hallmark signs of the disorder, hyponatremia. Due to
excessive volume expansion, many elements within the
blood may undergo dilutional effects, such as urea nitrogen and potassium. Serum osmolality is also low, but
urine osmolality may be higher than that of serum as free
water is being retained by the kidneys.

Diagnosis and Treatment
The finding of a urine osmolality higher than that of
serum in the face of hyponatremia is suggestive of
SIADH. Careful water restriction will improve clinical
symptoms while the cause is elucidated. Water restriction must be monitored closely to avoid rapid fluctuations in serum sodium concentrations. SIADH has been
described rarely with tumors in dogs (such as salivary
carcinoma). This condition is more common with systemic diseases, such as cholangiohepatitis, congenital
hydrocephalus, and meningitis. Therefore, water restriction could lead to dehydration if the patient is clinically
ill. With chronic hyponatremia, the serum sodium concentrations should not increase at a rate greater than
0.5 mEq/L/h or 8–10 mEq/day to avoid cerebral fluid
shifts. Due to the paucity of reports of this disease in the
veterinary literature, the prognosis is unpredictable and
dependent on the underlying condition.

­Erythrocytosis
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Erythrocytosis is defined as an increase in red blood cell
parameters (hematocrit, red blood cell count, hemoglobin). It may also be referred to as polycythemia. This
condition may be classified as relative or absolute.
A relative polycythemia is an apparent increase in red
blood cell mass that is actually due to a decrease in
plasma volume. This is commonly noted with dehydration and may be treated with fluid therapy to offset the
reduction in plasma volume. A relative polycythemia
would be expected to be associated with normal (or low)
erythropoietin levels.
An absolute polycythemia may be subclassified as primary or secondary. Primary polycythemia is independent of erythropoietin influence and arises from
progenitor cells within the bone marrow. The expanded
red blood cell mass appears morphologically normal,
and bone marrow aspiration suggests erythroid hyperplasia. Primary polycythemia is classified as a myeloproliferative disease, and is often referred to as polycythemia
vera. It may rarely progress to leukemia.
An absolute polycythemia that is classified as secondary is dependent on erythropoietin influence. This may
be an appropriate response, as seen with altitude changes,
right‐to‐left cardiac shunting disorders and hereditary
methemoglobin reductase deficiency. An inappropriate
polycythemic response may be seen with certain tumors,
especially of the kidney.
These tumors may produce erythropoietin ectopically,
resulting in a paraneoplastic syndrome of erythrocytosis. Several other mechanisms have been proposed to

VetBooks.ir

131 Endocrine Manifestations of Cancer

explain the rise in hematocrit, including decreased
metabolism of erythropoietin and production of erythropoietin‐stimulating hormones. Renal hypoxia due to
thrombosis or tumor mass may also play a role. This condition is rarely reported with other tumors, but has been
described in a dog with cecal leiomyosarcoma.
Diagnosis and Treatment
Erythrocytosis may be approached first by physical
examination to assess hydration status, cardiac auscultation, abdominal palpation to screen for abdominal
masses, and complete blood count (CBC)/serum chemistry. If the examination and bloodwork suggest dehydration, a fluid therapy trial should result in resolution of
the polycythemia. If dehydration is not present, or if
fluid therapy does not result in resolution, an absolute
polycythemia is present.
In the absence of obvious causes of a secondary absolute polycythemia (including appropriate responses such
as right‐to‐left shunting disorders and altitude changes),
evaluation of serum erythropoietin levels will help to differentiate erythrocytosis secondary to a renal (or other)
tumor from polycythemia vera (absolute primary polycythemia). In the latter condition, the erythrocytosis is
independent of erythropoietin, and erythropoietin levels
may be low to normal. The diagnosis of primary erythrocytosis (polycythemia vera) is often performed by ruling
out all other causes of secondary absolute polycythemia,
as erythropoietin measurements are not often available
and the assay is not species specific. Bone marrow evaluation should be considered if an absolute primary erythrocytosis is suspected to rule out marrow neoplasia.
Erythrocytosis secondary to production of erythropoietin from a renal tumor or other neoplasm will demonstrate marked elevations of serum erythropoietin levels.
Abdominal radiology or, preferably, ultrasonography will
help to detect a neoplasm of the gastrointestinal tract or
renal system. Treatment for an absolute erythrocytosis
that arises as a manifestation of cancer involves identifying and removing the causative neoplasm (i.e., renal
tumor, cecal tumor, etc.). Removal of the tumor will
result in resolution of the polycythemia. Phlebotomy
may be necessary prior to surgery to relieve symptoms of
hyperviscosity and reduce risk for a vascular accident.
No more than 20 mL/kg of blood or 25% of blood volume
should be removed at a time. A more exact volume to be
removed may be calculated by the following formula:
Blood to be removed mL
body weight kg blood volume mL / kg
actualPCV desiredPCV
actualPCV

where PCV is packed cell volume. Blood volume for dogs
and cats is considered to be 90 and 70 mL/kg respectively.
If tumor removal is not feasible, periodic phlebotomy
may control signs of hyperviscosity. In the case of renal
tumors, surgical removal alone affects survival, and without surgical intervention the prognosis is poor. In one
study evaluating surgical intervention, median survival
for dogs with renal carcinoma was 16 months (range 0–59
months), for dogs with sarcomas nine months (range
0–70 months), and for dogs with nephroblastoma six
months (range 0–6 months). In the same study, dogs that
did not undergo surgery had a median survival of <1
month (range 0–32 months). Additionally, removal of a
renal tumor results in resolution of the paraneoplastic
polycythemia. For a dog with a reported cecal leiomyosarcoma, phlebotomy helped control clinical symptoms for
over two years. It is important to note that fluid replacement is not generally recommended post phlebotomy. In
the presence of right‐to‐left cardiac shunting disorders,
volume replacement may be poorly tolerated by the
­cardiovascular system. In the presence of polycythemia
vera, the animal is volume replete prior to phlebotomy.
Treatment for primary polycythemia or absolute secondary polycythemia related to an uncorrectable cause
(such as a right‐to‐left shunt) involves a combination of
phlebotomy and hydroxyurea, covered elsewhere.

­Zollinger–Ellison Syndrome
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Secretion of excessive gastrin by neoplastic delta cells of the
pancreas has been described (gastrinoma). Gastrin is also
produced by G cells of the gastric antrum and duodenum,
and continued secretion results in hyperacidity. Clinical
symptoms are related to excessive production of gastric
acid from the continued stimulation of gastric parietal cells.
The findings of melena with a microcytic, hypochromic
anemia should lead to suspicion for gastrointestinal hemorrhage. This may be accompanied by weight loss, anorexia, and/or vomiting. Dogs may present late in the course
of disease, and as such cancer cachexia may be present.
Additionally, gastric ulceration may be severe and may
­predispose to gastric perforation. Endoscopic evaluation
of the stomach may reveal an ulcer, which typically is
located along the lesser curvature. Although gastrinomas
tend to be slow growing, approximately 85% demonstrate
metastasis at the time of diagnosis.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of a gastrinoma can be challenging. Serum
gastrin levels may be evaluated, and samples should be

1215

VetBooks.ir

1216

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

obtained prior to administration of gastroprotectants.
Antacids such as famotidine, ranitidine, and omeprazole
will artifactually raise serum gastrin levels. Abdominal
ultrasonography may identify a pancreatic mass, but as is
the case with insulinomas, gastrinomas are often too
small to detect. Ultrasonography can be useful to screen
for metastatic disease, due to the relatively high rate of
metastasis with this tumor. Radioactive scanning with
pentetreotide may be useful but has limited availability.
Surgical exploration with or without abdominal CT may
be necessary if presurgical screening does not identify a
mass or obvious metastatic disease. Histopathology is
required for an accurate diagnosis.
Treatment
Medical therapy alone may be employed if a patient is a
poor surgical candidate. Aggressive antacid therapy is
indicated. Often, the author will combine a proton pump
inhibitor (such as omeprazole) with an H2 blocker (such
as famotidine). In addition, sucralfate may be administered with antacids, preferably 30 minutes to an hour

apart. Sucralfate should be administered first, as it reacts
with hydrochloric acid to create a protective complex.
Administration of an antacid prior to sucralfate may
reduce its efficacy.
Motility modifiers may be necessary to control reflux
and vomiting. Metoclopramide should be used with caution if a stomach ulcer is present, as it may enhance the
potential for perforation. Centrally acting antiemetics,
such as ondansetron or maropitant, are preferred.
Finally, streptozocin has been advocated as adjunctive
chemotherapy to surgical intervention, but should be
used with caution due to its toxicity. The prognosis with
gastrinoma is typically guarded. Paraneoplastic effects,
such as gastric perforation and peritonitis, adversely
affect prognosis. However, with aggressive treatment,
including surgery, survival times have ranged from 4.5 to
18 months.
These above conditions are particular to ectopic
­hormone production resulting in endocrine manifestations. Further paraneoplastic syndromes are described
elsewhere in this text.

­Further Reading
Benchekroun G, de Fornel‐Thibaud P, Lafarge S, et al.
Trilostane therapy for hyperadrenocorticism in three
dogs with adrenocortical metastasis. Vet Rec 2008; 163:
190–2.
Feldman B, Rosenthal S, Vargas G, et al. Nephrogenic
syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis. N Engl J Med
2005; 352(18): 1884–90.
Galac S, Kooistra HS, Voorhout G, et al.
Hyperadrenocorticism in a dog due to ectopic secretion

of adrenocorticotropic hormone. Dom An Endocrinol
2005; 28: 338–48.
Hughes S. Canine gastrinoma: a case study and literature
review of therapeutic options. N Z Vet J 2006; 54(5):
242–7.
Nitsche EK. Erythrocytosis in dogs and cats: diagnosis and
management. Compend Contin Educ Vet 2004; 26(2):
104–18.

VetBooks.ir

1217

132
Paraneoplastic Syndromes
Cory Brown, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)
VetScan Mobile Diagnostics, Powell, OH, USA

Many tumors produce effects on the body that are not
related to direct invasion or compression. These effects
have become widely recognized as paraneoplastic syndromes. Recognition and treatment of these conditions
may allow early detection of occult neoplasia, reduction
of morbidity, and prolonged survival. The effects of paraneoplastic syndromes are due to the production and
excretion of peptides and hormones as well as immune
cross‐reaction between tumor and normal cells. This
chapter describes the most commonly recognized
paraneoplastic syndromes and their treatment. It is
­
important to recognize that the most effective treatment for all paraneoplastic syndromes is removal of the
­underlying tumor.

­Hypercalcemia
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Hypercalcemia remains one of the most commonly
encountered paraneoplastic syndromes in the dog and
cat. Commonly termed “humoral hypercalcemia of
malignancy,” this condition must be differentiated from
other common causes of hypercalcemia. Although it is
often noted with lymphoma (particularly mediastinal
lymphoma), multiple myeloma and anal sac adenocarcinoma, it may be observed with a variety of tumors. The
most common mechanism resulting in hypercalcemia is
release of a peptide by the tumor cells closely resembling
parathyroid hormone (PTH), called parathyroid hormone‐related protein (PTH‐rp). PTH‐rp mimics the
activity of PTH by binding to PTH receptors within the
renal tubule and bone. This leads to decreased calcium
excretion from the kidney and increased bone resorption. Other factors involved in hypercalcemia not related
to humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy include direct

bone invasion resulting in increased osteolysis and
­production of osteoclast‐activating factor by tumor cells.
Diagnosis
Initial investigation should include a thorough physical
and rectal examination. Further diagnostic evaluation
should include thoracic radiographs and abdominal radiographs or ultrasonography. Ultrasonography is preferred to evaluate for diffuse infiltration of abdominal
organs as well as abdominal lymphadenomegaly, as these
may be difficult to appreciate radiographically. Aspiration
of peripheral lymph nodes may be useful, even when the
lymph nodes are not clinically enlarged. Bone marrow
aspiration may be considered, especially in the face of
peripheral cytopenias, and additional radiographs or
bone scintigraphy may be carried out based on the
­presence of lameness or discomfort encountered during
palpation of long bones. Confirmation of an elevated calcium secondary to malignancy may be attempted by
evaluating PTH, PTH‐rp, and ionized calcium levels in
the serum. It is important to note that the ionized
calcium level is increased in patients with humoral
­
hypercalcemia of malignancy, and this may be monitored for a more accurate assessment of bioactive calcium levels. Evaluation of PTH‐rp with ionized calcium
and PTH can also help differentiate humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy from other causes of hypercalcemia
(i.e., renal disease, hyperparathyroidism).
Treatment
Common symptoms of hypercalcemia include polyuria/
polydipsia, muscle tremors, neurologic abnormalities
(including coma), renal dysfunction, and inappetence.
Treatment is aimed at reducing the ionized calcium level

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1218

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

as cancer therapy is ongoing. Mildly elevated total calcium levels are generally left untreated as cancer therapy
is ongoing, but all treatment decisions should take into
account the patient’s neurologic and renal status. Total
calcium levels that approach or exceed 13.5 mg/dL may
benefit from saline diuresis and administration of a loop
diuretic such as furosemide. Furosemide should only be
administered in the volume‐replete patient. Therefore,
subcutaneous or intravenous saline administration may
be necessary if clinical dehydration is appreciated.
Glucocorticoids may reduce intestinal absorption of
­calcium but should only be used once a diagnosis is
obtained, as they are directly cytotoxic to lymphoma and
myeloma cells. Use of the drug prior to establishing
a diagnosis may preclude an accurate diagnosis or
require more invasive procedures to obtain an accurate
diagnosis.
Finally, total calcium levels that are markedly elevated
(>17 mg/dL) constitute a medical emergency and w
­ arrant
hospitalization for diuresis. Administration of calcitonin
may be attempted, although the effects are short‐lived.
Administration of calcitonin subcutaneously may be
considered for a longer acting effect. Bisphosphonates
(pamidronate and zoledronate) may be used for persistent hypercalcemia and bone pain. The author generally
prefers pamidronate given as an intravenous infusion
every 2–4 weeks. In select cases of lymphoma, a chemotherapy trial may be necessary if a diagnosis is elusive or
if patient status dictates rapid intervention as laboratory
tests are pending. This should be supported by clinical
suspicion and after exhaustion of all available diagnostic
methods. Serum should be drawn and saved prior to a
chemotherapeutic trial. The author prefers L‐asparaginase
when this approach is necessary.
In all cases, successful treatment of the underlying
neoplasm will result in resolution of the hypercalcemia,
and the prognosis is dependent on the tumor type and
stage. The decline in calcium can be rapid with successful treatment of lymphoma. Calcium levels may then be
used as an additional tool to monitor for recurrence of
the neoplasm.

­Hypoglycemia
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Hypoglycemia as a paraneoplastic syndrome may be
related to excessive production of insulin‐like substances,
direct consumption of glucose by tumor cells and
decreased gluconeogenesis due to hepatic parenchymal
involvement. Production of IGF‐2 (acting as an insulin‐
like substance) has been implicated as a source of hypoglycemia in nonpancreatic neoplasms. Paraneoplastic

hypoglycemia has been associated with tumors such as
lymphoma, hepatocellular carcinoma and leiomyosarcoma, as well as renal tumors, mammary carcinoma, oral
melanoma, multiple myeloma, splenic hemangiosarcoma, pulmonary carcinoma, and others. Glucose levels
may be severely and persistently decreased (20–40 mg/
dL) in many cases, and clinical symptoms are related
directly to the neurologic effects of the hypoglycemia
as well as the concurrent release of counterregulatory
­hormones such as catecholamines. Many times, the
symptoms of hypoglycemia are severe and may predate
the diagnosis of the causative tumor.
Common symptoms of paraneoplastic hypoglycemia
include ataxia, lethargy, weakness (polyneuropathy), nerv­ eurologic
ousness or collapse, hunger or anorexia, focal n
abnormalities, seizures, and/or coma.
Diagnosis
Discovery of a persistent hypoglycemia should lead to
investigation for underlying neoplasia. Other etiologies
of hypoglycemia, including hypoadrenocorticism, sepsis,
congenital and acquired hepatic disorders, insulinoma,
malnutrition and toxicity (such as xylitol), should also be
investigated. Serum insulin levels should be evaluated in
the face of hypoglycemia to assess for an insulin‐­
secreting neoplasm. Normal or elevated insulin levels in
the face of hypoglycemia is not a normal finding.
Secretion of an insulin‐like substance (such as IGF‐2)
will not be detected when measuring serum insulin levels. Therefore, insulin levels are most often useful in the
diagnosis of pancreatic beta‐cell neoplasia (insulinoma).
Insulin concentrations should be determined on the
same sample documenting hypoglycemia. Thoracic radiographs and abdominal ultrasonography are indicated to
screen for a pancreatic islet cell tumor as well as intestinal, hepatic, and round cell neoplasia. Abdominal radiographs may be able to identify large intestinal or hepatic
tumors. Often, islet cell neoplasms cannot be identified
via ultrasonography due to their small size. In these
instances, surgical exploration or contrast CT may be
required.
Treatment
Treatment of this paraneoplastic syndrome involves
controlling clinical symptoms of hypoglycemia as the
underlying neoplasm is addressed. Often, it is difficult to
obtain euglycemia in the face of extensive or metastatic
neoplasia. In this situation, controlling the clinical manifestations of hypoglycemia becomes more important.
Management strategies for neoplasia‐related hypoglycemia are covered elsewhere.

VetBooks.ir

132 Paraneoplastic Syndromes

­Anemia/Thrombocytopenia
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Anemia and thrombocytopenia can be grouped together
as hematologic paraneoplastic syndromes as they may
occur together due to a common pathophysiology.
Immune‐mediated destruction due to mimicry of cell
membrane‐associated receptors or other immune cross‐
reactions tends to be the most widely accepted etiology of
secondary immune‐mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA)
and thrombocytopenia. Symptoms of anemia and thrombocytopenia are nonspecific to the cause and are covered
elsewhere.
Diagnosis
When anemia is considered individually, it must first
be determined to be regenerative or nonregenerative.
A nonregenerative anemia may suggest bone marrow
involvement, especially in conjunction with other cytopenias. Bone marrow disease must be differentiated
from an acute anemia in which a regenerative response
has not yet had time to develop. Typically, it will take an
average of 3–5 days to develop a moderate regenerative
response, depending on how suddenly the anemia developed and the degree of anemia. Additionally, clinical
signs of anemia tend to be more severe the more acute
the onset, as the body has time to adapt to a chronically
developing anemia.
A bone marrow biopsy and/or aspirate should be considered in the face of a chronic, nonregenerative anemia.
The author prefers to begin with a bone marrow aspirate.
If the aspirate is productive, a slide may be reviewed to
assess for cellularity. Bone marrow infiltration due to lymphoma or myeloma tends to be highly cellular, and assuming bone marrow elements are observed in a c­ellular
sample, an aspirate may suffice. If the aspirate is nonproductive (i.e., a “dry” tap), a bone marrow biopsy may be
obtained. A biopsy may be necessary to obtain a diagnosis
of myelofibrosis or other chronically progressive bone
marrow disorders. With these chronic ­conditions, bone
marrow elements are replaced by fibrosis and the aspirate
may be hemodilute or completely nonproductive.
As most animals present with a moderate to severe
anemia, these procedures are generally performed
shortly after a component blood transfusion to improve
the candidacy for anesthesia. It is important to remember that if a bone marrow aspirate or biopsy is deemed
necessary, it should be obtained before or within 12 hours
of beginning steroid therapy. Steroids, including prednisone and dexamethasone, are directly cytotoxic to
lymphoma and myeloma cells. These are two of the more
common cancers that may infiltrate the bone marrow.

Thrombocytopenia is not a contraindication to bone
marrow sampling, as the associated hemorrhage typically results in an autotransfusion into the marrow,
thereby remaining clinically silent. Prolonged external
pressure to the incision site within the skin may be necessary, however.
Classically, pancytopenia will develop with a leukopenia followed by thrombocytopenia. Anemia will develop
last due to the longer half‐life of red blood cells in relation to platelets and white blood cells. This may not be
the case in clinical practice, as multiple factors affect the
production and destruction of all bone marrow elements. It is not uncommon to encounter myelophthisis
in the face of thrombocytopenia alone, and any combination of cytopenias should raise suspicion for bone
­ arrow involvement.
m
If the anemia is determined to be regenerative, bone
marrow sampling is typically not necessary. Red blood
cell morphology may identify clues as to the source of the
anemia. A morphology review by an experienced pathologist or lab technician should be obtained. Specifically,
immune‐mediated disease may be confirmed by the
presence of a moderate to large amount of spherocytes.
Spherocytes are red blood cells that have undergone a
loss of membrane due to removal of antigen–antibody
complexes by the phagocytic portion of the immune system. This results in a loss of surface area with retention
of volume. The consequence of this is the red blood cell
changing its morphology from a biconcave disc to a
sphere, resulting in the term “spherocyte.” Immune‐
mediated hemolytic anemia may also be diagnosed by
identifying gross or microscopic autoagglutination. In
the absence of a significant number of spherocytes or
detectable autoagglutination, a Coombs test may be performed to identify an immune component to the anemia.
In the presence of visibly detectable autoagglutination, a
Coombs test is not necessary.
A schistocyte is a red blood cell fragment that may
develop due to shearing forces. These fragments do not
have a central pallor and are irregular. Schistocytes may be
noted in IMHA, but they are most commonly recognized
as a consequence of hemangiosarcoma. Red blood cells
may be damaged as they travel through the smaller blood
vessels and fibrin strands of the tumor, and as such
­schistocytes should prompt evaluation for an underlying
vascular neoplasm. Anemia due to damage to red blood
cells as they travel through the smaller capillary beds is
often termed microangiopathic anemia. Microangiopathic
anemia may be seen with any hypercoagulable disease,
and should also alert the clinician to the potential for
thrombosis. Fibrin strands and smaller blood clots may be
noted with hyperadrenocorticism, pancreatitis and other
nonneoplastic disorders, and these may all result in a
microangiopathic anemia.

1219

VetBooks.ir

1220

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Anemia may result from nonparaneoplastic disorders,
such as gastrointestinal blood loss, iron sequestration,
and medication. Thrombocytopenia may also be present
due to increased utilization, poor bone marrow production and immune‐mediated destruction that is unrelated
to a neoplastic disorder. The presence of these hematologic disorders should prompt the evaluation of a paraneoplastic disease if the clinical history, signalment, and
physical examination are suggestive. As a paraneoplastic
syndrome, thrombocytopenia tends to develop due to
immune‐mediated destruction from mechanisms similar to the development of IMHA, or increased consumption due to large tumors such as hemangiosarcoma.
Treatment
Treatment of secondary IMHA and immune‐mediated
thrombocytopenia (ITP) is similar to that of primary
IMHA, with attention to dealing with the underlying
cause. Immune suppression with prednisone is indicated
once a diagnosis is established, and may be effective
at controlling the anemia as cancer therapy is ongoing.
A wide dose range is reported for these disorders (1–4 mg/
kg/day), and the author prefers 0.5–1 mg/kg of prednisone twice daily, or 0.3 mg/kg dexamethasone sodium
phosphate IV twice daily. A higher dose may be used if
steroids are to be employed as sole therapy. Antithrombotic
therapy may be initiated with low‐dose aspirin, unfractionated heparin or clopidrogel. It should be noted that
the use of low‐dose aspirin (0.5 mg/kg by mouth once
daily) in the dog is considered safe in conjunction with
immune suppressive doses of prednisone or dexamethasone. This is the author’s treatment of choice in the dog.
For cats, the author recommends one‐quarter of a 75 mg
tablet (18.75 mg) of clopidrogel by mouth once daily. The
use of heparin is considered more effective at preventing
thrombi, versus preventing the progression of a clot as
with aspirin. However, monitoring of heparin therapy is
difficult and often expensive. Heparin use should be considered if monitoring is a­ vailable and feasible. Component
blood therapy may be necessary with either disorder, and
should be tailored to the patient. Platelet transfusions
have typically been found to be ineffective at long‐term
management of ITP, but they may play a role in preventing active bleeding. This may be important if intracranial
hemorrhage is suspected.
Gastrointestinal hemorrhage may result in significant
and refractory anemia, especially in the face of thrombocytopenia. This is an unfortunate negative prognostic
indicator with ITP and should be differentiated from
gastrointestinal ulceration. In the latter scenario, gastroprotectants should be instituted, and any medication
that may result in ulceration should be reduced or
­discontinued if possible. The majority of gastric ulcers
will develop due to medication or neoplasia, so if the

clinical history does not identify an offending medication, cancer should become a primary differential. More
specific therapy for primary IMHA and ITP is covered
elsewhere.

­Hypertrophic Osteopathy
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Hypertrophic osteopathy (HO) is an uncommon paraneoplastic syndrome. The pathophysiology is unclear,
but afferent neurologic stimulation may alter blood flow
to long bones. This is supported by case reports demonstrating resolution of lesions following vagotomy. HO is
most commonly noted with pulmonary lesions including
heartworm disease, but has been reported with nonthoracic neoplasia as well, including transitional cell carcinoma and adrenocortical carcinoma. Typical findings
include periostosis and subperiosteal new bone formation along the shafts of long bones. This condition is
­frequently painful. Affected limbs may be warm and
swollen, and radiographs will typically demonstrate the
common features of the disorder. Finding radiographic
evidence of HO should prompt radiographic evaluation
of the thorax. Abdominal ultrasonography may be considered if pulmonary lesions are not identified.
Treatment and Prognosis
Treatment is directed at removal of the underlying neoplasm. Vagotomy has been described but is not typically
performed as the primary treatment is to address the
underlying etiology. If the neoplasm cannot be treated,
pain management must be addressed. Opiates, nonsteroidal medication, steroids, and bisphosphonates have been
used alone or in combination to control discomfort.
Localized palliative radiation has been described but is
not typically recommended due to lack of supportive
­evidence. If tumor removal is successful, HO lesions
may persist for several weeks and require continued
pain management during this time. The lesions should
resolve given time if a thoracic neoplasm is successfully
removed.

­Myasthenia Gravis
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Myasthenia gravis is an immune‐mediated condition
that develops from production of antibodies to nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors located on the postsynaptic
neuromuscular junction. This prevents neurogenic
­
­signal transduction, leading to the hallmark signs of episodic weakness, exercise intolerance, megaesophagus,

VetBooks.ir

132 Paraneoplastic Syndromes

and regurgitation. Aspiration pneumonia is a common
complication of frequent regurgitation and may result in
respiratory symptoms. This paraneoplastic syndrome is
most commonly related to the presence of thymoma.
Myasthenia gravis may be focal, generalized or fulminant. As a paraneoplastic syndrome, a generalized form
is typically encountered. This type of myasthenia affects
skeletal muscle of the limbs, resulting in the aforementioned clinical signs. Ocular muscles may be affected,
resulting in a fatigue to repeated palpebral reflexes.
Myasthenia may be suspected based on clinical symptoms, and confirmed by evaluated serum levels of
anticholinergic receptor antibodies. Administration of
edrophonium chloride (“Tensilon test”) may provide
presumptive support for myasthenia gravis as serum
titers are pending. Both focal myasthenia and generalized myasthenia result in megaesophagus, which is easily
demonstrated radiographically.
Treatment
Treatment of thymoma can result in resolution of myasthenia, but at times the megaesophagus may be persistent. The reason for this is not known. Anticholinesterase
medication, such as oral pyridostigmine or injectable
neostigmine, may help ameliorate clinical symptoms. It
is important to note that injectable medication may be
necessary if severe megaesophagus with frequent regurgitation is present. Alternatively, many dogs may be
managed well with a supplemental gastrostomy tube.
This can allow delivery of medication and supplemental
nutrition into the stomach, thereby circumventing the
esophagus altogether. Gastrostomy tubes do not reduce
the overall frequency of regurgitation or the risk for aspiration pneumonia, however. Food should be delivered in
a standing position, and consistency of the food should
be experimented with. Some dogs will tolerate food in a
meatball, some as a slurry, and others in a gelatin. Use of
a Bailey chair, which encourages an upright position during feeding, may be considered as well. If possible, the
dog should be taken for a short walk after each feeding.

­Superficial Necrolytic Dermatitis
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis (SND, or hepatocutaneous syndrome) is a condition characterized by erythema,
alopecia, and crusts involving the eyes, nose/muzzle, and
extremities. A typical feature of this disorder is hyperkeratosis of the footpads with central necrosis affecting
one or multiple pads. Often, the footpads may be so
painful that the animal will refuse to walk. The disease
has been noted commonly with chronic hepatic disorders as well as chronic administration of large doses of

phenobarbital. As a paraneoplastic syndrome, SND may
be noted with glucagonoma. In the author’s experience,
chronic and fibrotic liver disease is the most common
disorder associated with SND.
Diagnosis
The finding of footpad hyperkeratosis with or without
concurrent clinical findings should prompt abdominal
ultrasonography to evaluate the pancreas and liver. An
experienced ultrasonographer should be used to evaluate the pancreas for a mass. The liver may have a typical
“Swiss cheese” appearance. A liver biopsy may be diagnostic but may need to be obtained via laparoscopy or
laparotomy due to hemorrhage risk. Animals with a
glucagonoma may have symptoms of diabetes, including
polyuria/polydipsia and weight loss (for further information refer to Chapter 144). A poor appetite is often
­associated with chronic liver disease. Measurement of
glucagon levels may be undertaken but the test is not
always available, and glucagon levels are not always elevated in the face of a glucagonoma. SND is often associated with a hypercatabolic state which may be manifested
with a hypoalbuminemia and/or hypoproteinemia. An
amino acid profile may reveal significant reductions in
serum amino acids, helping to confirm the diagnosis.
Skin biopsy may be characteristic if lesions are present.
Treatment
Treatment is aimed at the underlying cause. Surgical
resection of a glucagonoma is best if feasible. With
chronic liver disease or nonresectable neoplasia, administration of intravenous amino acids will often help skin
lesions to resolve. This may help to reduce discomfort.
10% Aminosyn® (or an equivalent solution) must be
administered via a central catheter and over 8–12 hours
due to its hypertonicity. It is typically administered
weekly until skin lesions resolve.
Skin and footpad lesions should be kept clean and dry.
A high‐protein diet may be prescribed with supplementation of egg whites or protein powder. Broad‐spectrum
antibiotics may be administered to control secondary
infections, and analgesics may be necessary if discomfort
is present. Zinc, omega‐3 fatty acids, and niacin have all
been suggested as adjunct therapies. These may be difficult to administer in the face of a poor appetite and are
considered supplemental therapy.

­Paraneoplastic Alopecia
Paraneoplastic alopecia is described in cats affected by
pancreatic carcinoma. It may occasionally be seen with
hepatic or biliary carcinomas, and is characterized by a

1221

VetBooks.ir

1222

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

noninflammatory alopecia. Hair may be epilated in
clumps, and the underlying skin is often thin and glistening. Affected areas may include the ventral abdomen,
thorax, limbs, pinnae, and periorbital region. The cause
is unknown, but theorized to be secondary to cytokine
production by the tumor resulting in follicular atrophy.
Most cats present systemically ill, as the skin lesions typically develop at a later stage of the disease process.
Metastases may be present within the liver and/or lungs,
and diagnosis may be achieved through imaging
(­
including abdominal ultrasound, abdominal/thoracic
CT, and/or thoracic radiographs) and appropriate tissue
sampling.

­Conclusion
Paraneoplastic syndromes are diverse in their presentation
and severity. In fact, many other paraneoplastic conditions
exist that are beyond the scope of this text. These include
thymoma‐related exfoliative dermatitis, peripheral neuropathies, nodular dermatofibrosis, and paraneoplastic
pemphigus. Other conditions, such as fever and cachexia,
are often considered paraneoplastic but are not specific or
unique in their presentation. Prompt identification and
treatment of these conditions will aid the clinician in additional diagnoses, maintain patient comfort, and prevent
life‐threatening sequelae as cancer therapy is ongoing.

­Further Reading
Cellio LM, Dennis J. Canine superficial necrolytic dermatitis.
Compend Contin Educ Vet 2005; 27(11): 820–5.
Vasilopulos RJ, Mackin A. Humoral hypercalcemia of
malignancy: pathophysiology and clinical signs.
Compend Contin Educ Vet 2003; 25(2): 122–8.
Vasilopulos RJ, Mackin A. Humoral hypercalcemia of
malignancy: diagnosis and treatment. Compend Contin
Educ Vet 2003; 25(2): 129–36.

Watson AD, Porges WL. Regression of hypertrophic
osteopathy in a dog following unilateral intrathoracic
vagotomy. Vet Rec 1973; 93(9): 240–3.
Zini E, Glaus T, Minuto F, et al. Paraneoplastic
hypoglycemia due to an insulin‐like growth factor
type‐II secreting hepatocellular carcinoma in a dog.
J Vet Intern Med 2007; 21: 193–5.

VetBooks.ir

1223

133
Lymphoid Leukemias, Myeloid Neoplasia, and Myelodysplastic Syndrome
Angela R. Kozicki, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)
Bluepearl Veterinary Partners, Southfield, MI, USA

­Lymphoid Leukemias
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Lymphoid leukemias are differentiated as either chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) or acute lymphoblastic leu­
kemia (ALL). CLL is a clonal, neoplastic proliferation of
small, mature‐looking lymphocytes that manifests as a
persistent, often severe lymphocytosis. Three subsets
have been recognized based on immunophenotyping.
The most common is granular T‐CLL which consists of
proliferations of cytotoxic (CD8+) T cells. Despite con­
ventional thinking that CLL is always a primary bone
marrow disease, granular T‐CLL is considered a primary
splenic disease which can be verified by expression of a
marker for splenic red pulp (CD11d). The second is B‐
CLL (CD21+, CD79a+) and the third is nongranular/
atypical T‐CLL (CD3+) in which no consistent pattern of
concurrent CD4 or CD8 expression is found. ALL is
defined by proliferation of immature lymphoblasts in the
bone marrow or peripheral blood. The immunopheno­
type of ALL is typically B cell (CD21+, CD3‐, CD4‐,
CD8‐) with an acute, immature lineage based on expres­
sion of CD34, a stem cell marker.
Classification of lymphocytes involves assessment of
cell surface antigen (marker) expression that pertains to
both lineage and function. This classification is usually
performed by immunophenotyping. Immunophenotyping
consists of the application of a­ ntibodies specific for dif­
ferentiation antigens of lymphocytes and other immune
cells to identify lineages of these cells present in neoplas­
tic or reactive diseases. Immunophenotyping can be per­
formed on cytology smears, blood smears, fluids (blood
or bone marrow), formalin‐fixed paraffin sections or
snap‐frozen tissue sections. Immunophenotyping tests
include immunohistochemistry (on tissue samples),
immunocytochemistry (on cytologic or fluid samples),

and flow cytometry in which cell suspensions are stained
with specific fluorochromes, analyzed by a focused laser
beam and sorted by size and DNA content (ploidy of
cells). Immunophenotyping can identify the presence of
different blood cell lineages but cannot predict clonality
(whether a population arises from a single cell).
It is important to know normal percentages of lym­
phocyte subsets found in the peripheral blood of dogs
and cats to be able to distinguish a benign or reactive
process from a malignant one. In general, peripheral
lymphocytes of dogs consist of ~80% T cells (CD3+ or
CD5+) with 45% being helper T cells (CD4+), 25% being
cytotoxic T cells (CD8+) and the remainder being dou­
ble‐negative T cells (CD4‐, CD8‐). Approximately 15%
are B lymphocytes (CD21+) and the remaining lympho­
cytes are natural killer (NK) cells. Cats are very similar
but have slightly fewer T cells (~75%) and a greater per­
centage of B cells (~25%) in the peripheral blood.
The etiology of lymphoid leukemias is largely
unknown. In people, there is no known association with
radiation, chemicals or alkylating agents and no viral
cause. Genetic factors are suspected in both humans and
dogs but immunophenotype of the neoplastic cells in
these species is different in that most human lymphoid
leukemias are B cell in origin. Therefore, it is unwise to
try to make direct correlations between species since dif­
ferent causative factors may be involved. In cats, retrovi­
ruses such as feline leukemia virus (FeLV) play a role
since ~60–80% of cats with ALL are FeLV+. There is no
known association between FeLV and CLL in cats and no
evidence of a retroviral cause in dogs.
Epidemiology
In people, CLL is an indolent disease of older adults (>60
years of age) and accounts for 25–30% of all adult leuke­
mias among white populations in North America and

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1224

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Western Europe. Ninety‐five percent of CLL in people
are B cell in origin. ALL is most common in young
­children (peak between 2 and 5 years) with a second peak
in aged populations and is most commonly B cell. The
true incidence of lymphocytic leukemias in animals is
unknown. CLL is thought to be less common than ALL
but more common than myeloproliferative disorders.
Signalment
In the dog, both ALL and CLL are most commonly seen
in middle‐aged to older animals with a median age of 10
years. No sex predilection has been found. Golden
retrievers and German shepherds are overrepresented in
CLL. CLL is rare in cats but seems to occur in elderly
cats with a mean age of 14 years. Cats with ALL are usu­
ally young and FeLV positive.
History and Clinical Signs
Most CLL animals are asymptomatic and the diagnosis is
incidental. When clinical signs are present, they are gen­
erally attributable to the degree of lymphocytosis, bone
marrow involvement or other organ involvement and
may include lethargy, inappetence, and weight loss.
Physical exam may show hepatosplenomegaly and mildly
enlarged peripheral lymph nodes. Clinical signs of ALL
patients are similar to CLL although they are typically
more severe. On physical exam, splenomegaly is the
most common finding but hepatomegaly and lymphad­
enopathy can also be present. Signs of life‐threatening
cytopenias such as pale mucous membranes, pyrexia,
and/or petechial hemorrhages are also possible.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of CLL is commonly made by examination of
the peripheral blood and bone marrow by a clinical
pathologist. A complete blood count (CBC) generally
reveals an absolute mild to marked lymphocytosis (6000
to >100 000 lymphocytes/μL) and cytologically the nuclei
appear small and mature with condensed chromatin
(Figure 133.1).
Other common hematologic findings include a mild
normochromic, normocytic, nonregenerative anemia, a
mild thrombocytopenia (>100 000/μL), and rarely neu­
tropenia. The hematologic abnormalities associated with
feline CLL have not been well characterized although
they are thought to be similar to dogs. A monoclonal
gammopathy or hyperglobulinemia in cats has been
reported but is uncommon since most CLL are T cell in
origin. Bone marrow aspirates show a significant prolif­
eration of small mature lymphocytes (usually >30%)
except in granular T‐CLL which demonstrates a

Figure 133.1 Photomicrograph of lymphocytes in the peripheral
blood of a dog that has CLL. The lymphoid morphology is
predominantly small and well differentiated. Wright Giemsa stain,
1000× magnification. Source: Courtesy of Dr Jan Andrews, Antech
Diagnostics.

marked splenic proliferation or infiltration of granular
­lymphocytes with minimal bone marrow involvement.
Other staging tests commonly recommended include
thoracic radiographs, abdominal ultrasound, and subse­
quent aspirate and cytology of any enlarged organ.
Immunophenotyping of blood, bone marrow or cytology
samples generally reveals the presence of a T cell lym­
phocyte population with no evidence of CD34 expression
(early hematopoietic stem cell marker), confirming the
maturity of the lymphocytes in question. The presence of
30% or more lymphoblasts in the bone marrow is consid­
ered diagnostic for ALL. Lymphoblasts are ­intermediate‐
to‐large sized lymphocytes with moderate amounts of
basophilic cytoplasm. Lymphoblasts are larger than neu­
trophils, have a condensed nuclear ­chromatin pattern,
and have a high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio (Figure 133.2).
Staging tests recommended for ALL are similar to
CLL; however, one of the principal goals is to differenti­
ate ALL from stage V lymphoma by degree of blood and
bone marrow involvement, lack of significant lymphade­
nopathy and, most importantly, its immunophenotypic
characteristics. Patients with stage V lymphoma can have
a better prognosis since their disease does not ­originate
in the bone marrow. Immunophenotyping, especially
flow cytometry, can be very useful in these cases
because ALL patients will be CD34+, confirming an early
­hematopoietic origin. Both stage V ­lymphoma and CLL
patients will be negative for this marker.

133 Lymphoid Leukemias, Myeloid Neoplasia, and Myelodysplastic Syndrome

VetBooks.ir

nonresponsive patients. Treatment of ALL requires
aggressive chemotherapy; CHOP‐based therapies like
those used in lymphoma are the most common proto­
cols. Remission rates of 25% have been reported but
remission times tend to be short.
Prognosis

Figure 133.2 Photomicrograph of lymphoblasts in the peripheral
blood of a dog with ALL. The cells are characterized by large size
with prominent nucleoli. Wright Giemsa stain, 1000×
magnification. Source: Courtesy of Dr Jan Andrews, Antech
Diagnostics.

Other causes of a lymphocytosis (chronic ehrlichiosis,
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, and severe babesiosis in
dogs; feline immunodeficiency virus [FIV], Toxoplasma
gondii, and chronic inflammatory bowel disease in cats)
should be ruled out if lymphocytic leukemia is not an
obvious conclusion.
Therapy
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia can have a protracted
clinical course and treatment is not usually instituted
until specific criteria are met: the presence of periph­
eral cytopenias (anemia, thrombocytopenia and/or
­neutropenia), clinical signs associated with the disease,
­peripheral lymphadenopathy, organomegaly, and/or a
peripheral lymphocytosis of >60 000 (although this is not
standardized). The standard treatment for CLL is a com­
bination of the oral alkylating agent chlorambucil and
prednisone. The dose and frequency of chlorambucil can
vary. In dogs it is typically given orally at 0.2 mg/kg or
6 mg/m2 orally once daily for 7–14 days, then reduced to
0.1 mg/kg or 3 mg/m2 every other day thereafter. In cats,
2 mg/cat every 48 hours is commonly used. Oral pred­
nisone is used concurrently with chlorambucil at 1 mg/kg
daily for 1–2 weeks, then 0.5 mg/kg every other day
thereafter. In cats, 10 mg/cat every 24 hours is commonly
used. The addition of vincristine or the substitution of
cyclophosphamide for chlorambucil has been used in

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia is a slowly progressive
disease and many patients are monitored for months
before any therapy is instituted. Remission rates with
treatment are ~70–75% with overall survival times of >1
year. Immunophenotype has been shown to be predic­
tive with survival times for dogs with granular T‐CLL,
B‐CLL, and atypical CLL of 930, 480, and 22 days respec­
tively. Although the prognosis is good in the short term,
ultimately, CLL patients can experience an acute blast
crisis in which lymphoblasts replace mature lympho­
cytes (ALL) and response to aggressive treatment is poor.
Prognosis for dogs and cats with ALL is very poor.
Median survival times of 3–128 days have been reported
in ALL dogs with a CD34+ phenotype treated with
CHOP‐based treatment protocols.
Hematopoietic peripheral blood stem cell transplanta­
tion (HSCT) is presently a viable treatment option
for dogs with leukemias. Although not widely available,
improved survival and cure are possible with this
ad­v anced form of therapy.

­Myeloid Neoplasia
Myeloid neoplasms arise from clonally proliferating cells
in the bone marrow and manifest as either accumulation
of neoplastic cells in the blood or lack of normal blood
cells. Myeloid neoplasms are divided into acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) and myeloproliferative neoplasms
(MPNs) which include chronic myelogenous leukemia
(CML), polycythemia vera (PV), basophilic/eosinophilic
leukemia, and essential thrombocytosis. (Box 133.1).
Acute Myeloid Leukemia
Etiology/Pathophysiology

Acute myeloid leukemia is defined by an abnormal pro­
liferation of clonal cells in the bone marrow and periph­
eral blood that arise from a single immature blast cell.
AML is divided into several subcategories based on
the Animal Leukemia Study Group’s 1991 proposal
which was modeled after the human leukemia French‐
American‐British (FAB) Cooperative Group classifica­
tions (see Box 133.1). In this system, myeloid leukemias
are divided into phenotypic subtypes based on morphol­
ogy and cytochemistry profiling using an alphanumeric

1225

VetBooks.ir

1226

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Box 133.1 Classification of leukemias in animals
as proposed by the Animal Leukemia Study Group
Lymphoid leukemias
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)
Myeloid neoplasia
Acute myeloid leukemias (AML)
Acute myeloblastic leukemia with minimal differentiation (LMA‐M0)
Acute myeloblastic leukemia without differentiation
(LMA‐M1)
Acute myeloblastic leukemia with maturation (LMA‐M2)
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (LMA‐M3) (not recognized in animals)
Acute myelomonocytic leukemia (LMA‐M4)
Acute monocytic leukemia (LMA‐M5)
Acute erythroleukemia (LMA‐M6)
Acute erythroleukemia with erythroid predominance
(LMA‐M6Er)
Megakaryoblastic leukemia (LMA‐M7)
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)
Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia
Chronic monocytic leukemia
Eosinophilic leukemia
Basophilic leukemia
Polycythemia vera
Essential thrombocythemia
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs)
Myelodysplastic syndrome with excessive blasts (MDS‐EB)
Myelodysplastic syndrome with refractory cytopenia
(MDS‐RC)
Myelodysplastic syndrome with erythroid predominance
(MDS‐ER)

code of M‐#, with the M standing for myeloid. The most
commonly reported forms in the dog are acute myelo­
blastic leukemia (M1 and M2) and acute myelomo­
nocytic leukemia (M4). Monocytic leukemia (M5),
erythroleukemia (M6), and megakaryoblastic leukemia
(M7) are also recognized in dogs but promyelocytic leu­
kemia (M3) has not been reported.
In dogs, the etiology of AML along with the other mye­
loid neoplasms is unknown. Genetic and environmental
factors such as exposure to radiation, drugs or toxic
chemicals are thought to play a role. Defining genetic
factors in dogs is difficult because canine karyotyping is

an arduous process due to the large number and mor­
phologic similarities of chromosomes and their resist­
ance to banding. Recently, however, advancements in
molecular cytogenetic analysis have aided in the discov­
ery of canine chromosomal abnormalities that are simi­
lar to human AML which may serve not only as diagnostic
and prognostic factors but also as therapeutic targets.
Epidemiology

A lack of veterinary studies examining myeloid neoplasms
has led to a deficiency of uniform diagnostic criteria,
nomenclature, and ultimately accurate diagnosis. Because
of this, correct information regarding incidence and other
epidemiologic information cannot be verified until a
more uniform classification system is standardized.
Signalment

Acute myeloid leukemia is rare with a variable patient
age at diagnosis. Males are more commonly affected
than females and large‐breed dogs seem to be predis­
posed. Retrospective studies suggest an increased inci­
dence in German shepherds, golden retrievers, and
Labrador retrievers. Small‐breed dogs have been
­represented in single‐case reports. The majority of feline
AML patients are FeLV positive.
History and Clinical Signs

The clinical course of AML is rapid. Common clinical
signs include extreme lethargy, secondary infection, and
hemorrhage. Hematologic abnormalities can be severe
with a WBC count as high as 150,000 μ/L. Anemia, neu­
tropenia, and thrombocytopenia are also common.
Spleen, lymph nodes, and liver are frequently involved
but other sites such as heart, kidney or central nervous
system (CNS) may be infiltrated as well.
Diagnosis

It is important to understand that AML is a disorder
resulting from uncontrolled proliferation or decreased
apoptosis of cells incapable of maturation, leading to the
accumulation of poorly differentiated or “blast” cells.
This is different from other myeloid neoplasms which
result from unregulated proliferation of cells that exhibit
incomplete/defective maturation, leading to the accu­
mulation of well differentiated cells. The diagnosis of
AML is generally made by evaluation of peripheral blood
or bone marrow. Confirmation of AML should include
consistent hematologic and morphologic criteria,
­p ositive ­staining for myeloperoxidase which is a heme
protein synthesized during myeloid differentiation that
constitutes the major component of neutrophil azuro­
philic granules, a consistent pattern of beta‐2 integrin
expression and absence of lymphoid antigens by immu­
nocytochemistry or flow cytometry (Figure 133.3).

133 Lymphoid Leukemias, Myeloid Neoplasia, and Myelodysplastic Syndrome

VetBooks.ir

progression of the malignancy, treatment is often limited
to palliative cytoreductive chemotherapy with such
drugs as cytosine arabinoside, doxorubicin, vincristine,
and cyclophosphamide. Intensive supportive care is
commonly necessary and may include blood and/or
platelet‐rich plasma infusion along with aggressive anti­
biotic therapy for infection.
Prognosis

Figure 133.3 Photomicrograph of poorly differentiated blast cells
in the peripheral blood of a dog that has myelomonocytic
leukemia diagnosed via flow cytometry. The neoplastic cells are
large with pleomorphic nucleoli and prominent nucleoli. Wright
Giemsa stain, 1000× magnification. Source: Courtesy of Dr Jan
Andrews, Antech Diagnostics.

Table 133.1 lists immunophenotypic markers for
uncharacterized leukemias in animals recommended by
the ACVP Oncology Committee.
Therapy

The course of the disease is short, usually only days to
weeks, and animals quickly succumb or are euthanized
soon after diagnosis. Traditional chemotherapy alone is
largely unrewarding due to inadequate or short‐term
responses. As with other forms of leukemia, HSCT is
becoming a viable treatment option for dogs with leuke­
mia. However, owing to limited availability and rapid
Table 133.1 Recommended immunophenotyping markers
to differentiate animal leukemias as proposed by the Myeloid
Neoplasm Subcommittee of the American College of Veterinary
Pathologists
Cell type

Immunophenotypic marker(s)

B lymphocytes
T lymphocytes
Myeloid
Megakaryoblastic
Dendritic cells
Acute leukemia

CD79a
CD3
MPO, CD11b
CD41
CD1c
CD34

Source: McManus PM. Classification of myeloid neoplasms: a
comparative review. Vet Clin Pathol 2005; 34: 189–212. Reproduced
with permission of John Wiley & Sons.

The prognosis for AML is considered poor. In one study
of 16 dogs with confirmed AML, median and mean sur­
vival after diagnosis were 7 days and 20 days respectively
with a range of 2–138 days. Most of the dogs in the study
were treated with chemotherapy. However, protocols
were not consistent and some dogs were euthanized
before any treatment could be instituted due to rapidly
progressive clinical signs. There is one case report of a
dog with megakaryoblastic leukemia that demonstrated
a lengthy survival of 24 months with treatment so all
AML is not necessarily rapidly fatal. For some dogs,
HSCT may be feasible. For those animals, HSCT offers
the possibility of prolonged survival and cure.
Myeloproliferative Neoplasms
Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) are defined as
overproduction of differentiated bone marrow cells which
results in the accumulation of the affected cell (granulo­
cytes and/or monocytes, erythrocytes or platelets).
Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia
Etiology/Pathophysiology

Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) in dogs is charac­
terized by a neoplastic proliferation of the neutrophil
series and is more similar to human chronic neutrophilic
leukemia than human CML. Human CML is associated
with the proliferation of several hematopoietic cell line­
ages due to the presence of a BCR‐ABL translocation
(Philadelphia chromosome) between chromosomes 9
and 22. The regions of human chromosomes 9 and 22 are
evolutionarily related to regions on canine chromosomes
9 and 26 and a canine equivalent to the BCR‐ABL muta­
tion (Raleigh chromosome) has been identified in three
cases of canine CML. The etiology of most canine and
feline CML is unknown.
Signalment

There is no known age, sex, or breed predilection in
canine CML. FeLV infection has been associated with
CML in cats.
History/Clinical Signs

Many patients have no clinical signs until significant
organ infiltration or myelophthisis of the bone marrow

1227

VetBooks.ir

1228

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

occurs. If clinical signs are present, they are often non­
specific and may include lethargy, inappetence, organo­
megaly, pale mucous membranes, and hemorrhage
caused by severe thrombocytopenia.

Signalment

Diagnosis

The majority of clinical signs occur secondary to hyper­
viscosity syndrome which is the sludging of blood due to
increased red blood cell mass. These signs may include
hemorrhage, exercise intolerance, neurologic signs such
as seizures or ataxia, splenomegaly, hyperemic mucous
membranes, injected sclera/retinal vessels, and weak­
ness. Cardiac or renal disease may also occur.

At diagnosis, the peripheral white blood cell count
(WBC) count is commonly >100 000/μL. Neutrophils
and neutrophilic precursors accumulate in bone mar­
row, peripheral blood and other organs such as the
spleen, liver, and lymph nodes. Eosinophils and baso­
phils may also be increased. CML must be distinguished
from a leukemoid reaction caused by inflammation,
immune‐mediated diseases, and/or a paraneoplastic
syndrome. Staging tests such as three‐view thoracic radi­
ographs, abdominal ultrasound, and bone marrow cytol­
ogy can be helpful in making this distinction. Biopsy of
the liver or spleen may also be helpful in distinguishing
CML from a leukemoid reaction due to its invasiveness.
Therapy

Treatment of CML consists of the chemotherapy agent
hydroxyurea at 20–25 mg/kg PO twice daily until the leu­
kocyte count drops to 15 000–20 000 cells/μL. The dos­
age of hydroxyurea can then be reduced by 50% on a
daily basis or to 50 mg/kg given biweekly or triweekly.
Prognosis

Although responders can be managed for several months
with chemotherapy, most CML patients will enter a ter­
minal phase of their disease. HSCT offers the only pos­
sibility of cure for dogs but may not be feasible or
practical. Death is either due to infection or hemorrhage
caused by neutrophil dysfunction and thrombocytopenia
or secondary to a “blast crisis.” Response rates in patients
in a blast crisis are low and the prognosis is very poor.
It is unknown whether the subset of canine CML patients
that have a BCR‐ABL chromosome will respond to
BCR‐ABL kinase inhibitors which have become the
standard of care for human CML patients.
Polycythemia Vera
Etiology/Pathophysiology

Polycythemia vera (PV) is a clonal disorder of erythroid
precursors in the bone marrow, which leads to the over­
production of red blood cells independent of erythropoi­
etin. PV is rare in the dog and must be differentiated
from more common causes of polycythemia such as rela­
tive polycythemia which is a result of hemoconcentra­
tion or secondary polycythemia which is driven by
erythropoietin. Conditions associated with secondary
polycythemia include chronic pulmonary disease, con­
gestive heart failure, renal disease, renal neoplasia, and/
or right‐to‐left cardiac shunts.

Polycythemia vera generally affects middle‐aged dogs
and cats with no breed or sex predilection.
History and Clinical Signs

Diagnosis

Recommended diagnostic tests to rule out relative or
secondary polycythemia include thoracic radiographs,
abdominal ultrasound, bone marrow aspiration, arterial
blood gas measurements, and serum EP levels if possible.
The diagnosis of PV is made by the demonstration of sig­
nificant erythrocytosis (hematocrit of 60–75%) with
normal to decreased serum EP levels. Bone marrow
cytology in PV is consistent with erythroid hyperplasia
with normal patterns of maturation.
Therapy

Treatment of PV consists of decreasing the red blood cell
(RBC) volume and, ideally, suppression of erythroid pro­
duction in the bone marrow. Phlebotomy with reinfusion
of the patient’s plasma after removal of the RBCs or
administering colloid and crystalloid solutions to replace
lost electrolytes is recommended. The PCV should be
reduced to 50–60% or by one‐sixth of its starting value
(15–20 mL/kg body weight can be removed at one time).
The drug of choice to suppress erythroid production is
hydroxyurea which works by inhibiting DNA synthesis.
Hydroxyurea is instituted at 20–25 mg/kg PO given twice
daily in dogs (10–15 mg/kg in cats orally once daily).
Once the hematocrit is below 60%, hydroxyurea is main­
tained at every other day dosing with the goal of main­
taining a normal or close to normal packed cell volume
(PCV).
Prognosis

The prognosis of PV is good with a high response rate
and survival times of longer than a year for responders.
Basophilic and Eosinophilic Leukemia
and Essential Thrombocythemia
Etiology/Pathophysiology

Basophilic leukemia has rarely been reported in dogs and
is diagnosed by an increased WBC count with a high
proportion of basophils in bone marrow and/or periph­
eral blood. The etiology is unknown. It is unclear whether
dogs and cats develop eosinophilic leukemia. At this

VetBooks.ir

133 Lymphoid Leukemias, Myeloid Neoplasia, and Myelodysplastic Syndrome

time, due to lack of useful clonality assays, eosinophilic
leukemia and hypereosinophilic syndrome are difficult
to differentiate. Essential thrombocythemia has been
described in the dog and is characterized by persistent
thrombocytosis of >600 000/μL without evidence of cir­
culating blast cells.
Signalment

There is no known age, breed, or sex predilection in any
of these disorders.
History and Clinical Signs

A history of lethargy, inappetence, and/or weight loss is
common with any of the myeloid neoplasms. Clinical
signs are generally vague and may include fever, pale
mucous membranes, petechiation, hepatosplenomegaly,
and lymphadenopathy.
Diagnosis

Basophilic leukemia must be differentiated from masto­
cytosis based on morphology. Although these cells are
usually easily distinguished from each other, changes in
morphology of the nucleus and granules in basophilic
leukemia can make this distinction more difficult.
Infiltration into other organs is possible, including the
liver, spleen and lymph nodes, so evaluation of these
organs by abdominal ultrasound and/or cytology can
aid in the diagnosis. To make a diagnosis of eosinophilic
leukemia, disorders associated with eosinophilia such
as skin diseases, respiratory, and/or gastrointestinal
tract diseases and parasitism need to be ruled out before
considering a neoplastic leukemic etiology. Dogs with
essential thrombocythemia can present with hepatos­
plenomegaly, nonregenerative anemia, and neutro­
philia. On examination of bone marrow, megakaryocytic
hyperplasia is the most common feature. Diseases that
are known to cause secondary thrombocytosis such
as chronic inflammatory diseases, rebound from
severe hemorrhage and iron deficiency anemia need
to be ruled out before making a diagnosis of essential
thrombocythemia.
Treatment/Prognosis

Treatment for basophilic leukemia with hydroxyurea has
provided complete or partial remissions for several
months in case reports. The effective treatment of eosin­
ophilic leukemia is unknown but in one case report,
treatment with corticosteroids was effective. Information
on treatment for essential thrombocythemia is lacking
but in one case report, a dog was successfully treated
with a chemotherapy protocol consisting of vincristine,
cyclophosphamide, Ara‐C, and prednisone. As with all
forms of leukemia, HSCT can be considered for suitable
dogs if feasible.

­Myelodysplastic Syndromes
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a heterogeneous
group of acquired alterations of hematopoietic stem cells
that have been described in humans, dogs, and cats.
MDS can be primary or secondary/acquired. Primary
MDS result from clonal expansion of a defective pluripo­
tent stem cell and therefore are considered neoplastic.
Some refer to myelodysplasia as preleukemia since it can
progress to acute leukemia in some cases.
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Several different aberrations can result from a dysfunc­
tional hematopoietic system constituting MDS. In dogs,
there are usually cytopenias in 2–3 cell lines in the
peripheral blood due to cell death caused by ineffective
hematopoiesis. Other blood abnormalities may include
dysplastic changes in several cell lines, metarubricytosis,
and macrocytic erythrocytes. The bone marrow is usu­
ally normocellular or hypercellular. Blast cells in bone
marrow make up <30% of all nucleated cells but in peo­
ple this threshold has been changed to <20%.
Three subtypes of primary MDS have been proposed
for dogs and cats: MDS with excessive blasts (MDS‐EB),
in which blast percentages are >5% and less than 20%,
MDS with refractory cytopenia (MDS‐RC) with blast
percentages <5% and cytopenias in one or more
lineages, and MDS with erythroid predominance
­
(MDS‐ER) in which the myeloid:erythroid (M:E) ratio is
<1. Cases of canine secondary MDS consistently have
<5% myeloblasts in the bone marrow. Secondary MDS
in dogs has been associated with several conditions
including myelofibrosis, neoplasia (lymphoma and
multiple myeloma), immune‐mediated thrombocyto­
penia, immune‐mediated hemolytic anemia, drugs, and
ionizing radiation. In cats, secondary MDS can be
­associated with FeLV.
Epidemiology
Genetic abnormalities in hematopoietic cells such as
mutations in oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes
along with chromosomal deletions have been discovered
in human MDS patients and are thought to play a role in
veterinary patients.
Signalment
MDS‐EB is the most common type of primary MDS and
occurs most frequently in middle‐aged to older dogs.
Both MDS‐RC and MDS‐ER occur in older dogs. No
breed or sex predilection is known in any of the
subtypes.

1229

VetBooks.ir

1230

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

History and Clinical Signs
The clinical signs of both MDS‐RC and MDS‐ER are
vague and commonly include lethargy and exercise intol­
erance. Physical exam generally reveals pale mucous
membranes and an anemia‐related heart murmur.
Clinical signs of MDS‐EB tend to be more severe and
include depression, anorexia, fever, and diarrhea. These
patients commonly have a history of illness that pro­
gresses over several months.
Diagnosis
Evaluation of blood and/or bone marrow is needed for
diagnosis of MDS. Because primary and secondary MDS
cannot be consistently differentiated cytologically, a
diagnosis of primary MDS should be made only if sec­
ondary causes have been ruled out. The most common
hematologic abnormalities in MDS‐RC and MDS‐ER are
nonregenerative anemias without any evidence of throm­
bocytopenia or leukopenia. MDS‐ER differs from MDS‐
RC by characterization of marked erythroid hyperplasia
and the presence of >5% rubriblasts in the bone marrow.
Patients with MDS‐EB have moderate to severe nonre­
generative anemia with evidence of neutropenia and
thrombocytopenia. Dysplastic features in all cell lines

are commonly found and a hallmark feature of MDS‐EB
is the presence of increased numbers of myeloblasts
(between 5% and 20% of total nucleated erythroid and
myeloid cells).
Therapy/Prognosis
There is no standard treatment for primary MDS. In
humans, patients commonly receive no treatment
because they often do not have clinical signs. Supportive
care such as blood transfusions and antibiotics for infec­
tions is used as necessary. Growth factors can also be
used. In one case report of a dog with MDS‐ER, human
recombinant erythropoietin was used to treat profound
anemia to promote terminal differentiation of dysplastic
erythrocytes. The hematocrit increased and that patient
remained in remission for >30 months. Dogs with MDS‐
RC and MDS‐ER can have prolonged survivals when
treated with chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide or cyto­
sine arabinoside is most common) and supportive care.
Patients with MDS‐EB can progress to AML and treat­
ment has been less rewarding, with survival times of days
to months. For suitable dogs, allogeneic HSCT can be
considered. The treatment and prognosis of secondary/
acquired MDS are dependent on the underlying cause.

­Further Reading
Comazzi, D, Gelain ME, Martini V, et al.
Immunophenotype predicts survival time in dogs with
chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Vet Intern Med 2011;
25: 100–6.
Tasca, S, Carli E, Caldin M, et al. Hematologic
abnormalities and flow cytometric immunophenotyping
results in dogs with hematopoietic neoplasia: 210 cases
(2000–2006). Vet Clin Pathol 2009; 38(1): 2–12.
Uopperi, TA, Bienzle, D, Bernreuter DC, et al. Prognostic
markers for myeloid neoplasms: a comparative review of

the literature and goals for future investigation. Vet
Pathol 2011; 48: 182–97.
Williams MJ, Avery AC, Lana SE, et al. Canine
lymphoproliferative disease characterized by
lymphocytosis: immunophenotypic markers of
prognosis. J Vet Intern Med 2008; 22: 596–601.
Young KM, Vail DM. Hematopoietic tumors. In: Withrow
SJ, Vail DM, Page RL, eds. Withrow and MacEwen’s
Small Animal Clinical Oncology, 5th edn. St Louis, MO:
Saunders, 2013, pp. 653–65.

VetBooks.ir

1231

134
Lymphomas
Kristine Elaine Burgess, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)
Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine, Tufts University, North Grafton, MA, USA

­Canine Lymphoma
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Canine lymphoma is one of the most commonly encoun­
tered neoplasms in the dog and is most analogous to
non‐Hodgkin lymphoma in people. It includes multiple
disorders of the lymphoid system, which are character­
ized by a monoclonal expansion of lymphoid cells. The
etiology of lymphoma is currently unknown and is likely
to be multifactorial.
Recent advances in molecular cytogenetics have dem­
onstrated various chromosomal aberrations associated
with diagnosis and prognosis in canine lymphoma.
These results, while in the early phase of research, are
similar to those seen in human non‐Hodgkin lymphoma
with dysregulation of certain molecular pathways.

Epidemiology
The incidence of canine lymphoma has steadily increased,
with approximately 84 per 10 000 dogs diagnosed each
year. Certain breeds are considered to have a higher
overall lifetime risk of developing lymphoma, suggesting
a heritable genetic component. These include boxers,
golden retrievers, basset hounds, and bulldogs. Likewise,
certain breeds of dogs are considered to be at much lower
risk, including dachshunds and Pomeranians.
Signalment
Average age at diagnosis is between 5 and 10 years old
with no apparent sex predilection.
History and Clinical Signs

Clinical presentation of multicentric lymphoma is highly
variable and will depend on the anatomic location
A number of case–control studies have evaluated envi­
and extent of the disease. An established World Health
ronmental influences on the development of lymphoma.
Organization (WHO) staging scheme for domestic
These studies demonstrated that exposure to 2,4‐D
­animals assigns patients into five categories based on
­herbicides increases the risk of developing lymphoma.
disease dissemination and anatomic site (Table 134.1).
Other studies have suggested that exposure to strong
This staging system is used for accurate planning of
magnetic fields or proximity to environmental waste
therapy, provides prognostic information, and allows
­
may be risk factors.
for comparisons between patients for the purposes of
Certain viruses have been associated with the develop­
clinical research.
ment of lymphoma in humans (e.g., Epstein–Barr virus,
The WHO substage (a/b) is another system used
HIV). No viruses have been identified as a causative
for
prognostication and is defined as the presence/
­
agent for the development of canine lymphoma.
absence
of constitutional signs at the time of presenta­
Various immune‐mediated disorders (immune‐­
tion.
Constitutional
signs of illness include anorexia, vomit­
mediated hemolytic anemia or thrombocytopenia),
ing,
diarrhea,
weight
loss, cachexia, fever, etc. Although
organ transplantation or a history of atopic dermatitis
these
signs
are
somewhat
subjective, this ­system consist­
have been implicated in the development of canine
ently
proves
to
be
very
prognostic.
lymphoma.
Environmental Influences

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1232

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Table 134.1 World Heath Organization clinical staging scheme
for lymphoma in domestic animals
Remarks

Anatomic location
A

Generalized

B

Alimentary

C

Thymic

D

Skin

E

Leukemia

F

Other

Stage
I

Involvement of single lymph node or lymphoid
tissue in a single organ

II

Multiple involved lymph nodes in a single region

III

Generalized lymph node involvement

IV

Involvement of the liver and/or spleen (+/‐ stage III)

V

Presence of lymphoma in the blood/bone
marrow and/or involvement of other organ systems
(+/‐ stage I–IV)

Substage
a

No systemic signs of illness

b

With systemic signs of illness

The most common presentation is that of an asymp­
tomatic dog with nonpainful but markedly enlarged
peripheral lymph nodes which would be classified as
stage III, substage a (see Table 134.1).
In general, dogs with stage V lymphoma will present
with clinical signs related to the anatomic location of the
disease. For example, dogs with bone marrow infiltration
may present with cytopenias, fever, sepsis or hemor­
rhage. Dogs with marked pulmonary involvement may
present in respiratory distress.
As lymphoma has the potential to cause a wide array of
clinical syndromes, it should be considered as a potential
cause of any unexplained disorder in high‐risk breeds
until proven otherwise.
Diagnosis/Clinical Staging
A diagnosis of canine lymphoma can be achieved via fine
needle aspiration (FNA) and cytologic evaluation of
an enlarged peripheral lymph node or tumor tissue.
Cytology supportive of lymphoma will demonstrate a
population of large or intermediate‐sized lymphocytes
comprising the majority (>50%) of cells. Small cell lym­
phoma is an exception, as it may not appear cytologically
malignant.

It is important to note that the presence of an inflam­
matory process within enlarged lymph nodes may con­
found a diagnosis since reactive lymphoid hyperplasia
can be difficult to distinguish from lymphoma. This
occurs commonly in the mandibular lymph nodes (due
to dental disease or ear infections), and evaluation of
these nodes should be avoided if possible.
A definitive diagnosis of lymphoma may require
­further analysis to determine if a clonal population of
lymphocytes is present. This can be accomplished via
polymerase chain reaction‐based assay evaluating anti­
gen receptor rearrangements (PARR). The presence of a
clonally expanded population of cells strongly supports a
diagnosis of lymphoma as it is uncommon in a reactive
­process. It should be noted, however, that this test can
result in a high percentage (upwards to 25%) of false neg­
atives. An alternative to PARR is a diagnostic test called
flow cytometry. This assay relies on monoclonal anti­
bodies and fluorescent markers to help confirm a diag­
nosis of lymphoma by evaluating for aberrancies and
determining the phenotype of leukocytes within a fresh
sample of blood or tissue (e.g., lymph node, effusions).
Because flow cytometry requires living cells to complete
the assay, an abundance of dead or dying cells will
­confound a definitive result.
Ideally, cytology should be used as a first‐line test fol­
lowed by confirmation with histology. A biopsy of lymph
node or other affected tissue can be obtained surgically
or via needle core biopsy. An excisional biopsy is pre­
ferred, as it allows for a more thorough classification of
the type of lymphoma by preserving the architecture of
the affected tissue. Biopsy samples also provide adequate
tissue to perform immunohistochemical phenotyping
for prognostic information by distinguishing between B
and T cell forms.
Histologic Classification

Lymphomas are a complex group of diseases that vary
clinically from indolent to aggressive, and from poorly
controlled to manageable with treatment.
Indolent forms of lymphoma are uncommon and
poorly understood. These low‐grade forms of lymphoma
are relatively slow growing and are associated with long
survival times with limited or no therapy. Examples
include marginal zone lymphoma, follicular lymphoma,
B or T cell small cell lymphoma, and T zone lymphoma.
The majority of dogs have a multicentric intermediate
or high‐grade variety, with diffuse large lymphoblastic B
cell being the most common. While higher‐grade lym­
phomas tend to be more responsive to chemotherapy,
the duration of tumor control is short when compared to
animals with low‐grade lymphoma, in which long sur­
vival is often achieved with minimal to no treatment.

VetBooks.ir

134 Lymphomas

Immunophenotype

Immunophenotyping is commonly used to distinguish
the population of lymphoid cells that make up the tumor.
Cell surface markers, such as CD3 and CD79a, aid in
­differentiating T cell from B cell lymphomas. It is well
established that dogs with a B cell form of lymphoma
have better response rates and prognosis compared to
those with a T cell phenotype.
Staging

Minimum database including a complete blood count
(CBC) with differential blood cell count, serum bio­
chemistry profile, and urinalysis should be completed to
evaluate for the presence of paraneoplastic conditions
and rule out co‐morbid disease.
Potential abnormalities related to lymphoma noted on
a CBC include blood dyscrasias such as a nonregen­
erative anemia, thrombocytopenia, lymphocytosis or
presence of circulating lymphoblasts. Bone marrow
­
aspiration is indicated in dogs with blood dyscrasias to
confirm lymphoma and rule out an unrelated blood
­disorder. This may also help to differentiate between
multicentric stage V lymphoma and a primary lympho­
blastic leukemia, which carries a worse prognosis.
A chemistry profile that includes a serum ionized cal­
cium level is recommended to evaluate for the presence
of hypercalcemia of malignancy and to assess liver and
kidney function.
A urinalysis is helpful in evaluating renal function and
can rule out a subclinical urinary tract infection. It is
important to note that dogs with hypercalcemia of
­malignancy may present with azotemia and isosthenuria,
which may not represent primary renal disease but
instead is a consequence of the effects of hypercalcemia
on renal tubules.
Thoracic and/or abdominal radiographs or abdominal
ultrasound are recommended to determine the presence
and extent of disease within visceral organs. When pre­
sent, pulmonary infiltrates typically appear radiographi­
cally as diffuse interstitial and/or alveolar patterns. Rarely
are there nodules or bronchial changes. Widening of the
cranial mediastinum may indicate the presence of medias­
tinal lymphoma.
Because of the potential for cardiotoxic effects of
­certain chemotherapy drugs, thoracic radiographs are
also important for assessment of cardiac changes.
Therapy
After establishing a diagnosis of lymphoma, a compre­
hensive discussion with the owner should encompass
goals, prognosis, associated costs, and potential compli­
cations. It is important to note that many owners have a

preconceived notion of cancer and its treatment.
Therefore it should be made clear that the majority of
dogs who receive chemotherapy will respond to treat­
ment and can achieve a remission in which they are free
of clinical signs related to lymphoma. In the author’s
experience, most owners who decide to proceed with
chemotherapy are cooperative, realistic, and apprecia­
tive of the efforts made to help their pets.
Treatment options range from multiagent protocols to
single‐agent prednisone and will be determined by the
location of the disease, the overall health of the pet, and
the emotional/financial commitment of the owner.
A primary veterinarian can easily manage many dogs
with multicentric lymphoma. However, consultation
with an oncologist may be helpful in establishing a treat­
ment protocol. Referral to an oncology center may be
indicated for atypical cases or for patients that are refrac­
tory to treatment.
Multiagent Chemotherapy Protocols

Drugs with established activity include cyclophospha­
mide (C), doxorubicin (H, hydroxydaunorubicin or
­doxorubicin), vincristine (O, Oncovin®), and prednisone
(P). Protocols incorporating these drugs are called
CHOP‐based protocols. All CHOP‐based multiagent
chemotherapy protocols are believed to be superior to
any single‐agent protocol with respect to remission
duration and overall survival time. Multiple studies have
demonstrated that approximately 80–90% of all dogs
receiving a CHOP‐based chemotherapy protocol will
experience a clinical remission with an overall median
survival time of 10–12 months. While success of t­ reatment
is highly variable, the majority of multiagent protocols
induce a first remission of >6 months after chemotherapy
induction.
Multiagent protocols are typically discontinued
15–19 weeks after the start of therapy. Long‐term main­
tenance chemotherapy has not demonstrated benefit
with respect to remission duration or progression‐free
survival.
A commonly used and well‐studied chemothera­
py
protocol for dogs with newly diagnosed or naive
­multicentric lymphoma is the University of Wisconsin
19‐week discontinuous (short) CHOP protocol. This
protocol is simple to administer since it relies on single‐
agent treatment at each visit, allowing for an assessment
of tolerability and efficacy of each drug. At week 19,
chemotherapy is discontinued if the dog is in complete
remission (Table 134.2).
Single‐Agent Chemotherapy Protocols

As noted earlier, multiagent protocol drugs work best
when given in combination at the onset of therapy.

1233

VetBooks.ir

1234

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Table 134.2 UW‐Madison short CHOP lymphoma protocol
Treatment week

Drug, dosage, and route

1

Vincristine (0.5–0.7 mg/M2) IV
Prednisone 2 mg/kg once per day for 7 days

Baseline CBC/chemistry profile/UA

2 Pretreatment CBC/plt

Cyclophosphamide (250 mg/M2) IV or POa
Prednisone 1.5 mg/kg once per day for 7 days

3

Vincristine (0.5–0.7 mg/M2) IV
Prednisone 1 mg/kg once per day for 7 days

Pretreatment CBC/plt

4 Pretreatment CBC/plt

No treatment: consider restaging to assess for response to treatmentb

5
6

Doxorubicin (30 mg/M2) IV +
Prednisone 0.5 mg/kg once per day for 7 days then discontinue

Pretreatment CBC/plt

Vincristine (0.5–0.7 mg/M2) IV

7 Pretreatment CBC/plt

Cyclophosphamide (250 mg/M2) IV or POa

8

Vincristine (0.5–0.7 mg/M2) IV

Pretreatment CBC/plt

9 Pretreatment CBC/plt

Doxorubicin (30 mg/M2) IV

10

No treatment

11

Pretreatment CBC/plt

Vincristine (0.5–0.7 mg/M2) IV

12 Pretreatment CBC/plt

Cyclophosphamide (250 mg/M2) IV or POa

13

Vincristine (0.5–0.7 mg/M2) IV

Pretreatment CBC/plt

14 Pretreatment CBC/plt
15
16

Doxorubicin (30 mg/M2) IVc
No treatment

Pretreatment CBC/plt

Vincristine (0.5–0.7 mg/M2) IV

17 Pretreatment CBC/plt

Cyclophosphamide (250 mg/M2) IV or POa

18

Vincristine (0.5–0.7 mg/M2) IV

Pretreatment CBC/plt

19 Pretreatment CBC/plt

Doxorubicin (30 mg/M2) IVd

a

Administer with furosemide 2 mg/kg SC to prevent sterile hemorrhagic cystitis (SHC). Substitute with chlorambucil at 1.4 mg/kg
if SHC develops.
b
Reduce dose to 1 mg/kg for dogs <15 kg.
c
Do not exceed 180 mg/M2 maximum cumulative dose.
d
If progressive disease is noted at any point in the treatment protocol, rescue chemotherapy should be considered.
CBC, complete blood count; IV, intravenous; plt, platelets; PO, by mouth (per os); UA, urine analysis.

If multiagent therapy is not an option, it is reasonable to
incorporate any number of the CHOP drugs and create
an individual protocol that suits the dog and the owner.
Doxorubicin as a single agent, administered every 2–3
weeks (up to five total treatments), can induce a remis­
sion in 50–75% of dogs for a median of 6–8 months. Care
must be taken to monitor for cumulative cardiotoxic
effects of this drug in the dog, which can result in dilated
cardiomyopathy (DCM). It is advisable to avoid this drug
in dogs with a preexisting heart condition or breeds that
are considered high risk for DCM (e.g., boxer, Doberman
pinscher, Great Dane, etc.). Other protocols with similar
success include cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and
prednisone (referred to as COP).
Dogs which are treated with a palliative protocol of
prednisone as a sole therapy can achieve a short‐lived
remission of approximately 1–2 months. It is important
to note that these dogs, when compared to dogs given

multiagent therapy from the outset, are more likely to
develop multidrug resistance and experience shorter
remission and survival times if any subsequent chemo­
therapy is administered.
Reinduction Chemotherapy Protocols

Reinduction with CHOP‐based drugs is recommended
provided that the recurrence is temporally far enough
from the conclusion of the initial protocol (i.e., ≥ 2
months). Typically, a second or even third remission is
achievable with a variable duration of response.
Rescue Chemotherapy

Inevitably, resistance to the CHOP‐based chemotherapy
drugs will develop, and it is unlikely that continued use
of the same drugs will provide a significant benefit. At
that point, drugs not used in the initial CHOP proto­
cols are recommended and are referred to as rescue

VetBooks.ir

134 Lymphomas

­chemotherapy agents/protocols. Successful induction of
an additional remission with rescue protocols varies
between 50% and 90% but the length of remission is
decreased, at 1.5–2.5 months.
A novel chemotherapy agent, rabacfosadine (Tanovea®),
has been conditionally approved for use in dogs with naive
or relapse lymphoma. This compound as a single agent has
demonstrated excellent efficacy for dogs with B cell form
of lymphoma and may be variably successsful for dogs
with a T cell variant. Other second‐line drugs often used
for rescue therapy include lomustine (CCNU), mechlore­
thamine (Mustargen®), vinblastine (Velban®), dacarbazine
(DTIC), and cytosine arabinoside (Cytosar‐U®). While
each of these drugs has a variable degree of efficacy against
lymphoma, the duration of response is considerably lower
when compared to standard multiagent protocols.

Cutaneous Lymphoma

A majority of dogs tolerate chemotherapy well. Potential
adverse effects include mild to moderate nausea, vomit­
ing, or diarrhea, all of which are easily treated with sup­
portive care or symptom management. In rare instances,
life‐threatening complications related to chemotherapy‐
induced myelosuppression can develop, requiring hospi­
talization and aggressive supportive care.
A CBC must be performed prior to every treatment to
ensure an adequate white blood cell count. It is generally
accepted that an absolute neutrophil count of >2000
cells/μL and >50 000 platelets/μL be present prior to
chemotherapy administration to minimize the risk of
sepsis or other complications.

A primary cutaneous form of lymphoma can develop
within the skin and/or the oral cavity (mucocutaneous).
Dogs may present with pruritus, scaling of the skin, and
alopecia that will progress to areas of ulceration, nod­
ules, and proliferative plaques. Lesions can be solitary or
can involve multiple skin sites. Oral involvement appears
as plaque‐like lesions or nodules associated with the
gums and lips. Multiple punch biopsies of the affected
areas are necessary to establish a diagnosis of lymphoma.
There are two types of cutaneous lymphoma distin­
guished histologically and phenotypically: epithelio­
tropic (T cell) lymphoma (also called mycosis fungoides)
and nonepitheliotropic (B or T cell) lymphoma.
Treatment of cutaneous lymphoma depends on the
extent and location of disease. Single lesions may be
appropriately treated with local therapy consisting of
surgery or radiation therapy. Diffuse cutaneous lym­
phoma is best treated with chemotherapy. B cell cutane­
ous lymphomas often respond better than T cell, but the
response rate with chemotherapy is less than that seen
with other forms of lymphoma.
CCNU or multiagent chemotherapy is the treatment
of choice, although a recent study has also supported the
use of Tanovea when treating dogs for cutaneous forms
of lymphoma. While many dogs have an initial response
to chemotherapy, the lesions often return or new lesions
develop within a short period of time (3–5 months).
Many dogs are euthanized within six months of diagno­
sis due to the discomfort associated with progressive
ulceration, bleeding, and pruritus.

Extranodal Forms of Lymphoma

Prognosis

There are instances where a dog will present with lym­
phoma isolated to a solitary site, such as the alimentary
tract, skin, central nervous system (CNS) or nasal cavity.
On rare occasions, local therapies such as surgery or
radiation therapy may be employed. Careful staging,
including bloodwork, thoracic radiographs, +/‐ abdomi­
nal ultrasound, +/‐ bone marrow aspiration, is essential
to ensure multicentric involvement is not present before
considering local therapy.

Response rates and remission duration for dogs with
newly diagnosed lymphoma will vary depending on the
clinical picture, biologic behavior, histologic classifica­
tion, immunophenotype, and treatment protocol. In
general, dogs with large B cell lymphoma have better
response rates to a CHOP‐based chemotherapy protocol
than dogs with T cell lymphoma. In fact, due to the vari­
able success in the treatment of dogs with T cell lym­
phoma, many oncologists are now relying on a modified
chemotherapy protocol that incorporates more alkylat­
ing agents (e.g., cyclophosphamide or lomustine). This
modification is based on the presumption that these
agents may be more effective agents for dogs with a T cell
form of lymphoma.

Complications of Chemotherapy

Alimentary Lymphoma

Alimentary lymphoma is an uncommon extranodal lym­
phoma. Dogs will present with nonspecific clinical signs
consistent with gastrointestinal (GI) disease, including
weight loss, anorexia, diarrhea, and vomiting. Limited
information in the veterinary literature suggests this
form of lymphoma is poorly responsive to chemother­
apy. In the author’s experience, a chemotherapy protocol
that incorporates CCNU can be more effective than a
multidrug CHOP‐based chemotherapy protocol alone.

Additional Treatment Strategies

Because most dogs ultimately will develop chemother­
apy resistance, other methods of lengthening a clinical
remission may be employed. These include total and
half‐body radiation therapy, hematopoietic stem cell

1235

VetBooks.ir

1236

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

transplantation (bone marrow transplant), and immuno­
therapy. These treatment strategies have variable success
and continue to be an active area of investigation.

­Feline Lymphoma
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Lymphoma (LSA) is one of the most common neoplasms
in the cat and can present in a variety of ways, depending
on the organ(s) affected. An association with retroviral
infection has been firmly established, with approximately
25% of feline leukemia virus (FeLV)‐positive cats devel­
oping lymphoma during their lifetime. Feline immuno­
deficiency virus (FIV) has also been implicated in the
development of lymphoma, although its true contribu­
tion has been difficult to determine since it often occurs
in conjunction with FeLV. Chronic immunosuppression
secondary to retroviral infection is thought to play a role
in this association. This correlates with the increased
incidence of lymphoma in cats receiving chronic
immunosuppressive drugs after renal transplantation.
­
Collectively, these findings parallel an increased inci­
dence of lymphoproliferative cancers in humans with
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or those receiv­
ing chronic immunosuppressive therapy.
The underlying cause of nonretroviral‐induced feline
lymphoma is not completely understood. It is likely
that chronic inflammation plays a role given that feline
lymphomas frequently arise in organs or sites affected
by chronic inflammation. For example, a correlation
between chronic inflammatory bowel disease and ali­
mentary lymphoma has been proposed. Comparatively,
humans with celiac disease have a similar predisposition
towards lymphoproliferative disorders and cancer.
Recent studies have also demonstrated that chronic
exposure to environmental tobacco smoke is associated
with an elevated risk for gastrointestinal lymphoma
in cats.
Epidemiology
Lymphoma is the most common neoplasm of the hemat­
opoietic system of cats, with an estimated incidence of
200 per 100 000 cats.
Studies have demonstrated that FeLV‐positive cats
have a 60‐fold or greater relative risk of the cancer. FIV
infection also increases the relative risk of lymphoma
5–6‐fold.
While the incidence of feline lymphoma has not
changed with the development of effective antiviral
­vaccines, the most common presentation of lymphoma
is now in older retrovirus‐negative cats.

Signalment
There is a bimodal distribution for feline lymphoma in
which retroviral‐positive cats present with lymphoma at
a young age (1–3 years) and virus‐negative cats present
at an older age (10–13 years). Currently, the median age
at presentation is approximately 11 years. There is no sex
predilection and any breed of cat can be affected,
although Siamese cats are overrepresented, suggesting a
genetic susceptibility to the disease.
History and Clinical Signs
Location of the tumor appears to be the determinant
of clinical signs and prognosis in feline lymphoma.
Consequently, the WHO staging system is not used.
Instead, lymphoma is generally divided into different
anatomic classifications: mediastinal, gastrointestinal,
multicentric, and miscellaneous sites (such as nasal and
renal).
Mediastinal Lymphoma

Young cats typically present with a mediastinal form of
lymphoma with acute‐onset dyspnea, which rapidly
­progresses as the tumor begins to occlude lymphatics,
leading to pleural effusion. Physical examination may
reveal a noncompressible cranial thorax and muffled or
caudodorsal displacement of cardiac sounds.
Alimentary Lymphoma

Alimentary lymphomas usually involve the stomach and
intestines of older cats. Gastrointestinal tumors may be
discrete or diffuse. The primary clinical signs are anorexia
and weight loss, although some cats may also ­present
with vomiting and/or diarrhea. With these ­clinical signs,
it is important, though often difficult, to differentiate
lymphoma from inflammatory bowel disease.
Extranodal Lymphoma

Cats with other forms of lymphoma (e.g., nasal, renal,
CNS, laryngeal) will present with clinical signs reflecting
the anatomic location.
Diagnosis
As described in dogs, a diagnosis of lymphoma can be
achieved via fine needle aspiration or surgical, endo­
scopic or needle biopsy of affected tissue. As noted
­previously, a definitive diagnosis via a fine needle aspi­
rate can be confounded by an insufficient or nondiag­
nostic sample, or if there is a significant component of
inflammation present. Because alimentary lymphoma is
easily confused with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD),
a full‐thickness tissue biopsy is often necessary to

VetBooks.ir

134 Lymphomas

­establish a definitive diagnosis. A histologic evaluation
of the diseased tissue will provide a more accurate evalu­
ation of tissue morphology and degree of invasion. If an
equivocal diagnosis is present, techniques such as immu­
nohistochemical or immunocytochemical analysis, flow
cytometric analysis and polymerase chain reaction‐
based clonality assays are available to characterize the
disease and refine the diagnosis.
Currently, a histologic classification scheme similar to
those described in humans and dogs does not exist for
feline lymphoma. There are two histologic forms: high‐
(or intermediate) grade lymphoma and low‐grade
(or small cell) lymphoma. These histologic distinctions
in combination with anatomic location are the most
prognostic and will determine treatment.
Immunophenotype

Immunophenotyping is not commonly used for prog­
nostication purposes in the cat as it is in dogs and
humans. It is employed, however, to confirm the p
­ resence
of a phenotypically identical population of l­ymphoid
cells that make up the tumor. This can be completed
on tissue samples via histochemical or cytochemical
staining for CD3 (T cell expression) or CD79a (B cell
expression). According to some studies, a T cell pheno­
type is more prevalent in cats with small cell or low‐grade
alimentary lymphoma and B cell phenotype is more
common in large cell or high‐grade lymphoma. As
mentioned previously, cell morphology (large cell vs
­
small cell) is used more commonly than a phenotypic
distinction to determine treatment and prognosis.
Alimentary Lymphoma

Cats with alimentary lymphoma are typically diagnosed
via abdominal imaging (e.g., ultrasound), which is abnor­
mal in approximately 60–90% of cats. The appearance is
variable, and may be of a circumferential mass with loss
of GI wall layering, or of a diffuse small intestinal wall
thickening of the muscularis, propria, and submucosa.
Mesenteric lymphadenopathy is also common and has
been reported in 45–80% of affected cats.
A cytologic or histologic assessment of a needle aspirate
or needle biopsy samples from intestinal masses, enlarged
lymph nodes or other abnormal‐appearing organs is
essential to establish a diagnosis. Endoscopic, laparoscopic
or incisional biopsy achieved by laparotomy may also be
performed. Full‐thickness GI biopsies best distinguish
inflammatory bowel disease from lymphoma and will
­differentiate a high‐ or low‐grade intestinal lymphoma.
Mediastinal Lymphoma

For cats with mediastinal lymphoma, a diagnosis can be
established via survey thoracic radiographs followed by
thoracocentesis with cytologic examination of the fluid.

The fluid lymphocyte count is usually greater than
4000/μL, with most appearing as intermediate or large
lymphoblasts. In cases where fluid cytology is not
­diagnostic, aspiration or biopsy of the mass itself can be
completed via ultrasound or computed tomography
(CT) guidance. Immunophenotypic and clonality assess­
ment may be helpful in equivocal cases.
Nasal Lymphoma

Nasal lymphoma differs from other sites in that it is often
non‐systemic and confined to the nose and/or sinuses.
Nasal CT or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), rhinos­
copy, and biopsy are necessary to establish a diagnosis.
Thorough staging with evaluation of regional lymph
nodes, thorax, and abdomen is recommended if local
radiation therapy is to be considered for sole treatment.
Renal Lymphoma

Renal lymphoma usually causes bilateral renomegaly
which may be detected on physical exam. Clinical signs
at presentation are a consequence of renal insufficiency.
Ultrasound‐guided renal biopsy or FNA is recommended
to confirm the diagnosis.
Central Nervous System Lymphoma

Spinal CNS lymphoma usually causes hindlimb paresis
or paralysis with or without back pain. Most tumors are
extradural, and occur in the thoracolumbar or lumbosa­
cral regions. Often there is no radiographic evidence of
disease. The clinical signs of brain lymphoma are attrib­
utable to the region of brain affected. Advanced imaging
with MRI or CT can be helpful in determining extent
and location of the lesion, and to evaluate for multifocal
disease. Because cerebral spinal fluid evaluation is not
always definitive for lymphoma, a diagnosis may be
attempted through cytologic evaluation of the bone
­marrow or kidneys since these organs are also involved
in up to 70% of cases.
Staging
As in canine lymphoma, beyond those initial diagnostics
performed to establish the diagnosis of lymphoma,
­additional diagnostics should be considered as part of
complete staging.
A complete blood work‐up including a CBC with dif­
ferential blood cell count, serum biochemistry profile,
urinalysis, and FeLV/FIV screen should be completed on
all cats. While most cats will have an unremarkable blood
profile, this is useful to evaluate for the presence of other
co‐morbid conditions.
A bone marrow aspirate is indicated in cats with blood
dyscrasias to confirm the presence of lymphoma and
rule out other etiologies. Results of a bone marrow

1237

VetBooks.ir

1238

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

­aspiration may help guide treatment if blood dyscrasias
are present.
Thoracic +/‐ abdominal radiographs or preferably
abdominal ultrasound are recommended to determine
the presence and extent of disease within visceral organs.
Therapy
There is less known about multicentric lymphoma treat­
ment protocols in the cat relative to the dog. While suc­
cess of the various chemotherapy protocols is highly
variable, the majority are capable of inducing a first
remission of >6 months after induction. Protocol choice
is based on cell type/grade.

protocol incorporating a drug with CNS penetration
(such as CCNU) is recommended.
Central Nervous System Lymphoma

Central nervous system lymphoma should be treated
with chemotherapy or radiation therapy emergently as
clinical signs, particularly paralysis, may become perma­
nent if treatment is delayed.

Table 134.3 Modified COP protocol for treatment of feline
lymphoma

Small Cell or Low‐Grade Lymphoma

Cats with a well‐differentiated or small cell form of
­lymphoma can have an excellent prognosis, and may
­survive for prolonged periods, with chlorambucil and
prednisolone.
Large Cell or High‐Grade Lymphoma

Similar to the dog, drugs with established activity in inter­
mediate and high‐grade lymphomas include cyclophos­
phamide (C), doxorubicin (H, hydroxydaunorubicin or
doxorubicin), vincristine (O, Oncovin®,), methotrexate,
CCNU (lomustine) and prednisone (P). Multiple proto­
cols incorporate these drugs as first‐ or second‐line treat­
ments and are considered a COP‐ or CHOP‐based
protocol, depending on the drugs used. These multiagent
chemotherapy protocols are used commonly for cats with
intermediate to large cell (high‐grade) lymphoma of any
anatomic location (Table 134.3). Currently, few data exist
to compare outcomes using the various modifications of
treatment for cats; consequently a protocol may be based
on client/veterinarian preference.
Unlike canine lymphoma, in which chemotherapy is
often discontinued after a period of time as long as the
pet continues to be in remission, comparable data do not
exist in the cat. Consequently, many cats continue to
receive maintenance chemotherapy for up to a year or
longer. Also unlike in humans and dogs receiving
­doxorubicin‐based protocols, cats are at low risk for car­
diotoxicity though they are susceptible to its renal toxic
effect. Renal function must be monitored with BUN, cre­
atinine, and urine specific gravity, ideally before each
treatment with doxorubicin. Corticosteroids may exac­
erbate cardiomyopathy in cats and these drugs should be
avoided or used conservatively in patients with clinical
or ­subclinical heart disease.
Renal Lymphoma

Because many cats with renal lymphoma have or will
develop CNS involvement, treatment with a multiagent

Treatment week

Drug, dosage, and route

1 CBC/chemistry profile/
UA as baseline prior to
therapy

Vincristine 0.5–0.6 mg/M2
Cyclophosphamide 200 mg/M2
Prednisolone 2 mg/kg daily

2

Pretreatment CBC/plt

Vincristine 0.5–0.6 mg/M2
Prednisolone 2 mg/kg daily

3

Pretreatment CBC/plt

Vincristine 0.5–0.6 mg/M2
Prednisolone 1 mg/kg daily

4a Pretreatment CBC/plt
and renal profile with USG if
using doxorubicin

5/6
7

Posttreatment CBC/plt Restage with ultrasound and/or
thoracic radiographs
Pretreatment CBC/plt

8/9
10

a

Vincristine 0.5–0.6 mg/M2
Cyclophosphamide 200 mg/M2
OR substitute with doxorubicin
(1 mg/kg) if not in clinical
remission
Prednisolone 1 mg/kg daily

Vincristine 0.5–0.6 mg/M2
Cyclophosphamide 200 mg/M2
Prednisolone 1 mg/kg daily
No treatment

Pretreatment CBC/plt

Vincristine 0.5–0.6 mg/M2
Cyclophosphamide 200 mg/M2
Prednisolone 1 mg/kg daily

11/12

No treatment

13

Vincristine 0.5–0.6 mg/M2
Cyclophosphamide 200 mg/M2
Prednisolone 1 mg/kg daily

Pretreatment CBC/plt

14/15

No treatment
Restage when clinically
indicated

16

Vincristine 0.5–0.6 mg/M2
Cyclophosphamide 200 mg/M2
Prednisolone 1 mg/kg dailyb

Pretreatment CBC/plt

If a clinical remission has not been achieved by week 4, then
substitute with doxorubicin and alternate with vincristine/
cyclophosphamide. Use doxorubicin only if adequate renal function
has been established with renal profile and urine specific gravity.
b
Continue every three weeks until relapse or for one year of
continuous remission.
CBC, complete blood count; plt, platelets; UA, urine analysis;
USG, urine specific gravity.

VetBooks.ir

134 Lymphomas

Nasal Lymphoma

If nasal lymphoma is confirmed to be nonsystemic, local
radiation therapy may be indicated as a sole treatment.
Other Anatomic Locations

Other infrequently encountered forms of lymphoma in
the cat include laryngeal or tracheal. Cats presenting
with disease isolated to these locations can respond
­positively to local radiation therapy +/‐ chemotherapy
for periods of 6–12 months.
Prognosis
Generally, the overall response rate and survival time in
cats are much lower than those achieved in dogs.
However, this varies and is determined by the anatomic
location at presentation, grade of tumor, and viral status
of the cat.
High‐grade tumors progress rapidly but are more
likely to respond to multiagent chemotherapy for a
finite period of time, whereas low‐grade tumors pro­
gress slowly and can be easily managed as chronic
diseases.
Cats with mediastinal lymphoma respond well to
chemotherapy initially, but the duration of response is
usually short‐lived (2–3 months).

Cats with high‐grade alimentary lymphoma treated
with a multiagent chemotherapy protocol can respond
with median survival times of 210 days. A positive
response to treatment is the best prognostic indicator.
Cats achieving a complete or partial remission have a
significantly longer survival time of >2 years.
Cats with nasal lymphoma can enjoy lengthy ­survival
times of 1–3 years or more with radiation therapy
+/‐ chemotherapy.
Central nervous system and renal lymphoma are
uncommon but when encountered, cats can experience a
short period of clinical benefit from ­chemotherapy and/
or radiation therapy for a median of 2–6 months.

­Conclusion
Cats and dogs with lymphoma can respond favorably to
chemotherapy +/‐ radiation therapy. The treatments are
generally well tolerated with most animals ­achieving a
clinical benefit for variable periods of time. Prognosis is
dependent on location, extent of disease, histologic
grade, and phenotype. Cancer treatment in pets can be a
rewarding experience. Most pet owners appreciate the
dedication of the veterinarian and the additional quality
time they gain with their pets.

­Further Reading
Simon D, Eberle N, Laacke‐Singer L, Nolte I. Combination
chemotherapy in feline lymphoma: treatment, outcome,
tolerability and duration in 23 cats. J Vet Intern Med
2008; 22: 394–400.
Thamm DH, Vail DM, Post GS, et al. Alternating
rabacfosadine/doxorubicin: efficacy and tolerability in
naïve canine multicentric lymphoma. J Vet Intern Med
2017; 231(3): 872–8.
Vail DM, Moore AS, Ogilvie GK, Volk LM. Feline
lymphoma (145 cases): proliferation indices, CD3

immunoreactivity and their association with prognosis
in 90 cats. J Vet Intern Med 1998; 12: 349–54.
Vail DM, Pinkerton ME, Young KM. Hematopoietic
tumors. In: Withrow S, Vail DM, Page RL, eds. Small
Animal Clinical Oncology, 5th edn. St Louis, MO:
Elsevier Saunders, 2013, pp.608–50.
Vezzali E, Parodi AL, Marcato PS, Bettini G.
Histopathological classification of 171 cases of canine
and feline non‐Hodgkin lymphoma according to the
WHO. Vet Comp Oncol 2010; 8: 38–49.

1239

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1241

135
Plasma Cell Disorders
Orna Kristal, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)
Kfar Saba, Israel

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Plasma cell neoplasms develop from clonal proliferation
of terminally differentiated immunoglobulin‐producing B
lymphocytes. They typically produce a homogenous
monoclonal immunoglobulin which is why they are
thought to originate from a single cell. However, not all
neoplasms are secretory and some may be biclonal or
even polyclonal. Reported plasma cell disorders (PCD) in
dogs and cats include multiple myeloma (MM), cutaneous
and noncutaneous extramedullary plasmacytoma (EMP),
IgM (Waldenström) macroglobulinemia (WM), solitary
osseous plasmacytoma (SOP), and plasma cell leukemia.
The etiology of PCD in dogs and cats is largely unknown.
No retroviral association was found in cats. Chronic
immune stimulation in rodent models and chronic infec­
tions in people have been associated with MM. Exposure
to ionizing radiation is a well‐known risk f­ actor and agri­
cultural chemicals, benzene, and petroleum products
have been considered potential risk ­factors in humans.
Multiple myeloma usually originates from multiple
bone marrow sites in dogs. In cats, multicentric noncuta­
neous EMP with or without bone marrow involvement
may present as MM. The neoplastic plasma cells in MM
typically secrete abnormal amounts of a single whole or
partial (light or heavy chain) immunoglobulin called the
M component, or paraprotein. In dogs, the M component
is usually IgA or IgG with similar frequency. In cats, the
IgG class is four times more common than IgA. IgM over­
production is uncommon in both species and is more
often associated with WM, a form of lymphoplasma­
cytic lymphoma. The abnormal light chains are excreted
in the urine and are called Bence Jones proteins.
Uncommon presentations in both species include
biclonal gammopathies, nonsecretory MM, monoclonal
gammopathies without hyperglobulinemia and
cryoglobulinemia. Cryoglobulins are immunoglobulins

that precipitate in temperatures below 37 °C, so they are
usually lost in the clot when the blood is allowed to clot
at room temperature.
Multiple myeloma negatively affects many organ
systems as a result of tumor infiltration, high levels
­
of circulating or deposited M component, production of
cytokines by tumor cells or bone marrow microenviron­
ment and the effects on the immune system.
Abnormal immunoglobulins can lead to hyperviscos­
ity syndrome (HVS) when high protein levels are reached.
The incidence of HVS is highest with IgM (WM) which
is a pentamer and has a high molecular weight, followed
by IgA‐secreting myelomas which are dimers that can
polymerize. IgG‐associated HVS occurs less frequently.
Increased serum viscosity leads to “sludging” of blood in
the vasculature that results in hypoxia and bleeding
diathesis leading to organ damage. HVS occurs in about
30% of dogs with MM and most commonly affects the
central nervous system (CNS), eyes, cardiovascular sys­
tem, and coagulation system.
Bleeding disorders are common in dogs with MM and
the mechanism is likely multifactorial. Coating of plate­
lets with paraproteins leads to decreased adhesiveness,
failure to release platelet factor III, and thrombocy­
topathia. Paraproteins can also interfere with clotting
factors and lead to abnormal fibrin polymerization.
Thrombocytopenia due to bone marrow infiltration
(myelophthisis) or immune‐mediated disease may also
contribute to bleeding. Approximately 33% of dogs and
25% of cats with MM have clinical evidence of bleeding.
Nonregenerative normocytic normochromic anemia
is the most common hematologic abnormality in MM
patients, present in about 66% of dogs and cats. Etiologies
may include myelophthisis, decreased erythrocyte life
span due to coating with paraprotein, blood loss, pro­
duction of inhibitory cytokines by myeloma cells and
decreased erythropoietin production due to renal

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1242

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

­dysfunction. Thrombocytopenia and neutropenia may
also occur.
Suppression of normal immunoglobulin production is
common and is suggested to result from normal feed­
back inhibition induced by the monoclonal gammopa­
thy. In people, maturation of normal B cells to plasma
cells is suppressed as well as T helper cell number and
function. These abnormalities can lead to immunosup­
pression and, combined with neutropenia, increased risk
for bacterial infections.
Osteolytic bone lesions are induced by secretion
of osteoclast‐activating factors from the bone marrow
microenvironment and myeloma cells. These factors
include the cytokines interleukin (IL)‐1 beta, tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)‐beta, and IL‐6. Osteolytic lesions
may cause pain, lameness, spinal compression due to
extradural tumor masses, or vertebral fractures which can
lead to paresis or paralysis. Lytic bone lesions are detected
in 50–60% of dogs with MM. In cats, skeletal involvement
is more variable, noted to occur in 8% of cases in one case
series and in up to 58–67% in other reports.
Hypercalcemia occurs in 15–20% of dogs and 9–25% of
cats with MM. Hypercalcemia was present in 50% of dogs
with MM at diagnosis when ionized calcium rather than
total calcium was measured. The main proposed mecha­
nism is direct bone osteolysis, although skeletal lytic lesions
are more common than hypercalcemia. Hypercalcemia
may be worsened by concurrent renal disease.
Renal disease is one of the serious complications of
MM, reported in 30–50% of dogs and about 25% of cats.
Light chains that are filtered by the glomerulus precipi­
tate in the renal tubule, causing interstitial nephritis.
Hypercalcemia, infiltration of the kidneys by myeloma
cells, decreased renal blood flow secondary to hypervis­
cosity, amyloidosis, glomerulonephritis, and pyelone­
phritis following immunosuppression may also
contribute to renal dysfunction.
Cardiac disease, a less common complication, may be
explained by increased peripheral vascular resistance,
excessive cardiac workload, and myocardial hypoxia sec­
ondary to hyperviscosity.
Waldenström macroglobulinemia is a rare disease in
animals and is considered a form of lymphoplasmacytic
lymphoma involving the spleen, lymph nodes, and bone
marrow along with serum IgM‐related signs of hypervis­
cosity or cryoglobulinemia. Osteolytic bone lesions and
hypercalcemia are not present and Bence Jones protein­
uria is uncommon.
Solitary PCD include EMP and SOP. They are defined
as local accumulation of neoplastic monoclonal plasma
cells without evidence of systemic PCD. Canine EMPs
are distinct, usually solitary tumors unrelated to MM.
The skin, especially the head, and extremities are affected
most commonly, followed by the mucous membranes of
the oral cavity (Figure 135.1) and the colorectal junction.

Figure 135.1 Oral extramedullary plasmacytoma in the maxilla of
a dog.

Other sites such as gastrointestinal, trachea, larynx, eye,
genitalia, and others are rare and comprise 1% of all EMP
cases. Cutaneous, oral, and colorectal EMPs are usually
benign but can be locally invasive and cause bone destruc­
tion in the oral cavity. In humans, cutaneous EMP is
uncommon and is often part of a multicentric disease. In
dogs, MM rarely exhibits cutaneous involvement. Fewer
reports exist regarding solitary EMP in cats but their
behavior and site distribution appear similar to dogs. The
multicentric EMP as part of MM is more common in cats
than dogs although incorporating abdominal ultrasound
and cytology into the staging of MM may prove abdomi­
nal organ involvement is more common than previously
thought. A recent study showed that 57% of dogs with
MM that underwent abdominal ultrasound were cyto­
logically confirmed to have liver, spleen, or abdominal
lymph node involvement. Amyloid deposits of immuno­
globulin origin occur in 3–13% of EMPs.
Solitary osseous plasmacytomas have been reported in
the dog affecting the appendicular skeleton, zygomatic
arch, and vertebrae. In humans (and probably in dogs),
the prognosis is much better than for MM but about 50%
of SOPs will eventually develop into MM.

­Epidemiology
Multiple myeloma is uncommon in both dogs and cats,
representing less than 1% of all malignancies. It com­
prises about 8% of all hematopoietic tumors and 3.6% of
all primary and secondary bone tumors in dogs. The
incidence in both species is lower than in humans.

­Signalment
Multiple myeloma affects older animals with a median age
of 8–9 years (range, 2–15) in dogs and 12–14 years in cats

VetBooks.ir

135 Plasma Cell Disorders

(range, 4–18). There is no breed or sex predilection in dogs.
In cats, it is most common in domestic short‐hairs and a
slight male predisposition has been reported. EMPs usually
occur in middle‐aged to older dogs (median age 9–10
years). The cocker spaniel and West Highland white terrier
seem to be at increased risk. Solitary EMPs are less com­
mon in cats and SOP is rarely reported in both species.

­History and Clinical Signs
Clinical signs of MM are variable, with a median duration
of one month prior to diagnosis. In dogs, the most com­
mon presenting sign is lethargy and weakness (62%).
Skeletal lytic lesions lead to lameness, pain and paresis or
paralysis with vertebral involvement (47%). Bleeding disor­
ders most commonly present as epistaxis or gingival bleed­
ing (37%). Ocular and CNS abnormalities are caused by
HVS, systemic hypertension or both. Ocular signs include
retinal bleeding, enlarged tortuous retinal vessels, retinal
detachment (35%), and acute onset of blindness. Hyphema,
episcleral injection, corneal edema, and aqueous flare may
also occur. CNS signs include dementia, personality
changes, disorientation, and seizures (12%). Polyuria/poly­
dipsia (25%) may develop secondary to renal disease and
hypercalcemia. Cardiopulmonary signs (syncope, cyano­
sis, congestive heart failure [CHF]) are less common.
Vomiting, anorexia, and weight loss have been seen in dogs
with hypercalcemia and/or renal disease. Some dogs may
present with secondary infections such as cystitis.
Physical examination findings may include pale mucous
membranes, dehydration, fundic changes, neurologic
deficits, fever, and cranial organomegaly.
In cats, lethargy, anorexia, and weight loss are the most
common clinical signs. Vomiting and diarrhea, as well as
cranial organomegaly and cutaneous or subcutaneous
masses are more common than in dogs.
Cutaneous and mucosal EMPs usually appear as pink
or red, raised, alopecic and sometimes ulcerated solid
nodules, about 1–2 cm in diameter (see Figure 135.1),
but they can range from 0.2 to 10 cm in diameter. The
majority of tumors are single, but some dogs may develop
more than one tumor simultaneously or sequentially.
Oral EMPs can cause bleeding and decreased appetite.
Colorectal EMPs can lead to hematochezia, rectal bleed­
ing, tenesmus, and rectal prolapse. SOPs cause pain,
lameness, or neurologic symptoms.

Table 135.1 Frequency of abnormal diagnostic test results
in dogs and cats with MM
Test abnormality

Dogs (%)

Cats (%)

68

41–69

Anemia (nonregenerative)
Thrombocytopenia

33–45

50

Leukopenia

25

37

Circulating plasma cells

10

5–27

Hypoalbuminemia

65

36

Hypocholesterolemia

Not reported

68

Renal azotemia

33

23–36

Hypercalcemia

17–50

9–25

Proteinuria

35

77

Bence Jones proteinuria

40

44–50

Hyperviscosity

32

35–44

Bone lysis (radiographs)

50

8–56

tests such as anemia, hypoalbuminemia, renal dys­
function, and hypercalcemia should prompt work‐up
for MM (Table 135.1).
Serum protein electrophoresis (SPE) separates pro­
teins based on their size and electrical charge. The
immunoglobulins are contained in the beta and gamma
fractions and monoclonal gammopathies produce a nar­
row peak in one of these fractions (Figure 135.2). Rarely,

Fractions

%

Ref. %

g/L

g/L

­Diagnosis

Albumin
Alpha 1
Alpha 2
Beta
Gamma

12.9
2.3
5.3
9.8
69.7

55.8 – 66.5
2.9 – 4.0
7.1 – 14.5
8.6 – 14.8
9.2 – 18.2

16.4
2.9
6.7
12.4
88.5

43.0 – 51.0
1.0 – 2.0
5.0 – 8.0
6.0 – 9.0
6.0 – 11.0

Suspicion of MM usually arises in an animal present­
ing with appropriate clinical signs and hyperglobuline­
mia. Initial evaluation includes CBC, full chemistry
panel, and urinalysis. Additional findings on these

Figure 135.2 Serum protein electrophoresis results in a dog with
MM. The albumin peak is on the far left and there is a tall, narrow
spike in the gamma region on the right consistent with monoclonal
gammopathy. Total protein level was 12.7 g/dL. Source: Courtesy of
Dr Roni Minke, American Medical Laboratories, Hertzeliah, Israel.

1243

VetBooks.ir

1244

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

MM produces a biclonal gammopathy. A dog with MM
may still have a normal globulin level due to suppression
of normal globulin production. Therefore, if findings
support MM, SPE should be done even if total globulin
level is normal. When monoclonal gammopathy is dem­
onstrated, immunoelectrophoresis can determine the
antibody type.
Urinalysis provides information on renal function, uri­
nary tract infection, and proteinuria. However, urine
dipsticks only measure albumin. Special heat precipita­
tion methods are required to detect Bence Jones pro­
teins. This is a qualitative test associated with a high rate
of false‐positive and ‐negative results in people. Urine
electrophoresis or immunoelectrophoresis may be more
reliable.
Bone involvement may appear on radiographs as mul­
tiple osteolytic lesions affecting mainly the axial skele­
ton, or as diffuse osteoporosis (Figure 135.3). Plain
survey skeletal radiographs are recommended for detec­
tion of these lesions. It is best to start with thoracic, lum­
bar spine, and pelvic radiographs, unless pain is localized
to other bones. Skeletal CT can be more sensitive than
radiographs for detection of small lesions and spinal cord
compression. Radionuclide bone scans are not recom­
mended because MM lesions are primarily lytic and may
be undetectable. Abdominal ultrasound is recommended
in all cats and in dogs without bone marrow plasma­
cytosis. Most common abnormalities are splenomegaly,
hepatomegaly, and changes in echogenicity or nodules in
these organs.
Bone marrow aspiration is required for a definitive
diagnosis of MM and is taken from routine sites. In some
cases, aspiration or a needle core biopsy is taken directly
from a lytic lesion if it is large enough and accessible.
This is especially pertinent in cases of SOP. Normal bone
marrow contains less than 5% plasma cells. Finding of

Figure 135.3 Lateral radiograph showing well‐demarcated small
“punched out” lytic lesions and a “lacy” trabecular pattern in the
cervical vertebrae due to diffuse osteopenia in a dog with MM.

>10% plasma cells in the marrow, especially if cellular
atypia or clustering is present, is used to diagnose MM by
some investigators, while the majority agree that >20%
plasma cells is a more reliable value. The morphology of
neoplastic plasma cells varies from normal to large pleo­
morphic cells with large cytoplasm, high mitotic index,
and multinucleation (Figure 135.4). In cats (and less often
in dogs), bone marrow infiltration may not be severe
enough and visceral organ infiltration may be diagnostic
instead.
In patients with hypercalcemia, ionized calcium is
indicated for confirmation because binding of calcium to
paraproteins will increase total calcium while ionized
calcium remains normal. Hypocholesterolemia was
reported in 68% of cats with MM in one study. A possible
explanation is downregulation of cholesterol production
by the liver to maintain oncotic pressure in the face of
hyperglobulinemia. When HVS is suspected, serum vis­
cosity can be measured in relation to water. Normal
canine serum viscosity is 1.6–1.8 times that of water.
Clinical signs of HVS usually appear when serum viscos­
ity is greater than five times that of water.
Differential diagnoses for monoclonal gammopathy
include B cell lymphoma, mainly chronic but also acute
B cell lymphoid leukemia, WM, chronic infections such
as Ehrlichia canis and leishmaniasis in dogs, feline infec­
tious peritonitis (FIP) in cats, and monoclonal gammop­
athy of unknown significance (MGUS). The latter is a
benign process, well recognized in humans but only a
few cases have been reported in dogs and cats.
Diagnosis of EMP and SOP is made by tissue biopsy
or fine needle aspirate. Most EMPs are not well

Figure 135.4 Bone marrow aspirate from a dog with multiple
myeloma showing abundant plasma cells with a typical
paranuclear clear zone of the golgi apparatus. A single bincucleate
cell is present (arrow). Source: Courtesy of Dr Sharon Kuzi, Koret
School of Veterinary Medicine, Israel.

VetBooks.ir

135 Plasma Cell Disorders

­differentiated and can be difficult to differentiate from
other round cell tumors. Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
is sometimes utilized in these cases to detect light and
heavy chains. The majority of EMPs stain for lambda
light‐chains, similar to the physiologic distribution of
light chains in normal canine and feline plasma cells.
Staining for multiple myeloma oncogene 1/interferon
regulatory factor 4 (MUM1/IRF4) is highly sensitive for
EMPs but 21% of B cell lymphomas stain positive as well.
It is therefore recommended to use it in combination
with other round cell markers together with morphol­
ogy of the cells. SOP, GI EMP, and multiple cutaneous
EMPs in dogs can metastasize, or develop into MM.
Therefore, it is important to fully stage them at diagno­
sis. Staging includes SPE (even if total globulin level is
normal), bone marrow aspiration, survey skeletal radio­
graphs, and abdominal ultrasound.

­Therapy
Chemotherapy with melphalan and prednisone is the
treatment of choice for MM in dogs. Although cure is
unlikely, response to treatment is achieved in most dogs
often for relatively long periods of time. Melphalan is
prescribed at a dose of 0.1 mg/kg PO once daily for 10
days, then 0.05 mg/kg PO once daily continuously. An
alternate pulse protocol with melphalan at 7 mg/m2
(rounded to the nearest whole 2 mg tablet) given once
daily for 5 days every 21 days is also used. Prednisone is
given at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg PO once daily for 10 days,
then 0.5 mg/kg PO on alternate days indefinitely or
­discontinued after 60 days. These protocols are usually
well tolerated and the main toxicity of melphalan is mye­
losuppression, most commonly thrombocytopenia.
It is generally accepted that a reduction in serum levels
of the M component by at least 50% is a reasonable
­therapeutic goal. In addition, clinical signs and clinical
pathology abnormalities should also improve, usually
within 2–4 weeks. Radiographic improvement of skeletal
lytic lesions may take several months, and may only be
partial. Routine monitoring of response to treatment and
toxicity is usually done with a complete blood count
(CBC), total globulin level, and Bence Jones protein
(if originally present) every two weeks. A CBC should be
checked at least once on day 7 of the pulse protocol.
Once a good response is achieved and no cytopenias
have been identified, follow‐up can be done less often.
Melphalan and prednisone have also been used in cats
but melphalan is more myelosuppressive than in dogs,
and may cause prolonged neutropenias. Ideally, melpha­
lan should be compounded for cats to allow accurate
dosing and avoid hazardous exposure of humans. Use of
chlorambucil, cyclophosphamide, CCNU, or multidrug

therapy may be more suitable in cats with MM than
­melphalan and responses have been documented.
Chlorambucil has been recommended for the treat­
ment of WM at a dose of 0.2 mg/kg PO once daily,
although treatment with melphalan and prednisone may
be effective as well.
Rescue therapy after disease relapse may be attempted
with other alkylating agents including cyclophospha­
mide, chlorambucil, or CCNU. The VAD protocol which
includes vincristine, doxorubicin, and dexamethasone
has been extrapolated from humans, while others have
used CHOP‐based lymphoma protocols. There are only
anecdotal data regarding these rescue protocols, but it
appears that while response rate is quite high, most
responses are of short duration.
Symptomatic animals presenting with severe compli­
cations of MM require supportive care simultaneously
with diagnosis and initiation of antitumor therapy.
Animals with severe signs of HVS (altered mentation,
hemorrhage, retinal detachment, or CHF) can be treated
with plasmapharesis. Renal dysfunction, especially with
concurrent hypercalcemia, is treated with IV fluid diure­
sis until symptoms improve. Severe hypercalcemia can
be treated with calcitonin in addition to fluid diuresis or
with IV bisphosphonates if diagnosis is delayed.
Prednisone is highly effective in treating hypercalcemia
but it should not be started prior to making a definitive
diagnosis as it may obscure results. Hypercalcemia usu­
ally resolves quickly after starting chemotherapy. Dogs
with extensive lytic lesions should have exercise restric­
tion and analgesia.
Bisphosphonates (BP) inhibit osteoclast activity and in
human. They have been shown to reduce bone pain, the
incidence of pathologic fractures and prolong time to
first event. The more potent amino‐bisphosphonates
such as pamidronate or zoledronate also appear to have
antitumor activity and zoledronate has shown a survival
advantage over placebo and other BP in patients with
symptomatic MM. Pamidronate or zoledronate probably
have a role in the treatment of animals with osteolytic
MM, but they have not yet been critically evaluated.
Large lesions can be treated with radiation therapy
(RT). In addition, fractures in weight‐bearing bones or
vertebrae require surgical stabilization alone or com­
bined with RT. Healing can occur, although it can be very
slow and only if local tumor control is achieved. Patients
presenting with a fever, other evidence of infection, or
severe neutropenia should be treated with broad‐spec­
trum antibiotics. Samples for culture and sensitivity
prior to antibiotic therapy should be collected if infec­
tion is suspected.
The treatment of choice for EMPs is usually surgical
resection. The cutaneous and mucosal EMPs are usually
benign and complete surgical excision carries an

1245

VetBooks.ir

1246

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

excellent prognosis. In some cases, RT has been used for
nonresectable or recurrent EMPs as well as melphalan
and prednisone alone, or combined with RT. In cases
with SOP, surgical excision when possible or RT is the
treatment of choice. Fracture repair, or spinal cord
decompression and vertebral stabilization, followed by
RT could be considered when appropriate. Chemotherapy
may be used when RT is not available. Both modalities
have resulted in prolonged local control that is not nec­
essarily accompanied with bone remodeling.

­Prognosis
Two larger case series of dogs with MM, treated with
melphalan and prednisone, have been published to date,
32 years apart. One compared continuous and pulse pro­
tocols and found no statistically significant difference in
any of the outcome variables, although a small cohort size
and high numbers of censored dogs could have impacted
the results. In both studies, some dogs received an initial
dose of cyclophosphamide as well. In the first study
(Matus et al), a complete response (undetectable serum
monoclonal Ig) was observed in 43% of dogs, partial
response (≥ 50% decrease in Ig) in 49% and no response in
only 8%. The median survival time (MST) of all 37 dogs
was 540 days and the addition of cyclophosphamide did
not affect survival. In the second study (Fernandez et al),
overall response rate was similar (86%), but most were
defined as having a complete response. Median survival
time for all 38 dogs was 930 days, almost double the time
in the first study. Additionally, twelve dogs in the first
study were treated with prednisone alone and their MST
was 220 days. Matus reported that a response to treat­
ment with chemotherapy was positively associated with
survival. Hypercalcemia, Bence Jones proteinuria and
extensive bone lesions were negative prognostic ­indicators

for survival. Fernandez showed that renal disease and a
high blood neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio around the
time of diagnosis also negatively impacts survival. Ionized
hypercalcemia and osteolytic lesions among other factors
evaluated were not prognostic.
In cats, data are based on small numbers. Overall
remission rate is lower and survival times shorter com­
pared to dogs. A MST of 9.5 months was reported in one
study and no cat lived more than six months in another.
The prognosis for solitary cutaneous and mucocuta­
neous EMPs in dogs is generally good. Surgical excision
is curative in most cases. Local recurrence rate is
reported to be approximately 5% (higher for oral tumors),
nodal or systemic disease develops in 2% and new cuta­
neous EMPs occur in less than 2% of dogs. Cell type, pro­
liferation rate, presence of amyloid, and cyclin D1
reactivity have no prognostic significance in dogs. Dogs
with multiple cutaneous EMPs in the absence of MM
have been assigned a diagnosis of cutaneous plasmacyto­
sis (CP) based on the rare syndrome in humans, that usu­
ally follows an indolent course. In the first reported
series, 21 dogs with CP were treated with chemotherapy,
most with melphalan and prednisone. The overall
response rate was 74%, complete response was 37%,
median progression free survival was 143 days, but
median overall survival was longer at 542 days. None of
the dogs progressed to develop MM. In cats, EMP behav­
ior is less predictable. Some remain localized and surgi­
cal excision can lead to long‐term control while others
progress rapidly to MM.
As in humans, veterinary patients with successfully
treated SOP eventually develop local failure, new lesions
or MM but they can enjoy long disease‐free periods until
progression. It is important to thoroughly stage them at
initial diagnosis and to monitor routinely for local and
systemic relapse with serum globulin levels, careful atten­
tion to bone pain, and additional diagnostics if indicated.

­Further Reading
Fernandez R, Chon E. Comparison of two melphalan
protocols and evaluation ofoutcome and prognostic
factors in multiple myeloma in dogs. J Vet Inern Med
2018; 32: 1060–1069.
Kupanoff PA, Popovitch CA, Goldschmidt MH. Colorectal
plasmacytomas: a retrospective study of nine dogs. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 2006; 42: 37–43.
Matus RE, Leifer CE, MacEwen GE, et al. Prognostic
factors for multiple myeloma in the dog. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 1986; 188(11): 1288–92.
Mellor PJ, Haugland S, Murphy S, et al. Myeloma‐related
disorders in cats commonly present as extramedullary

neoplasms in contrast to myeloma in human patients: 24
cases with clinical follow‐up. J Vet Intern Med 2006;
20(6): 1376–83.
Patel RT, Caceres A, French AF, et al. Multiple myeloma in
16 cats: a retrospective study. Vet Clin Pathol 2005; 34:
341–52.
Terpos E, Roodman DG, Dimopoulos MA. Optimal use of
bisphosphonates in patients with multiple myeloma.
Blood 2013; 121: 3325–8.

VetBooks.ir

1247

136
Central Nervous System Tumors in Dogs and Cats
David Ruslander, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology), DACVR (Radiation Oncology)
Veterinary Specialty Hospital of the Carolinas, Cary, NC, USA

­Etiology/Epidemiology/Signalment
Central nervous system (CNS) tumors are infrequently
seen in dogs and cats but with increased imaging capabilities (computed tomography, magnetic resonance
imaging [MRI], etc.) and increased awareness of specific disease entities, there appears to be a subjective
rise in the incidence of diagnosis. By definition, the
CNS includes intracranial structures (brain and pituitary gland) as well as spinal cord. In these locations,
tumors are typically classified as either primary or
metastatic.

Other mutations that are commonly seen in human
brain tumors, including abnormal chromosome copy
number aberration (CAN), have also been reported,
indicating a possible similar etiology.
Historically, metastatic lesions to the CNS were
regarded as uncommon but with improvement in treatment of primary tumors and increased diagnostic capabilities, there appears to be a subjective rise. It is now
estimated that up to 50% of intracranial neoplasia in
dogs are metastatic in origin. The most common tumor
types are carcinomas, malignant melanoma, hemangiosarcoma, and lymphosarcoma.

Intracranial

Spinal Cord

The incidence of primary intracranial neoplasia in veterinary patients has been estimated to be 14.5/100 000 in
dogs and 3.5/100 000 in cats. The most common type in
the dog is meningioma, but glial tumors (astrocytoma
and oligodendroglioma), histiocytic sarcoma, choroid
plexus tumors, primitive neuroectodermal tumors
(PNET), and lymphoma can also occur. Meningioma
and lymphoma, followed by pituitary tumors, are the
most common primary tumors in cats.
Most dogs with primary neoplasia are >5 years of age
with the exceptions of lymphoma, which can occur at
any age, and glial tumors, which can occur in young dogs
due to their purported genetic predisposition. In the cat,
lymphoma can occur at any age, especially in young
feline leukemia virus (FeLV)‐positive cats.
Some dogs appear to be at higher risk for glial tumors,
such as boxers and other brachycephalic breeds. In one
recent study, it was reported that boxers represented
50% of all dogs receiving radiation therapy for a brain
tumor. In dogs, genetic mutations have been identified in
glial tumors, including the P53 tumor suppressor gene.

The incidence of spinal cord neoplasia in both species
has not been reported. In general, spinal tumors can be
described in terms of their anatomic location: extradural,
intradural/extramedullary, intramedullary, or mixed
compartment. In one large retrospective study of 399 histopathologically confirmed spinal cord tumors in dogs,
48% were extradural, 13% were intradural/extramedullary, 6% were intramedullary, and 33% were mixed
compartment.
The most common extradural primary spinal cord
tumor in the dog is meningioma, whereas in the cat it is
lymphoma followed by meningioma. Intramedullary
­spinal cord tumors are more likely to be primary (glial)
than metastatic, especially in younger dogs. Metastatic
intramedullary tumors are reported in both species and
are more common in older animals.
Spinal nephroblastoma is a specific malignancy that
arises from the embryonic remnants of the immature
kidney and typically occurs in young dogs (<3 years of
age). This tumor has a predilection for golden retrievers,
German shepherd dogs, and arctic breeds. It is most

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1248

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

often intradural/extramedullary and is located in the
caudal thoracolumbar region.
Spinal lymphoma often affects young cats, is associated with FeLV, tends to occur in an extradural location
in the thoracic and lumbar spine, and is usually present
in multiple locations outside the CNS. In dogs, CNS
lymphoma is sporadically identified. It is most commonly the T cell phenotype and located extradurally but
can be seen in any location.
Solitary spinal plasmactyomas (benign and malignant
proliferation of plasma cells) have been described in both
dogs and cats. Some lesions will remain solitary although
progression to systemic or multiple myeloma is possible.
Please refer to Chapter 135 for more information.
Carcinomas and hemangiosarcoma are the most commonly reported secondary spinal cord tumors in dogs.
Osteosarcoma is the most commonly reported in cats.
While initially thought to be very rare, the incidence of
metastatic lesions in the CNS has risen as diagnostic
imaging capabilities and control of the primary disease
have improved.

­History and Clinical Signs
Intracranial
Most patients with CNS neoplasia will present with
altered neurologic function (dull, nerve deficits, paresis,
etc.) but this is not universal. Some present with only
subtle symptoms such as lethargy, depression or neck
pain. Headaches are a common presenting symptom in
humans but recognition of this symptom in veterinary
patients is extremely difficult. Seizure or seizure‐like
activity as a presenting clinical finding is more common
in dogs than in cats.
Cats and dogs with pituitary tumors may present with
a variety of symptoms, many of which are nonneurologic
and relate to the endocrine abnormalities of hyperadrenocorticism (polyuria/polydipsia). In cats, unregulated
diabetes secondary to acromegaly is common due to
excessive growth hormone production. Initially, neurologic abnormalities may be subtle and limited to mild
lethargy and disorientation but often progress to more
severe abnormalities (seizures, mentation changes, neurologic deficits) with time.
Spinal Cord
Spinal cord neoplasia should be suspected in any patient
with a history of forelimb or hindlimb paresis or paralysis. Those presenting with spinal pain should also be suspect as pain is a common presenting symptom in both
cats and dogs. Onset of signs may be acute, as with lym-

phoma, but may be slowly progressive with more slowly
growing neoplasia such as meningioma.

­Diagnosis
Intracranial
All patients with neurologic symptoms should be considered as possible oncology cases. As such, a stepwise
approach is encouraged to allow for accurate staging and
identification of a primary tumor, if one exists, prior to
surgical intervention, radiation therapy or chemotherapy. Full blood analysis, urinalysis, three‐view thoracic
radiographs, and abdominal ultrasound should be performed prior to or in conjunction with advanced imaging (CT/MRI/positron emission tomography [PET]).
Magnetic resonance imaging has dramatically changed
the ability of the clinician to identify small subtle lesions
and as such is the preferred method of diagnosing brain
and spinal cord neoplasia. Improvement in technology
has increased the utility of CT imaging but MRI is still
recommended if available. Involvement and consultation
with a radiation oncologist early in the process will allow
for proper positioning of the patient should radiation
therapy be pursued. With MRI, the majority of dogs and
cats will have a hypo‐ to isointense lesion on T1‐weighted
and hyperintense on T2‐weighted images with a variable
amount of peritumoral edema. Contrast enhancement
with gadolinium is variable and more common with
high‐grade neoplasia given the disruption of the vasculature. Cystic lesions are more common with meningioma.
The presence of a “dural tail” on contrast‐enhanced T1
images has historically been associated with meningioma but can be seen with any neoplasia. This finding
results from thickening and contrast enhancement of
dural tissue extending from the primary tumor in a tail‐
like fashion. Other MRI and CT features of specific brain
neoplasia types have been described but there is considerable overlap among tumors (Figures 136.1 and 136.2).
With the exception of lymphoma, cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) analysis is rarely useful in distinguishing neoplastic intracranial/spinal cord disease from inflammatory
lesions as it rarely reveals neoplastic cells. Analysis
often reveals increased protein levels, sometimes with
elevated cell counts. If CNS lymphoma is suspected,
more advanced testing of CSF such as antigen receptor
gene rearrangement and/or flow cytometry should be
pursued.
Histopathologic diagnosis of intracranial tumors
requires biopsy and the use of stereotactic CT guidance
in obtaining the sample. This advanced procedure has
become more commonplace. Associated complication
rates are reported to range from 12% to 27% with a 5–9%

136 Central Nervous System Tumors in Dogs and Cats

VetBooks.ir

mortality rate, but will continue to decrease as experience with the procedure increases. Currently, not all
patients receive histopathologic confirmation due to the
cost and risk of potential complications. To mitigate
some risk, cytology can be considered instead but this
too is not commonly performed. Hence many patients
are treated without a true diagnosis.
Dogs with suspected hyperadrenocorticism and cats
with suspected acromegaly or insulin resistance should
be evaluated with CT or MRI. Small pituitary masses
may escape detection with CT but larger lesions can be
detected with CT especially with newer generation CT
imagers.
Spinal Cord

Figure 136.1 T1‐weighted post‐contrast (gadolinium) coronal
image of a frontal lobe mass in a 9‐year‐old, male, golden
retriever. Surgical excision was performed. Histopathology was
consistent with histiocytic sarcoma. The dog’s only symptom
was acute onset of seizures.

As with intracranial neoplasia, full staging including
three‐view thoracic radiographs, full blood analysis,
urinalysis, and abdominal ultrasound should be performed before or in conjunction with advanced imaging (CT/MRI/PET). Survey spinal radiographs should
be performed to evaluate for possible bony lysis.
Although rarely helpful, lysis may be present and may
indicate a neoplastic process is emanating from outside the CNS with secondary invasion to spinal cord, as
in the case of skeletal neoplasia (osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma) or rarely soft tissue tumors (soft tissue
sarcomas, carcinomas). As with intracranial tumors,
due to cost, need for advanced diagnostic equipment
and risk of potential complications, many patients
with spinal neoplasia are treated without a definitive
diagnosis.

­Treatment/Prognosis
Central nervous system neoplasia, like other tumors, can
be managed with a combination of surgery, radiation,
and chemotherapy. However, the veterinary literature is
limited to uncontrolled and retrospective studies based
on relatively small numbers of patients.
Medical Management

Figure 136.2 T1‐weighted postcontrast (gadolinium) sagittal
image of a cervical spinal cord tumor in an 11‐year‐old male
castrated boxer, presenting for acute tetraparesis with associated
neck pain. The mass is consistent with a meningioma given the
extraaxial location and presence of a dural tail at the caudal
extent of the mass. Surgical excision and biopsy were not
performed. The dog received 48 Gy radiation therapy (16 × 3 Gy)
and adjuvant hydroxyurea with nearly complete resolution of the
neurologic signs/neck pain and was alive two years following
treatment.

Nonspecific treatment options include antiinflammatory doses of corticosteroids for peritumoral edema and
anticonvulsant therapy if seizures are a component of the
clinical presentation. Phenobarbital, Keppra® (levetiracetam), and zonisamide are all options for control
of seizures. Unfortunately, supportive care alone is associated with a poor prognosis in the vast majority of
patients. Published survival times in such a group are
generally between one and 10 weeks but individual
patients may far exceed this.

1249

VetBooks.ir

1250

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Surgery
Intracranial

Depending on the location, surgical intervention is recommended as a sole therapy for well‐circumscribed
meningiomas or a prelude to postoperative radiation
therapy and/or chemotherapy. Surgery alone for meningioma in dogs is associated with a median survival time
of 4.5–7 months. Radiation therapy in the postoperative
setting has increased that median to 16–30 months.
Other surgical techniques such as ultrasonic aspiration
or endoscopic‐assisted surgical resection have resulted
in survival times of 41 and 70 months in dogs, demonstrating the utility of more aggressive approaches.
Surgery as sole therapy for nonmeningioma tumors is
more variable, case dependent, and generally results in
median survival times of months rather than years.
Meningioma in the cat is often less aggressive and
invasive compared to the dog. Hence, the prognosis with
surgery as sole therapy is good to very good with median
survival times of 23–28 months.
Surgical approaches to the pituitary gland (transsphenoidal hypophysectomy) have been described but management is usually accomplished with fractionated
external beam radiation therapy or more recently radiosurgical techniques in both dogs and cats.
Spinal Cord

Outcomes in dogs and cats with spinal cord neoplasia
are understandably highly variable and there is considerable perioperative mortality due to poor return to function. Overall median survival in one study of 37 dogs was
240 days if they survived 20 days following surgery, but
40% did not survive to that point. In a separate study
evaluating surgery for intraspinal meningioma, clinical
improvement was noted in all dogs surviving the perioperative period but recurrence of clinical signs was at a
mean of 19 months. Only a minority were disease free
long term, thus indicating the need for postoperative
radiation therapy. Postoperative radiation therapy did
appear to have a benefit based on time to neurologic
deterioration but recurrence of signs and/or tumor was
still noted anywhere from 18 to 36 months. In cats
undergoing surgical treatment of spinal cord tumors,
improvement was reported in 25/26 cases but the median
survival time for those with malignant neoplasms was
110.5 days, compared with 518 days for those with
benign tumors. In this study, the vast majority of cats
eventually succumbed to disease‐related problems.
Radiation Therapy
Radiation therapy has evolved over the past several decades from relatively unsophisticated planning techniques

to the current state utilizing 3D computer planning and
modern technology. Long‐term efficacy of radiation
therapy alone is limited given the tolerance of the brain
and as macroscopic tumor control is generally not as
rewarding as adjunctive treatment following cytoreductive surgery. Table 136.1 gives a summary of treatment‐
related outcomes of CNS tumors.
Recently, stereotactic radiosurgical (SRS) approaches
have been employed which allow for one or two fractions
of high‐dose radiation to be delivered rather than the
conventional 15–25 daily fractions of lower doses per
fraction. This high dose per fraction is limited to the
tumor and a small volume of normal surrounding tissue.
This form of treatment theoretically minimizes the risk
of complications to normal tissues while providing ablative doses to the tumor. SRS is still in the investigational
stage in veterinary oncology and direct comparison to
conventional fractionated radiation therapy has not been
performed. However, preliminary results in the literature
are encouraging and the shortened overall treatment
times and minimal dose to noninvolved tissues are
attractive to both clinicians and owners and SRS likely
represents the future of radiation therapy for brain
neoplasia.
Side‐Effects

Acute and late developing radiotherapy side‐effects vary
depending on total dose given, dose per fraction, and the
total volume and specific tissue type being irradiated.
Late‐term side‐effects are rare (<20%) but when they
occur, management is challenging as they are often life‐
threatening. Of the late effects, brain necrosis is the most
common but others including spinal cord myelopathy
can occur. Unfortunately, the clinical distinction between
these late side‐effects and tumor recurrence is difficult
and often requires histopathology.
Acute side‐effects of CNS irradiation are rare and
often limited to surrounding normal structures in the
treatment field such as the oral cavity, otic and ocular
structures, and gastrointestinal tract. A syndrome of
delayed acute CNS effects can be seen several months
after completion of radiation therapy and are manifested
by responsiveness to corticosteroids. This syndrome is
thought to be a transient demyelination of the white matter rather than true necrosis which is the more classic
delayed effect.
Intracranial

Due to the limitations of available veterinary clinical
studies, the prognosis following irradiation of many primary intracranial tumors, especially those of glial origin,
is largely unknown (see Table 136.1). Based on what has
been reported, median survival time following irradiation may range from four months to greater than four

VetBooks.ir

136 Central Nervous System Tumors in Dogs and Cats

Table 136.1 Summary of outcomes of dog and cats with brain neoplasia
Study

Tumor type

Number of patients

Treatment

Median survival time

Troxel et al.

Meningioma

34 cats

Surgery

685d

Greco et al.

Meningioma

17 dogs

Surgery
(aspirator)

1254d

Axlund et al.

Meningioma

14 dog
12 dogs

Surgery
Surgery + radiotherapy (RT)

210d
495d

Brearley et al.

Meningioma
Intraxial tumor
Pituitary tumor

41 dogs
34 dogs
8 dogs

RT

347d
282d
147d

Gallagher et al.

Meningioma

17 cats

Surgery

3–72‐month range
11 cats 810d

Turrel et al.

Meningioma, sarcoma, astrocytoma

2 dogs
1 dog
1 dog

RT

322d

Heidner et al.

Meningioma
Other types
Unknown

9 dogs
8 dogs
8 dogs

RT +/‐
surgery +/‐ hyperthermia

137d overall

Evans et al.

Meningioma
Lymphoma
Pituitary adenoma
Metastatic carcinoma
Oligodendroglioma
Granulomatous Meningoencephalitis
Unknown

4 dogs
1 dog
1 dog
1 dog
1 dog
1 dog
1 dog
5 dogs

RT

1545d (39 Gy)
519d (45 Gy)

Iwamoto et al.

Meningioma
Glioma
Pituitary

18 dogs
6 dogs
1 dog

RT

Not reported

Larue et al.

Unknown

65 dogs

RT +/‐ surgery

405d

Spugnini et al.

Meningioma
Glioma
Choroid plexus

21 dogs
4 dogs
3 dogs

RT

250d

Kent et al.

Pituitary tumor

19 dogs

RT

1405d

Mayer et al.

Pituitary tumor

8 cats

RT

522d

Bley et al.

Extraxial tumor
Intraaxial tumor
Pituitary tumor

22 dogs
13 dogs
13 dogs

RT

1174d

Sellon

Pituitary tumor

11 cats

Radiosurgery

750d

Source: Adapted from Warren E, Narak J, Axlund T, Smith A. Treatment of intracranial tumors. In: Twedt D, Bonagura J, eds. Kirk’s Current
Veterinary Therapy XV. St Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2014, pp. 1039–47.

years depending on tumor type, prescription dose, and
other variables. Regardless, the long‐term efficacy of
radiation therapy when delivered as sole therapy is limited given the tolerance of the CNS and macroscopic
tumor control is generally not as rewarding as when
delivered as adjunctive treatment following cytoreductive surgery. For meningioma in the dog, a median survival of approximately one year can be anticipated with
radiation therapy. When radiation therapy is delivered as
an adjunct to surgery, median survival increases to 16–30
months.

For cats and dogs with pituitary macroadenoma or
macroadenocarcinoma, radiation therapy has been
­recommended and results in good outcomes with both
fractionated therapy and radiosurgical techniques.
Conformal three‐dimension radiation therapy has been
described for this tumor in both species and outcomes
have been very good to excellent for control of both neurologic signs in affected patients and endocrine abnormalities. Of note, the endocrine manifestations may take
several months to improve, which necessitates ongoing
monitoring.

1251

VetBooks.ir

1252

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Spinal Cord

Radiation therapy of spinal cord tumors has been
described in the veterinary literature but studies are limited by low case numbers and lack of histopathologic
confirmation in the majority of patients. As with intracranial irradiation, a similar limitation of dose is encountered in the spinal cord and control times are affected by
the spinal cord tolerance.
In one study, primary radiation therapy for spinal cord
tumors (no histopathologic confirmation) resulted in
median control of nine months. In a separate study evaluating surgery for spinal meningioma, those that underwent postoperative radiation therapy appeared to have a
benefit based on time to neurologic deterioration but
recurrence of signs and/or tumor recurrence was noted
anywhere from 18 to 36 months. It is important to recall
that deterioration of neurologic condition may be related
to tumor recurrence but may also be related to spinal
cord damage/necrosis. Therefore, documentation of
true tumor recurrence is recommended prior to considering repeat irradiation and/or surgical intervention.
Chemotherapy
There is very little in the veterinary literature regarding
chemotherapy for CNS neoplasia with the exception of
standard chemotherapy for canine and feline lymphoma.
The blood–brain barrier represents a significant obstacle to the delivery of chemotherapy to the brain and spinal cord. Survival times of dogs with unconfirmed (no
biopsy) brain tumors treated with lomustine (CCNU)
were very similar to patients treated with supportive care
alone (93 vs 60 days).

Hydroxyurea is an alkylating agent most commonly
used in veterinary medicine for the management of polycythemia. Recently, it has been used as an adjuvant to
surgery and/or radiation therapy for dogs with intracranial and spinal meningioma. In one such study, oral
hydroxyurea in combination with glucocorticoids was
administered to 33 dogs with MRI‐diagnosed meningioma, resulting in a significantly longer survival time than
observed in 10 dogs treated with glucocorticoids alone.
Temozolamide has recently been evaluated in management of canine glial tumors. Although the data in
veterinary oncology are preliminary and no strong
recommendations can be made regarding efficacy and
comparison with other chemotherapy approaches
­cannot be made, results in the human literature are
encouraging.
For patients with CNS lymphoma, options in addition
to standard chemotherapy include lomustine, hydroxyurea, and the antimetabolite cytosine arabinoside which
cross the blood–brain barrier. The role of chemotherapy
specifically for spinal cord neoplasia is not known, but
similar chemotherapeutics are recommended depending
on final diagnosis when possible.
Newer Therapies
With increased understanding of how the immune system functions in tumor environments, immunotherapy,
in particular tumor vaccination and gene therapy,
has recently been developed to aid in the treatment
of canine brain tumors but these approaches remain
investigational.

­Further Reading
Dickinson PJ. Advances in diagnostic and treatment
modalities for intracranial tumors. J Vet Intern Med
2014; 28(4): 1165–85.
Hicks J, Platt S, Kent M, Haley A. Canine brain tumours: a
model for the human disease? Vet Comp Oncol 2017;
15(1): 252–72.
Hu H, Barker A, Harcourt‐Brown T, Jeffery N. Systematic
review of brain tumor treatment in dogs. J Vet Intern
Med 2015; 29(6): 1456–63.

LeBlanc AK, Mazcko C, Brown, et al. Creation of an NCI
comparative brain tumor consortium: informing the
translation of new knowledge from canine to human
brain tumor patients. Neuro Oncol 2016; 18(9): 1209–18.
Van Meervenne S, Verhoeven PS, de Vos J, Gielen IM.
Comparison between symptomatic treatment and
lomustine supplementation in 71 dogs with intracranial,
space‐occupying lesions. Vet Comp Oncol 2014; 12(1):
67–77.

VetBooks.ir

1253

137
Cancer of the Nose and Mouth
Lauren Askin Quarterman, DVM, DACVR (Radiation Oncology)
PetCure Oncology, San Jose, CA, USA

­Oral Tumors
Etiology/Pathophysiology
A wide variety of malignant and benign cancers develop
in the oral cavity. In dogs, the most common malignant
oral tumors in order of frequency are malignant melanoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and fibrosarcoma. In
cats, squamous cell carcinoma is the most common oral
cancer, with fibrosarcoma second. Risk factors for the
development of oral squamous cell carcinomas in cats
include flea collars and high intake of either canned food
or, specifically, canned tuna fish.
Oral malignant melanoma (OMM) is a highly malignant tumor with frequent metastasis to regional lymph
nodes and lungs. Metastasis has been reported in
80–100% of cases, and is associated with site, size, and
stage of tumor. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) frequently invades bone in both the dog and cat. The metastatic rate for nontonsillar SCC in the dog is approximately
20% but nearly 100% of cases with tonsillar SCC metastasize to the retropharyngeal lymph nodes. The metastatic
rate of oral SCC in the cat is unknown, as control of local
disease in cats is rarely achieved. Oral fibrosarcomas
(FSA) are locally invasive but rarely (<30%) metastasize
to regional lymph nodes or lungs. At times, these tumors
may histologically appear benign and may be reported as
a fibroma or low‐grade fibrosarcoma. A well‐described
syndrome in large‐breed dogs, occurring most commonly on the hard palate and maxillary arcade, has been
termed “histologically low‐grade, biologically high grade”
fibrosarcoma. Despite the benign histologic appearance
of these tumors, they tend to grow rapidly, metastasize,
and invade bone. Rapid recurrence is common.
Epulides are relatively common neoplasms in dogs, but
rare in cats. Epulides appear similar to gingival hyperplasia. In general, four types of epulides have been described

in the dog: fibromatous, ossifying, acanthomatous, and
giant cell. The nomenclature is unfortunately confusing
and varied, and the clinician is encouraged to speak
directly to the pathologist if there are any questions over
terminology. The term epulis strictly refers to expansile
gingival lesions; more recently, it has been shown that
some of these tumors do not involve the periodontal ligament, with many of the fibromatous and ossifying types
being derived from the gingiva only. Periodontal odontogenic fibroma has recently been accepted as the correct
terminology to use to classify both the fibromatous epulis
and ossifying epulis, as these epulides are variations of the
same lesion. Also, the acanthomatous epulis has recently
been renamed acanthomatous ameloblastoma. A study in
2011 characterized the clinicopathologic features in 153
dogs with oral tumors of possible ondontogenic origin
and found that the three most common lesions were
canine acanthomatous ameloblastoma, peripheral odontogenic fibroma, and focal fibrous hyperplasia which is a
reactive lesion resulting from chronic inflammation.
Acanthomatous ameloblastoma is a benign tumor with
aggressive local behavior and frequent invasion into underlying bone. The rostral mandible is the most common site.
Fibromatous and ossifying epulides, unlike acanthomatous
ameloblastoma, are noninvasive. They are slow‐growing,
firm masses and are usually covered by intact epithelium.
Ossifying epulides usually have a broad base attachment
and are less pendunculated than fibromatous epulides.
These two epulides vary histologically by the presence or
absence of bone formation within the tumor.
Epidemiology
The oral cavity is the site of approximately 6% of all
­neoplasms in dogs, and oral cancer is the fourth most
common cancer overall. In cats, cancer of the oral cavity
accounts for 3–12% of all cancers.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1254

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Signalment
In contrast to other malignant oral tumors, OMM tends
to occur in smaller breed dogs as well as some large
breeds, with an average age at presentation of 12 years.
Cocker spaniel, miniature poodle, Anatolian sheepdog,
Gordon setter, chow chow, and golden retriever are overrepresented. The average age of a dog presenting with an
oral SCC is 8–10 years, while the average age for a cat is
10–12 years. Oral FSAs tend to occur in large‐breed
dogs, particularly the golden and Labrador retriever. The
average age at presentation is 7–9 years and there appears
to be a male predisposition. Dogs presenting with
fibromatous and ossifying epulides are typically 8–9
years, and a male predisposition has been reported.
Shetland and old English sheepdogs are predisposed to
acanthomatous ameloblastomas. The average age at
presentation is 7–10 years, and a sex predisposition is
not reported.
History and Clinical Signs
Cats and dogs with rostral oral cancer commonly present for a mass noted by the owner. Cancer in the caudal
oral cavity is rarely noted by owners and the animals
often present at an advanced stage of disease, resulting in
fewer options for treatment. Clinical signs may include
hypersalivation, exophthalmos or facial swelling,
epistaxis, weight loss, halitosis, bloody oral discharge,
dysphagia or pain on opening the mouth. Occasionally,
cervical lymphadenopathy (especially in squamous cell
carcinoma of the tonsil) is also found. Complete oral
examinations should always be performed during health
exams as early intervention may allow for more treatment options and an improved prognosis.
Diagnosis
Due to the wide range of cancer behavior and recommended treatment options for oral cancers, diagnostic
evaluation is critical. A biopsy is required for the definitive diagnosis, and this will assist the clinician in determining the biologic behavior and prognosis of the tumor.
Impression smear or fine needle aspirate cytology preparations of the tumor are generally not rewarding, as
many oral tumors are associated with a high degree of
necrosis and inflammation. Most animals will require a
short general anesthesia for careful mass evaluation,
regional radiographs, and biopsy. An incisional biopsy of
the mass is recommended.
Advanced imaging is recommended for oral tumors
arising from the maxilla, palate, and caudal mandible.
Computed tomography (CT) scans are generally preferred to magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) because of

Table 137.1 WHO staging system for oral tumors
Stage Tumor size and metastasis status

I

<2 cm diameter tumor

II

2 to <4 cm diameter tumor

III

>/= 4 cm diameter tumor and/or lymph node metastasis

IV

Distant metastasis

superior bone detail. Both provide more information on
the local extent of the tumor than regional radiographs.
Information obtained from CT or MRI is critical in the
planning of definitive surgery and radiation.
Regional lymph nodes should be carefully palpated for
enlargement or asymmetry. Caution should be exercised,
however, when making clinical judgments based on palpation alone, as lymph node size is not an accurate predictor of metastasis. Lymph node aspirates should be
performed in all animals with oral cancers, regardless of
their size or mobility. Three‐view thoracic radiographs
are recommended to evaluate animals for evidence of
pulmonary metastatic disease. Thoracic CT scans should
be considered for animals with highly metastatic tumor
types such as OMM, since CT scans are more sensitive
for detecting pulmonary metastatic lesions. Based on
these diagnostic steps, oral tumors are then staged
according to the World Health Organization’s staging
scheme (WHO) (Table 137.1).
Therapy
Surgery

Surgical resection is the gold standard for oral tumors
and is the most commonly used modality for achieving
local control. The surgical approach depends on tumor
type and location. The majority of tumors involving the
maxilla, mandible, and hard palate will have underlying
bone involvement so surgical resection should include
bony margins to increase the likelihood of complete
excision. Minimum margins of at least 2 cm, and preferably 3 cm, are recommended for malignant tumors such
as SCC, OMM, and FSA in the dog.
Radiation Therapy

Radiation therapy can be used with palliative or curative
intent, or as an adjunct to surgery for incompletely
resected tumors or tumors with aggressive local behavior. Radiation therapy can be considered a primary treatment of canine oral SCC, OMM, and some benign tumors
such as epulides. These tumors are radiation responsive,
even when treated in the setting of gross ­
disease.
Radiation protocols used for the treatment of these
tumors have involved daily or alternate‐day treatments

VetBooks.ir

137 Cancer of the Nose and Mouth

consisting of 2.7–4.2 Gy per fraction with a total dose
ranging from 48 Gy to 57 Gy. More recently, stereotactic
radiation is being used as treatment of non-resectable
oral tumors. Protocols typically consist of 1-3 high doses
of radiation precisely targeted at the tumor, with rapid
dose fall off outside of the tumor. These protocols are
proving to provide durable control of disease, with
decreased acute side effects when compared to traditional radiation protocols; however published studies are
still limited.
When using radiation therapy alone, tumor control is
better achieved with smaller lesions (T1 or T2 tumors).
With megavoltage radiation, local recurrence is reported
in up to 30% of cases. When compared to T1 tumors,
tumor progression is three times more likely with T2
tumors and 5–8 times more likely with T3 tumors. Local
tumor control and survival time, however, can be
improved by combining surgery and radiation therapy.
Acute radiation side‐effects are common during treatment of oral tumors, but these are generally self‐limiting.
They can include alopecia and moist desquamation, oral
mucositis, dysphagia and ocular changes such as blepharitis, conjunctivitis, keratitis, and uveitis. Late side‐effects
are rare (<5%), but are much more serious as they are
permanent. Late side‐effects include skin fibrosis, bone
necrosis and oronasal fistula formation, development of
a second malignancy within the radiation field, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, cataract formation, and ocular
atrophy.
Chemotherapy

Frontline treatment for most oral tumors is control of
local disease with surgery and/or radiation therapy.
Chemotherapy is indicated for some tumors due to their
high metastatic potential. OMM and tonsillar SCC are
both highly metastatic tumors, but unfortunately their
response to chemotherapy is low.
The nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug piroxicam, a
COX‐2 inhibitor, has been shown to have some effect
against canine oral SCC. Expression of COX‐2 has also
been noted in feline oral SCC, but no improvement has
been seen in the management of these tumors when
piroxicam has been used.
Immunotherapy

A DNA vaccine against tyrosinase is now commercially
available for the adjunctive treatment of dogs with
OMM. To maximize chances of long‐term survival, it
has been found that the vaccine is most effective when
residual disease is minimized and local regional control
has been achieved. Adverse reactions following administration of the vaccine have been found to be minimal,
with the most notable side‐effects consisting of bruising
and hematoma formation.

Prognosis
Malignant Melanoma

The prognosis for dogs with oral malignant melanoma is
guarded. In one study, median survival time (MST) of
dogs with untreated oral melanomas was two months.
Aggressive resection by mandibulectomy or maxillectomy can be effective for control of these tumors but
postsurgical recurrence has been reported to develop in
8–85% of dogs and metastasis to regional lymph nodes,
lungs, or other viscera may develop in as many as 95%.
Metastasis, particularly to the lungs, is the most common cause of death, being reported in 15–67% of dogs.
Median survival times for dogs with OMM treated with
surgery are approximately 17–18 months, 5–6 months,
and three months with stage I, II, and III disease,
respectively.
Coarse fraction radiation treatment effectively
achieves local control in dogs with melanomas.
Reduction in tumor size is attained in 83–100% of dogs,
and a complete response rate has been reported to be as
high as 70%. In a retrospective study of 140 dogs with
OMM treated with radiation therapy, it was found that
systemic chemotherapy had no impact on the development of metastatic disease, time to first event, or survival. In the same study, tumor location, bone lysis, and
tumor volume were all variables identified to predict
time to first event and survival. If none of these risks
were present, median survival for dogs with malignant
melanomas treated with radiation therapy was 21
months, and if one, two, or three risk variables were present, median survival time was 11 months, five months,
or three months, respectively.
The use of immunotherapy for malignant melanoma is
showing some promise, but most results involve small
numbers of dogs in phase I trials. Xenogeneic vaccine
studies for dogs with stage I–III OMM report median
survival times of almost three years when local regional
control had been achieved and patients received vaccine
versus 1.5 years when patients were given the same
­vaccine, but failed locally.
Canine Squamous Cell Carcinoma

Following mandibulectomy for canine nontonsillar SCC,
the median survival ranges from 19 to 26 months versus
10–19 months following a maxillectomy. Tonsillar SCC
carries a graver prognosis. Due to higher local recurrence and metastatic rates, studies report one‐year
­survival times of only 10%.
Full‐course radiation therapy, either alone or as an
adjunct following incomplete surgical resection, is also a
successful treatment modality for the management of
oral SCC in dogs. With full‐course radiation, a study of
39 dogs reported an overall median progression‐free

1255

VetBooks.ir

1256

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

survival time of 36 months. Local tumor recurrence was
a more common cause of first treatment failure than
regional metastasis to lymph nodes. Dogs with T1, T2,
and T3 tumors had a progression free, one‐year survival
rate of 89%, 83%, and 41% respectively, and a three‐year
progression‐free survival rate of 74%, 53%, and 23%,
respectively. A study of 14 dogs treated with full‐course
radiation therapy as the primary treatment modality
reported median disease‐free interval and survival of 12
and 14 months, respectively. The median disease‐free
interval was 16 months in dogs 9 years or less, and seven
months in dogs older than 9 years of age.
Feline Squamous Cell Carcinoma

The prognosis for feline SCC is poor, as there is no
known consistent, effective treatment for gaining local
control. In one series of 52 cats, the one‐year survival
rate was less than 10% with median survival times of
three months for surgery, surgery and radiation therapy,
radiation therapy and low‐dose chemotherapy, and radiation therapy with hyperthermia. Other studies investigating surgery alone, have reported median survival
times of 5.5–7.5 months, but only tumors of the mandible were considered resectable. In a separate study the
combination of surgery and radiation reported a survival
time of 14 months. All cases were arising from the
mandible.
Radiation therapy alone is generally ineffective in the
management of cats with oral SCC. However, the combination of radiation with radiation sensitizers or chemotherapy has resulted in response rates from 70% to 100%
and median survival times of approximately 3–6 months.
A recent prospective study including 31 cases of oral
SCC in cats evaluated the effectiveness of an accelerated
radiation therapy protocol and concomitant carboplatin
for treatment. Median survival for all cats in this study
was 5.4 months, while cats with tumors of tonsillar origin or cheek responded best to therapy with a mean survival of two years.
Fibrosarcoma

The prognosis for dogs with oral fibrosarcoma is guarded.
Multimodal treatment with surgery and radiation therapy
of the local disease results in the best survival rates.
Following maxillectomy or mandibulectomy alone, local
recurrence is reported in up to 60% of dogs with a median
survival time of 10–12 months and a one‐year survival rate
of 50%. Oral fibrosarcomas are considered to be radiation
resistant. A smaller tumor size improves the outcome following radiation therapy, with the median progression‐free
survival time of 45 months for dogs with T1 tumors compared to 31 months and seven months for T2 and T3
tumors, respectively. When radiation therapy is used as an

adjunct to surgery, a median survival time of 18–26 months
is reported. A study completed in 2011 reported the outcome in 29 dogs with oral fibrosarcomas treated with surgical excision with or without adjuvant radiation. The
median survival time in this study was reported to be
approximately two years with a one‐ and two‐year progression‐free survival rate of 88% and 58%, respectively.
Epulides

The prognosis for dogs with epulides is excellent following treatment with either surgery or radiation therapy. In
contrast to fibromatous and ossifying epulides, wide
local excision of adjacent soft tissue and bone is necessary for cure of acanthomatous ameloblastomas. Local
recurrence rate following bone‐removing surgery is less
than 5%.
Radiation therapy is indicated for acanthomatous
ameloblastomas that are not curable with surgery alone.
In a prospective clinical trial, 47 dogs with acanthomatous ameloblastomas (39 dogs) or fibromatous or ossifying epulides (eight dogs) were treated with 12 fractions
of 4 Gy, three times a week to a total dose of 48 Gy.
Clinical stage was the only significant prognostic factor,
with dogs that had stage T3 tumors having a 7.9 times
higher risk of tumor recurrence than dogs with stage T1.
In a 2004 study of 57 dogs treated with radiation therapy,
the median overall survival time was four years.
Intralesional bleomycin has also been described for the
treatment of acanthomatous ameloblastomas. With this
treatment, a complete response was sustained in all four
dogs treated for greater than one year with no local
recurrence.

­Nasal Tumors
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Carcinomas, including adenocarcinoma, squamous cell
carcinoma, and undifferentiated carcinoma, comprise
nearly two‐thirds of nasal tumors in the dog while sarcomas, including fibrosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, osteosarcoma, and undifferentiated sarcoma, comprise the
bulk of the remaining tumors. In the cat, lymphoma and
carcinoma are the most common tumors of the nasal
cavity. It has been speculated that dogs living in urban
environments may be at higher risk for developing nasal
tumors, and some studies have also associated the exposure of environmental tobacco smoke as an increased
risk factor, but this finding is not consistent. Nasal lymphoma in cats is typically feline leukemia virus (FeLV)
antigen negative, and definite risk factors have not been
reported.

VetBooks.ir

137 Cancer of the Nose and Mouth

Nasal tumors are locally invasive tumors that carry a
relatively low metastatic rate. Metastasis at the time of
diagnosis is seen in approximately 10% of animals, but
may be as high as 40–50% at the time of death. Death,
however, is usually attributable to local disease progression rather than metastatic lesions. Most common sites
of metastasis are the regional lymph nodes and lungs.
Less common sites include bones, kidneys, liver, skin,
and brain.
Epidemiology
Nasal tumors account for approximately 1% of all neoplasms in dogs and cats.
Signalment
The average age at the time of diagnosis for canine and
feline nasal tumors is 10 years. It appears that medium‐
and large‐breed dogs may be more commonly affected.
Also, a slight male predilection has been suggested in dogs,
and dolichocephalic breeds may be at an increased risk.
History and Clinical Signs
The most common clinical signs associated with nasal
tumors include epistaxis, bloody or mucopurulent nasal
discharge, facial deformity, sneezing, dyspnea, stertorous breathing, exophthalmia, and ocular discharge secondary to obstruction of the nasolacrimal duct. The
average duration of clinical signs before diagnosis is
three months. All of these clinical signs can overlap with
other intranasal diseases, but a strong suspicion for cancer should be made in older animals with an intermittent
and progressive history of initially unilateral and/or
mucopurulent discharge.
Diagnosis
Definitive diagnosis of a nasal tumor requires a tissue
biopsy but historical information and diagnostic imaging
can be highly suggestive of cancer. Conventional radiography can be helpful in the diagnostic evaluation of dogs,
but CT is preferred as it provides improved anatomic
detail, determination of the extent of the tumor, and
identification of nasal cavity abnormalities. A CT scan
also allows for detection of CNS invasion. Certain findings on CT are correlated with a diagnosis of cancer in
dogs, but none of these alone or in combination are
definitively diagnostic. A tissue biopsy is always required.
Once a definitive diagnosis has been made, fine needle
aspirates of regional lymph nodes should be completed,
along with three‐view thoracic radiographs.

Several staging systems based on radiographic or
CT findings have been proposed in canine nasal
tumors but their prognostic significance remains
controversial. The Adams modified staging system
­
developed in 2009 is the most recent system that has
been adapted (Table 137.2). With this system, dogs
with unilateral intranasal involvement confined to the
nasal cavity had the longest median survival time of
23.4 months when treated with definitive radiotherapy. Those with cribriform involvement had the
­shortest median survival time of 6.7 months.
Therapy
Treatment of nasal tumors is directed primarily at the
control of local disease. Unfortunately, the disease is often
extensive. Curative surgery is not possible as bone invasion occurs early in the course of the disease. Hence, radiation therapy is the standard of care. The combination of a
cytoreductive surgery followed by radiation therapy for
the treatment of nasal tumors has been evaluated, but has
not been shown to improve clinical outcome in dogs when
compared to megavoltage radiation alone.
With definitive or curative intent radiation, the goal of
treatment is to deliver the maximum radiation dose to the
tumor while minimizing the dose to surrounding normal
tissues. Most radiation therapy done in veterinary medicine involves the use of conventional computerized treatment planning. However, with advances in the field of
radiation oncology, the use of intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) has proven to be a very good option
for the treatment of nasal tumors. IMRT allows for the
optimization of radiation dose delivery to complex tumor
volumes with rapid dose drop-off to surrounding normal
tissues. When IMRT is used, normal tissue toxicities are
greatly reduced while higher cumulative doses of radiation
are delivered to the tumor. Traditional definitive protocols
involve the administration of a total radiation dose of 40-57
Gy in 10-19 fractions of 3-4.2 Gy, over a 2-4 week period.
Table 137.2 Adams 2009 modified staging system for canine
nasal tumors
Stage

Remarks

T1

Confined to one nasal passage, paranasal sinus, or
frontal sinus with no bony involvement

T2

Any bony involvement, but no evidence of orbital,
subcutaneous, or submucosal mass

T3

Involvement of orbit or subcutaneous or
submucosal mass

T4

Tumor extension into the nasopharynx or
cribriform plate

1257

VetBooks.ir

1258

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Computerized treatment planning using CT images of the
patient are recommended to enhance normal tissue sparing while ensuring appropriate dose distributions within
the tumor. For IMRT, CT and computer planning is
required. Stereotactic radiation, which is similar to IMRT,
is the specific treatment of choice for most nasal tumors.
Protocols consist of the precision delivery of curative intent
therapy in 1-3 high dose fractions.
With stereotactic and/or traditionally fractionated
IMRT, acute toxicities that effect the rapidly dividing tissue
of the oral cavity, nasal cavity, skin, and eye can be seen, but
are typically very limited. Oral antibiotics, analgesics, and/
or artificial tears can be used as needed to counteract and
support any treatment related side effect. Life limiting late
side effects such as bone or brain necrosis are possible, but
the risk is expected to be less than 5%.
Palliative radiation therapy can also be considered for the
treatment of nasal tumors. With palliative radiation protocols, side‐effects are limited. Alleviation of clinical signs has
been reported in up to 95% of dogs treated, with median
survival times reported to be approximately 4–6 months.
Chemotherapy has also been evaluated for the treatment of
nasal tumors in dogs. Clinical responses are seen with
chemotherapy, but the response is usually not durable.
Prognosis
Canine Nasal Tumors

The long‐term prognosis for dogs with nasal tumors is
very dependent on the treatment pursued. A retrospective study of 139 dogs with nasal tumor evaluated
those that did not receive therapy. Their overall median
survival time was approximately three months. This
study also found that dogs presenting with epistaxis
had a significantly shorter median survival time than
those without epistaxis. Surgery as the sole treatment
of nasal tumors results in a median survival time of
only 3–6 months, with a high rate of acute and chronic
morbidity. Curative‐intent, high‐energy megavoltage
radiation alone results in a median survival time of
8–19.7 months, with one‐ and two‐year survival rates
ranging from 43% to 60% and 11% to 44%, respectively.
The combination of surgery followed by postoperative
radiation reports survival times ranging from 4.1
months to 15.2 months, adding no benefit to radiation
therapy alone. In a small series of 13 dogs that underwent preoperative radiation followed by surgical exenteration of residual disease, a survival advantage was
demonstrated (MST 47 months). However, these

patients experienced significant late side‐effects
including rhinitis (bacterial and fungal), osteomyelitis,
and fistula formation. A study in 2011 evaluated definitive reirradiation of nine dogs with nasal tumors and
found that reirradiation is a viable treatment option for
canine nasal tumors with tolerable acute and late side‐
effects. The MST time for the patients in this study was
30 months.
Feline Nasal Tumors

Reports of treatment for feline nasal tumors are
­lacking. One study including 16 cats with nonlymphoproliferative neoplasms treated with a definitive
course of radiation to a total dose of 48 Gy reported
a MST of 12 months. This treatment resulted in
­minimal acute side‐effects and modest chronic ocular
side‐effects. When radiation therapy protocols are
used for the treatment of feline nasal lymphoma,
long‐term control of local disease is favorable and it
has been reported that higher total doses (greater or
equal to 32 Gy) of radiation therapy may confer an
additional survival benefit. The role of chemotherapy
for the treatment of feline nasal lymphoma is undefined. Median survival times for cats receiving radiation therapy +/‐ chemotherapy for the treatment of
nasal lymphoma range from 13 to 31 months.

­Cancer of the Pharynx
Pharyngeal tumors are rare and little information has
been reported in literature. In cats, lymphosarcoma
is the most commonly reported. In dogs, extramedullary plasma cell tumor, osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, and carcinomas have all been
reported. Malignant tumors of the pharynx are more
common; however, benign tumors have been reported
in dogs. These include rhabdomyoma, angioleiomyoma, and oncocytoma. Rhabdomyomas are minimally invasive and have a predilection for young
male dogs.
Surgery is the treatment of choice for pharyngeal
tumors. Many benign tumors can be removed while
preserving function, while radical procedures such as
permanent tracheostomy and complete laryngectomy
are required for malignant tumors. Chemotherapy
and radiation therapy can also be considered. Surgical
removal of pharyngeal rhabdomyoma is often considered curative.

VetBooks.ir

137 Cancer of the Nose and Mouth

­Further Reading
Adams W, Keiter M, Thrall D, et al. Prognostic significance
of tumor histology and computed tomographic staging
for radiation treatment response of canine nasal tumors.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2009; 50(3): 330–5.
Bergman P. Canine oral melanoma. Clin Tech Small Anim
Pract 2007; 22(2): 55–60.
Bommarito D, Kent M, Selting K, Henry C, Lattimer J.
Reirradiation of recurrent canine nasal tumors. Vet
Radiol Ultrasound 2010; 52(2): 207–12.

Proulx D, Ruslander D, Dodge R, et al. A retrospective
analysis of 140 dogs with oral melanoma treated with
external beam radiation. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2003;
44(3): 352–9.
Théon P, Rodriguez C, Madewell B. Analysis of prognostic
factors and patterns of failure in dogs with malignant
oral tumors treated with megavoltage radiation. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 1997; 210(6): 778–84.

1259

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1261

138
Tumors of the Eye and Ocular Adnexa
Erin M. Scott, DVM, DACVO1 and Paul E. Miller, DVM, DACVO2
1
2

Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA
Department of Surgical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin‐Madison, Madison, WI, USA

­Tumors of the Ocular Adnexa
Tumors of the eye, orbit, or adnexa may be painful and
disfiguring, impair vision, and elicit concern that life‐
threatening disease may be present elsewhere in the
body. Even benign ocular tumors may cause blindness
and loss of the eye simply by virtue of their location.
Although both ocular and periocular tumors are reportedly uncommon, their actual frequency is undoubtedly
greater as most presumably benign ocular tumors,
especially those affecting the canine eyelid, are not histologically examined. Histopathologic examination, however,
is essential to ensure proper diagnosis and treatment.
Eyelids, Third Eyelid, Conjunctiva, and Cornea
The etiology of ocular adnexal tumors is poorly understood
but suspected causes include chronic inflammation, exposure to ultraviolet light, and viral infection (e.g., papillomavirus). In dogs, more than 85% of eyelid and conjunctival
neoplasms consist of sebaceous or meibomian gland adenomas and epitheliomas, papillomas, and melanomas. The
substantial majority of these tumors are benign. Even histologically malignant canine eyelid tumors rarely metastasize,
although they may be more locally invasive and likely to
recur after surgery. In cats, however, most feline eyelid and
ocular surface tumors are malignant.
Meibomian Gland Adenoma/Epithelioma

Although rare in other species, benign meibomian gland
adenomas and epitheliomas are the most common eyelid
margin tumor in middle‐aged to older dogs. They may
grow rapidly, first starting as a nodular swelling of the
meibomian gland and eventually appearing as a proliferative mass exiting the meibomian gland orifice on the
lid margin.

Papillomas

In contrast, viral papillomas appear as verrucous masses
originating from the conjunctiva in young dogs. They are
well demarcated, superficial, and grow rapidly. Surgical
manipulation has been reported to disperse new papillomas over the ocular s­urface. Papillomas, like histiocytomas, usually resolve spontaneously in young dogs,
although persistence in older dogs is common. Other
forms of benign papillomas in dogs include squamous
papillomas, which are of unknown etiology and occur
at any age, as well as reactive papillomas, which are seen
secondary to other conditions that result in chronic
irritation.
Squamous Cell Carcinoma

Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) has a predilection for
the lower eyelid and medial canthus of white cats, and
comprises the majority of feline eyelid and third eyelid
tumors. It is less frequently reported in dogs, however, in
both species it tends to affect older animals. Predisposing
factors include exposure to solar radiation, lack of
adnexal pigmentation, and chronic ocular surface irritation. Ocular surface SCC has a predilection for the limbus, although it may also invade the cornea. SCC appears
as a focally thickened, roughened, pink‐to‐red lesion or
as an ulcerated lesion which is slow to heal. Metastasis to
regional lymph nodes occurs late in the course of disease
and distant metastasis is uncommon. SCC of the third
eyelid tends to more readily invade the orbit than ocular
surface or eyelid SCC (Figure 138.1a).
Hemangioma/Hemangiosarcoma

Adnexal vascular endothelial tumors are uncommon in
dogs and rare in cats. As with ocular surface SCC, solar
radiation is believed to be a risk factor. They usually
arise from the nonpigmented conjunctiva of the lateral

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1262

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

(a)

(b)

Figure 138.1 (a) Squamous cell carcinoma involving the third
eyelid of a cat. Note the proliferative and ulcerated mass
extending from the anterior surface of the third eyelid.
(b) Hemangioma of the third eyelid of a cat. Note the bright red,
exophytic mass extending from the leading edge of the third
eyelid. Source: Courtesy of University of Wisconsin‐Madison
Comparative Ophthalmology Service Collection.

limbus or leading edge of the third eyelid and appear as
relatively superficial, focal, raised, soft, red masses
with visible feeder vessels (Figure 138.1b). Ulceration
is common in larger masses. Metastasis of primary
­conjunctival vascular tumors, even when classified as
hemangiosarcoma, is rare although it may recur following simple excision. It is critical to differentiate a
primary ocular hemangiosarcoma from a metastatic
lesion.
Melanocytoma/Melanoma

Dermal melanocytic tumors of the eyelid are common
and typically benign in dogs, while in cats they are rare
and more malignant. Melanocytic tumors of the conjunctiva are infrequent and malignant in both species
(although distant metastasis tends to be uncommon).
Conjunctival melanomas involving the nictitating
membrane and superior palpebral conjunctiva may have
greater metastatic potential. In both cats and dogs,
conjunctival melanomas often locally recur following
surgical excision, and may invade the orbit and spread to
regional lymph nodes or lungs.

Adenoma/Adenocarcinoma

Adenocarcinomas are the most common tumor of the
gland of the third eyelid. They appear as a localized, firm,
smooth, pink swelling arising from the posterior surface
of the nictitans. They mimic prolapse of the gland of the
nictitans (i.e., cherry eye), but a key differentiating feature is their occurrence in older dogs and cats. Recurrence
is common if the entire gland is not removed, and metastasis, especially to the regional lymph nodes and orbit, is
possible.
History and Clinical Signs
In addition to a mass lesion, other clinical signs of eyelid
or ocular surface tumors may include epiphora, conjunctival vascular injection, ocular discharge, elevation of the
third eyelid, conjunctival/corneal erosion or ulceration,
and corneal vascularization or pigmentation. Palpebral
conjunctival masses often protrude when they no longer
can be accommodated by the space between the eyelid
and globe. Advanced tumors invading the orbit may
result in exophthalmia or enophthalmia, depending on
their location. Large tumors and sebaceous adenomas
often have a substantial inflammatory component and
may be secondarily infected.
Diagnosis
The extent of conjunctival involvement should be determined by everting the eyelid (and third eyelid if affected).
Careful palpation of the lesion by inserting a lubricated
finger in the conjunctival cul‐de‐sac can aid in determining the full extent of the tumor and whether bony
involvement has occurred. Nasolacrimal lavage and
possibly positive contrast dacryocystorhinography may
help characterize medial canthal masses. Fluorescein
staining should be used to determine the integrity of the
ocular surface.
Small eyelid and ocular surface tumors are best
diagnosed and treated by excisional biopsy. Fine
needle aspiration (FNA) or incisional biopsies of
larger tumors aid in determining prognosis and planning
definitive therapy. Orbital ultrasound, skull radiographs, computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), regional lymph node cytology,
and thoracic radiographs may be required to localize
or clinically stage potentially malignant tumors such
as SCC, third eyelid adenocarcinomas, and conjunctival
melanomas.
Therapy
Specific therapy varies with tumor type, size, location,
and extent; whether the eye still has vision; the animal’s

VetBooks.ir

138 Tumors of the Eye and Ocular Adnexa

expected lifespan; the amount of discomfort due to the
mass; and any financial constraints of the owner. All eyelid tumors, whether benign or malignant, may affect
vision or ocular comfort. Excision is indicated for all
eyelid tumors in cats, rapidly growing masses, those irritating the eye or impairing eyelid function, if the owner
is concerned, or the mass is cosmetically unappealing. In
young dogs, even large papillomas or histiocytomas that
are nonirritating may be monitored as spontaneous
regression is common.
Tumors involving less than one‐fourth to one‐third
of the palpebral fissure length are best treated by a
V‐plasty (wedge) or four‐sided (house) excision. In
the latter technique, the incision is made perpendicular
to the eyelid margin (rather than obliquely), resulting
in superior apposition of the eyelid margins and
greater wound stability, especially in larger tumors. It
may be possible to shrink large tumors that are
infected or inflamed with antibiotic or antiinflammatory therapy such that a wedge or four‐sided excision
becomes possible. Electrosurgical excision may result
in substantial scarring of the eyelids. Carbon dioxide
(CO2) laser ablation may be appropriate for some
smaller tumors.
Tumors greater than one‐fourth to one‐third of the
eyelid typically require reconstructive blepharoplasty or
other therapeutic modalities. Depending on tumor type,
alternative therapies include systemic chemotherapy
(e.g., lymphoma, mast cell tumors), local infiltration with
chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., SCC), and/or local radiation therapy (e.g., SCC). These modalities may completely eliminate the tumor or reduce it so that a less
extensive surgical procedure is possible. Reconstructive
blepharoplasty, however, is the procedure of choice if
surgical cure is a possibility, other modalities are unlikely
to substantially reduce the tumor, or if the tumor type
requires extensive margins.
Liquid nitrogen cryosurgery may be an alternative
to extensive blepharoplasty for some eyelid and corneal
tumors. It is fast, technically simpler than reconstructive blepharoplasty, and usually allows the
nasolacrimal puncta and canaliculus to be preserved.
Often cryosurgery can be performed with only sedation or local/topical anesthesia, which is helpful in
older or debilitated patients. After sedation/anesthesia,
the mass is isolated with chalazion forceps and
debulked flush with the lid margin. Using a closed
probe that approximates the diameter of the mass as
much as possible, an iceball is formed and allowed to
extend 3–5 mm beyond the visible margins of the
mass in a double freeze‐thaw cycle. If the tumor is
large, the iceballs should overlap. If complete regression is not achieved 2–3 weeks after the first session,
additional treatments may be performed. Marked

postoperative swelling and usually transient depigmentation of the frozen tissue are expected.
Tumors involving the conjunctiva and third eyelid
(especially conjunctival hemangiosarcomas, melanomas, and third eyelid adenocarcinomas) are best
treated by wide surgical excision, sometimes to the
point of exenteration. Excision of the entire third eyelid may result in keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Cryosurgery
may allow the third eyelid to be spared in papillomas
and early SCC. It can also be a useful adjunct to excision
in advanced canine conjunctival melanomas and SCC.
Superficial keratectomy/sclerectomy, often followed
by cryosurgery, is preferred for many corneal and
scleral tumors, although some tumors require full‐
thickness corneal/scleral resection and placement of a
donor graft.
Prognosis
With treatment, the prognosis for most canine primary
eyelid tumors is excellent. Even histologically malignant
primary lid tumors rarely metastasize, and recurrence
rates are low. Recurrences, however, need to be differentiated from new primary eyelid tumors as these are common. The prognosis for feline eyelid tumors is guarded,
as most eyelid tumors in cats are malignant. Conjunctival
melanomas and adenocarcinomas of the third eyelid
­frequently recur even if all clinically visible tumor is
removed. Conjunctival hemangiosarcomas most likely
have a good prognosis because total excision may be
curative, although recurrence and loss of the eye may
occur.
Limbal (Epibulbar) Melanoma
Limbal melanomas are typically benign, sessile, heavily
pigmented masses originating from melanocytes in the
limbal sclera or subconjunctival connective tissue of
middle‐aged dogs and cats. The majority are located in
the superior limbal region, suggesting that solar radiation may be a risk factor. Growth is slow and confirmed
metastasis has not been reported. Clinical signs are generally mild and may include localized corneal invasion,
epiphora, and mild conjunctival irritation. Differential
diagnoses include conjunctival melanoma, uveal melanoma invading the sclera, metastatic melanoma, and
staphyloma or coloboma. Gonioscopy and ocular ultrasound aid in differentiating invasive intraocular tumors
from limbal melanomas.
Therapy should be considered if the tumor has invaded
the eye, the animal is painful, or if growth is rapid.
Observation alone is often an appropriate approach in
older dogs given the benign nature and usually slow

1263

VetBooks.ir

1264

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

growth rate of these tumors. If intervention is required,
lamellar keratectomy/sclerectomy with graft placement,
cryosurgery or laser photocoagulation may be curative
or reduce the size of the mass such that it no longer
threatens vision for the remainder of the animal’s life.
Cryotherapy or beta‐irradiation may also substantially
reduce the risk of recurrence following local excision.
Enucleation is curative and indicated if the mass has
entered the eye and there is ocular discomfort.

­Intraocular Tumors
Primary Tumors
Primary intraocular tumors occur more frequently than
metastatic intraocular neoplasms in dogs and cats. They
most commonly originate from the uvea, and their etiology is poorly understood.
Canine Anterior Uveal Melanocytoma/Melanoma

Intraocular melanocytomas arising from the iris or ciliary
body comprise the majority of canine intraocular tumors.
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Most tumors are benign and detected in older dogs
(7 years of age or older) although more rapidly growing
pigmented iridal masses have been described in young
dogs. Malignant intraocular melanomas may be locally
invasive but distant metastasis (usually hematogenously)
is rare.
Ocular melanosis of cairn terriers is a distinct clinical entity that resembles a diffuse and benign form of
uveal melanoma. It is a bilateral disorder in which the
iris becomes thickened and more darkly pigmented,
followed by release of pigment into the aqueous and
pigment ­deposition in the sclera/episclera. Secondary
glaucoma is common. Some cairn terriers may have
overt uveal melanocytic tumors, but in most dogs the
pigmented cells are nonneoplastic (Figure 138.2).
Choroidal Melanocytoma/Melanoma

These rare melanocytic tumors generally originate
from the peripapillary choroid and appear as well‐
delineated, raised, subretinal pigmented masses. They
may remain virtually static for many years, although
others may extend into the overlying retina, sclera,
Figure 138.2 (a) Free‐floating uveal cysts
in the anterior chamber of a dog. Note
that the spherical, fluid‐filled cysts
transilluminate. (b) Cairn terrier with
ocular melanosis characterized by diffuse
pigment deposition in the sclera and
episclera. (c) Iris nevus (freckle) in a dog.
Such lesions should be closely monitored
for signs of progression. (d) Canine
anterior uveal melanoma. Note the heavily
pigmented and raised iris mass. Source:
Courtesy of University of Wisconsin‐
Madison Comparative Ophthalmology
Service Collection.

VetBooks.ir

138 Tumors of the Eye and Ocular Adnexa

optic nerve, and orbit. Although usually considered
benign, such invasion warrants a more cautious
prognosis. Small tumors are typically asymptomatic
although larger tumors ­frequently present with chronic
uveitis, secondary glaucoma, retinal detachment,
intraocular hemorrhage, or blindness. Ocular ultrasonography may be required to identify the mass in
these patients. Therapy is usually enucleation if the
mass is progressive or the eye is painful. Diode laser
ablation is an alternative treatment for small masses
that do not involve the optic nerve.
Feline Diffuse Iris Melanoma

Diffuse iris melanomas are the most common primary
intraocular tumor in cats. Although the prodromal
period may be quite long, most cats are 9 years of age or
older at the time of diagnosis.
The most common clinical sign is slowly progressive
diffuse iridal hyperpigmentation. Occasionally, a pigmented iridal nodule or amelanotic mass is seen. The
diagnosis is generally made clinically, and is based on
the presence of progressive iridal hyperpigmentation
and thickening or irregularity of the iris surface or
(a)

(b)

pupil (Figure 138.3). Secondary glaucoma may occur.
Diffuse iris melanoma is differentiated from chronic
anterior uveitis with iridal hyperpigmentation by the
absence of other signs of uveitis and a more protracted
course.
Diffuse iris melanoma has the potential to distantly
metastasize, especially to the liver and lungs. Iris hyperpigmentation, however, is typically very slowly progressive, often requiring months to years to progress to the
point at which the eye must be enucleated, and an additional 1–3 years after that before metastatic disease may
become evident. No single morphologic feature is predictive of outcome, but metastasis has been linked to a
greater mitotic index, larger tumors, extension through
the iris into the ciliary body stroma, and involvement of
the scleral venous plexus.
The treatment of diffuse iris melanoma is controversial. Because these eyes initially retain vision and are
comfortable, in the ideal setting, enucleation would be
delayed until just prior to malignant transformation,
invasion into other ocular structures, secondary glaucoma, or metastasis. Such precise timing; however, is
seldom possible. Enucleation is recommended if iris
hyperpigmentation progresses to involve virtually all
of the iris surface, pigmented cells are present in the
aqueous humor and trabecular meshwork, the pupil
is distorted (indicating iridal stromal invasion), invasion into the ciliary body or scleral appears imminent,
or intraocular pressure is elevated. However, it is
unknown whether early enucleation leads to increased
survival.
As an alternative to enucleation, some veterinary
ophthalmologists have attempted to ablate small,
focal, hyperpigmented foci with a diode laser in an
effort to preserve vision and the eye. The long‐term
success rate and side‐effects of this procedure, however,
are unknown.
In practice, slowly progressing lesions, especially in
older cats with other life‐limiting disorders, are often
simply monitored, ideally by comparison to baseline
photographs. In many cats, the progression may be so
slow that the patient can be followed for many years to a
decade or more without apparent metastasis.
Iridociliary Epithelial Tumors

Figure 138.3 (a) Feline diffuse iris melanoma. The right iris is
diffusely and heavily pigmented and the pupil is slightly more
dilated due to stromal invasion of neoplastic cells (anisocoria). The
left iris has multifocal nevi (freckles). (b) Exfoliated pigment from
the iris is present on the anterior lens capsule. Source: Courtesy of
University of Wisconsin‐Madison Comparative Ophthalmology
Service Collection.

Primary iridociliary epithelial tumors (e.g., ciliary body
adenomas, adenocarcinomas, pleomorphic adenocarcinomas) are occasionally observed in middle‐aged
to older dogs and cats. Most are benign, fairly well‐
delineated, slow‐growing masses that originate from
the ciliary body or the posterior iris epithelium
(Figure 138.4). They are often n
­ onpigmented, although
some epithelial tumors are pigmented and clinically
indistinguishable from anterior uveal melanocytomas.

1265

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

chondrosarcoma. The cell of origin in the three subtypes
is unclear, although damage to the lens and chronic
uveitis are common historical complaints.
Most eyes are blind from the preceding trauma or
chronic inflammation, and the most common presenting
signs are white, tan, or pink mass filling the anterior
chamber and distortion of the globe. Extension beyond
the sclera or into the optic nerve may be seen ultrasonographically and are poor prognostic indicators. Growth
along the optic nerve into the chiasm and brain, invasion
of regional lymph nodes, and distant metastasis have
been reported. Early enucleation of suspicious globes
with removal of as much of the optic nerve as possible is
recommended, although it is unclear if this prolongs
survival.

VetBooks.ir

1266

History and Clinical Signs

Figure 138.4 Canine iridociliary epithelial tumor. There is a
nonpigmented, vascular ciliary body adenoma filling the posterior
chamber and pushing the inferior iris forward. Source: Courtesy of
University of Wisconsin‐Madison Comparative Ophthalmology
Service Collection.

Clinical signs include a retroiridal mass that may displace
the iris or lens and in advanced cases, secondary glaucoma, intraocular hemorrhage, and ocular pain.
Tumors that invade the sclera are typically classified as
adenocarcinomas and have anaplastic features, but
metastasis is uncommon and occurs late in the course of
the disease, if at all. However, a few cases of truly malignant pleomorphic adenocarcinomas with fatal metastasis have been reported in dogs. Dogs affected with this
rare form usually have long‐standing ocular disease that
was initially thought to be inflammatory or traumatic in
origin.
Due to the possibility of malignancy, early enucleation
of ciliary body tumors has been recommended, although
benign adenomas may remain static for years. This
makes enucleation controversial for small tumors unassociated with secondary ocular disease. Local intraocular resection or laser photoablation in an effort to
preserve vision and ocular comfort has been described.
Feline Ocular Posttraumatic Sarcoma

A unique entity in cats, sarcomas following ocular
trauma are second only to melanomas in frequency as a
primary feline ocular tumor. Most cats are middle‐aged
to older and the latency period following ocular trauma
to tumor development averages six to seven years. There
are three morphologic subtypes: spindle cell sarcoma
(the most common), round cell, and osteosarcoma/

Common presentations of intraocular tumors include
a visible mass involving intraocular tissues, sclera or
occasionally the orbit, as well as glaucoma, hyphema,
or anterior uveitis. Intraocular neoplasia should
always be considered in animals with hyphema, glaucoma, or both when there is no history of trauma or
coagulopathy. Small masses frequently have no
clinical signs. Pigmentation is not a reliable indicator
of tumor type.
Diagnosis
Usually, the clinical or ultrasonographic appearance (if the
media are opaque) is strongly suggestive of intraocular neoplasia. It may be difficult to differentiate organizing blood
clots from neoplastic mass lesions and more invasive diagnostic procedures may be required. Because most anterior
uveal brown or black masses are cystic and not neoplastic,
transillumination or ultrasonography should be attempted
before resorting to more invasive procedures. Uveal cysts
typically are spherical, may be attached to the ciliary body
or free‐floating in the anterior chamber, and allow bright
light to pass through them (see Figure 138.2a). Once suspected, most primary canine intraocular tumors that are
not blinding nor causing discomfort are observed for
progression, although occasionally FNA (with its risks of
inflammation, infection, and hemorrhage), intraocular
resection, or enucleation are used for diagnostic purposes.
It is also important to rule out metastasis from another
primary site (e.g., oral cavity or nailbed) to the eye, or from
the eye to other organs (especially lungs and liver).
Therapy
Because the risk of metastasis is low and the ability of
enucleation to prevent metastasis in the few malignant

VetBooks.ir

138 Tumors of the Eye and Ocular Adnexa

tumors that have been reported is unproven, it is difficult
to automatically advise enucleation of normotensive,
noninflamed, visual eyes. Therefore, canine primary
intraocular tumors are generally photographed and carefully followed for progression. Enucleation is advised if
malignancy is a concern or if intractable uveitis, chronic
hyphema, or secondary glaucoma is present. Isolated
primary masses involving only the iris or a portion of the
ciliary body may be amenable to local resection by sector
iridectomy/cyclectomy with preservation of the globe,
but this procedure requires an accomplished ophthalmic
surgeon and often has unsatisfactory long‐term results.
Transscleral and transcorneal Nd:YAG or diode laser
therapy may induce remission in small to moderate‐sized
primary intraocular tumors while also preserving vision.
Prognosis
The prognosis for histologically benign intraocular
tumors is excellent. Enucleation is curative but blinding.
Attempts at local excision or laser photoablation may
only be palliative, especially if the ciliary body or trabecular meshwork is involved.
Secondary Uveal Neoplasms
Because the uveal tract is highly vascular, numerous
malignant tumors have been reported to metastasize
to the eye. Lymphoma is the most common secondary
intraocular tumor in the dog and cat, with ocular lesions
affecting approximately one‐third of dogs with the disease.
Common clinical signs include a severe uveitis, in which
the amount of anterior chamber cell/flare is disproportionally severe compared to the degree of conjunctival
hyperemia and pupillary miosis. Other clinical signs include
secondary glaucoma, retinal hemorrhage and detachment, hyphema, conjunctivitis, and keratitis characterized
by corneal infiltrates, edema, vascularization, and intrastromal hemorrhage. Exophthalmia from orbital invasion
and vision loss due to optic nerve or central nervous
system (CNS) disease may also occur. Dogs with intraocular
lymphoma survive only 60–70% as long as dogs without
ocular involvement when treated with cyclophosphamide,
vincristine, and prednisolone (COP), or with doxorubicin.
Ocular signs may be palliated by topical or systemic corticosteroid therapy, but the most effective therapy is systemic
chemotherapy directed at the cancer itself. Enucleation may
be necessary for pain relief in some patients.

­Tumors of the Orbit and Optic Nerve
Orbital neoplasia may be primary, secondary to extension of adjacent tumors into the orbit, or the result of

distant metastasis. In cats and dogs, 90% or more of
orbital tumors are malignant, and regional infiltration
(including into the CNS) or distant metastasis is common. Numerous types of orbital tumors have been
described in cats and dogs. Tumors involving the optic
nerve are rare, although secondary invasion of the nerve
may occur in feline posttraumatic sarcomas, feline SCC,
canine choroidal melanomas, and canine meningiomas.
Primary Orbital Tumors
Sarcomas

Mesenchymal tumors are among the most common
canine primary orbital tumors. These include osteosarcomas, fibrosarcomas, reticulum cell sarcomas, and
­neurofibrosarcomas. Orbital tumors should be histologically graded for a more accurate prognosis but most sarcomas are locally invasive and carry a poor prognosis.
Canine Lobular Orbital Adenoma

Lobular adenomas, perhaps originating from the lacrimal gland, may involve the anterior orbit in dogs. They
typically present as soft, smooth conjunctival swellings,
or space‐occupying orbital lesions that can cause either
enophthalmia or exophthalmia. Lobular orbital adenomas are composed of multiple friable lobules, making
complete surgical excision challenging. Although benign,
recurrence is common, often 1–2 years after excision.
Meningioma

Canine orbital meningiomas are uncommon tumors
which tend to grow slowly and rarely metastasize.
Invasion of surrounding tissues, including bone and the
CNS, is possible.
Glioma

Gliomas are rare primary optic nerve tumors in dogs.
The metastatic potential of gliomas appears to be low,
but invasion into the retina or the ventral aspect of the
brain is possible.
History and Clinical Signs
Orbital neoplasia is typified by slowly progressive
exophthalmia, absent to minimal pain on opening the
mouth, difficulty in retropulsing the eye, and deviation
of the globe. Nasal or sinus tumors that suddenly erode
into the orbit occasionally result in acute exophthalmia
and substantial orbital pain. If the mass is anterior to the
equator of the globe, enophthalmia may occur. Chronic
epiphora secondary to obstruction of the nasolacrimal
duct, exposure keratoconjunctivitis, palpable orbital
masses, or unexplained orbital pain also suggest orbital
neoplasia. Measurement of corneal diameters and

1267

VetBooks.ir

1268

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

intraocular pressure (IOP) allows differentiation of
buphthalmia from glaucoma (large corneal diameter and
high IOP) and exophthalmia (normal corneal diameter
and IOP).
Optic nerve lesions may result in unilateral or bilateral
blindness (the latter if the optic chiasm is affected),
which may be sudden in onset, as well as optic nerve
head pallor, papilledema, or marked protrusion and congestion of the optic disc on ophthalmoscopy. Relatively
mild exophthalmia with vision loss suggests optic nerve
neoplasia because other orbital tumors typically cause
profound exophthalmos before visual loss. Tumors
affecting more posterior portions of the optic nerve may
not cause exophthalmia or a visible change in the optic
nerve head.

(a)

(b)

Diagnosis
Differential diagnoses include nonneoplastic orbital
inflammatory diseases such as granulomas, cellulitis,
abscesses, and myositis of the extraocular and masticatory
muscles. Inflammatory orbital disorders typically exhibit
marked pain on opening the mouth. The location of an
orbital mass can usually be determined by careful physical
examination, including determination of the direction of
malposition of the eye, retropulsion of the globe, palpation
of the orbit, and oral examination caudal to the last molar.
In addition to physical examination, cytology of regional
lymph nodes, orbital imaging (computed tomography,
magnetic resonance imaging, orbital ultrasound), thoracic
radiographs, and possibly abdominal ultrasonography
should be performed. In one study of cats with orbital
neoplasia, 59% had orbital bone lesions on skull radiographs and 15% had evidence of metastasis on thoracic
radiographs. CT or MRI offers far superior visualization
of the orbit and facilitates planning of either radiation
or surgical therapy (Figure 138.5).
Histologic characterization by FNA or needle core
biopsies (performed via the mouth or through the periocular skin), with ultrasound or CT guidance if necessary, is
essential for arriving at a definitive diagnosis. It is important to avoid the globe, major orbital blood vessels, and
optic nerve when collecting these samples. If less invasive
methods of obtaining specimens are nondiagnostic,
exploratory orbitotomy or exenteration may be required.
If the optic disc appears normal, electroretinography,
MRI, and cerebrospinal fluid taps may aid in distinguishing optic nerve neoplasia from sudden acquired retinal
degeneration syndrome and posterior optic neuritis.
Therapy
Primary orbital and optic nerve tumors that have not
disseminated elsewhere may be amenable to surgical

Figure 138.5 (a) Orbital mass in a dog with exophthalmos and
dorsal deviation of the left globe. (b) Sequential postcontrast
transverse CT images of the same dog. There is an aggressive soft
tissue orbital mass with lysis of the left palatine, lacrimal, frontal,
and zygomatic bones and extension into the nasal cavity (left) and
oral cavity (right). Source: Courtesy of University of Wisconsin‐
Madison Comparative Ophthalmology Service Collection.

excision. If bony involvement is not present, orbital
exenteration by widely dissecting around the mass (stripping periorbita if necessary) is usually preferred, as the
advanced stage of the tumor at the time of diagnosis typically makes it impossible to completely excise the mass
and preserve a functional or comfortable eye. If periorbital bones are involved, a radical orbitectomy, which
resects the affected orbital tissues and surrounding
bones, may be considered. When treating optic nerve
tumors, as much of the orbital optic nerve as possible should be removed in an attempt to obtain clear
margins.
If preservation of a comfortable eye and vision appears
possible, a variety of orbitotomy techniques have been
described, ranging from small incisions through the eyelid or mouth to reflection of the zygomatic arch, temporalis muscle elevation, and zygomatic process osteotomy.
Postoperative complications are common and may
include secondary enophthalmia with entropion, diplopia (double vision), facial nerve palsy, and severe orbital
hemorrhage. Surgical debulking can be palliative in some
patients, and some dogs may survive a year or more with
minimal therapy.

VetBooks.ir

138 Tumors of the Eye and Ocular Adnexa

The value of chemotherapy and radiation therapy
(RT), either alone or as an adjunct to surgery, is unclear,
although chemotherapy for orbital lymphoma may be
effective. Systemic corticosteroids may reduce perineuronal swelling and permit some patients with optic nerve
meningioma to maintain vision for several weeks to
months. RT may be helpful in the case of nasal tumors
with orbital extension, in subtotally excised or recurrent
tumors, and in other select cases.
The ocular side‐effects of conventional external beam
RT for nasal and periocular tumors can have a substantial
impact on an animal’s quality of life. Common complications include keratoconjunctivitis sicca, corneal
ulceration, enophthalmia, entropion, cataracts, retinal
hemorrhages, retinal detachments, and blindness.
Intensity‐modulated RT (IMRT), which uses c­onformal
avoidance, significantly decreases the ocular toxicity seen
in dogs treated by RT for sinonasal and orbital tumors.

Prognosis
The prognosis for most tumors involving the orbit and
optic nerve is poor with conservative treatment, especially
if there is bony involvement. Recurrence at the original site
and involvement of adjacent or distant sites are common,
often occurring within weeks to a few months. Even
benign‐appearing tumors such as lobular orbital adenomas and orbital meningiomas may be locally invasive and
tend to recur following wide excision.
Secondary Orbital Tumors
Most feline orbital tumors are epithelial in origin, with invasive SCC being the most common. Lymphoma is another
common secondary orbital tumor affecting both cats and
dogs. Orbital lymphoma should be considered part of a
­systemic process, and further diagnostics are warranted.

­Further Reading
Dubielzig RR, Ketring KL, McLellan GJ, Albert DM.
Veterinary Ocular Pathology: A Comparative Review.
New York: Elsevier, 2010.
Featherstone HJ, Renwick P, Heinrich CL, Manning S.
Efficacy of lamellar resection, cryotherapy, and
adjunctive grafting for the treatment of canine limbal
melanoma. Vet Ophthalmol 2009; 12(1): 65–72.
Lawrence JA, Forrest LJ, Turek MM, et al. Proof of
principle of ocular sparing in dogs with sinonasal

tumors treated with intensity‐modulated radiation
therapy. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2010; 51(5): 561–70.
Maggs DJ. Eyelids. In: Maggs D, Miller P, Ofri R, eds.
Slatter’s Fundamentals of Veterinary Ophthalmology, 5th
edn. St Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2013, pp. 110–39.
Miller PE, Dubielzig RR. Ocular tumors. In: Withrow S,
Vail D, Page R, eds. Withrow and MacEwen’s Small
Animal Clinical Oncology, 5th edn. St Louis, MO:
Elsevier, 2013, pp. 597–607.

1269

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1271

139
Cancer of the Heart
Nick A. Schroeder, DVM, DACVIM (Cardiology)1 and Lisa DiBernardi, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology),
DACVR (Radiation Oncology)2
1
2

LeadER Animal Specialty Hospital, Cooper City, FL, USA
Gulf Coast Veterinary Specialists, Houston, TX, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Cardiac neoplasia in small animals is usually associated
with pericardial effusion. Most of the time, rupture of a
cardiac tumor occurs which leads to hemopericardium
and cardiac tamponade. In dogs, the majority of cases
are secondary to malignant hemangiosarcoma. Cats
most commonly have cardiac lymphoma. Diagnosis is
frequently based on echocardiographic location of the
mass lesion, taking into account the age and breed of the
animal, and only rarely is histopathologic confirmation
achieved via surgical biopsy. Given the current rate
of change in treatment modalities, consultation with a
­veterinary oncologist is recommended.
Tumors of the heart typically arise from the myocar­
dium, the heart base or the pericardium and are com­
monly associated with pericardial effusion. Pericardial
effusion is a relatively common condition in the dog, much
less so in the cat. Normally, there are only a few milliliters
of fluid present in the pericardial space, which serves
to lubricate the epicardial surface. The pericardium is a
tough, fibrous membrane. The purpose of the pericar­
dium is to stabilize the position of the heart within the
thorax and provide some diastolic function. When signifi­
cant amounts of fluid accumulate within the pericardial
space, cardiac function may be compromised, and affected
animals may start to show clinical signs as described
below. The most common causes of pericardial effusion
are cardiac neoplasia and idiopathic ­pericardial effusion.
Malignant transformation of vascular endothelial cells
results in hemangiosarcoma (HSA). Cardiac HSA typi­
cally arises from the tissue of the right atrium (RA) and/
or right auricle (RAu), though other regions of the heart
may occasionally be affected. Spontaneous hemorrhage
causes hemopericardium.

Heart‐based tumors (HBTs) constitute approximately 5%
of cases of cardiac neoplasia in the dog and up to 3% in cats
and are commonly identified as incidental f­ indings. Most of
these are aortic body tumors (ABTs, chemodectoma or par­
aganglionoma). These tumors arise from chemoreceptor
cells sensitive to blood oxygen and carbon dioxide tension.
Most ABTs are locally invasive and up to 21% are malignant,
metastasizing to lung, liver, left atrium, pericardium or
kidneys. Approximately 5–10% of all heart‐based tumors
are ectopic thyroid c­arcinomas or parathyroid tumors.
These are rarely secretory or functional. Hemopericardium
may be present due to spontaneous hemorrhage from
the mass itself. Alternatively, a hydropericardium with a
modified transudate may develop secondary to obstruction
of lymphatic drainage of the pericardial sac.
The myocardium may be infiltrated with neoplastic
lymphocytes (LSA), occasionally causing pericardial effu­
sion, typically a modified transudate. Cardiac l­ymphoma
may be primary or multicentric.
Pericardial effusion may develop secondary to pericar­
dial mesothelioma. Pleural effusion may also occur in
affected animals with mesothelioma, often concomitant
with pericardial effusion.
Other miscellaneous and rarely reported cardiac
tumors include intrapericardial lipoma, rhabdomyosar­
coma, cardiac mxymoma, and other sarcomas.

­Epidemiology
The prevalence of cardiac neoplasia in the dog has
been cited at 0.19% and is less than 0.03% in cats.
Primary ­cardiac neoplasia constitutes 84% of cases,
with 16% ­
representing metastatic lesions (most
­commonly ­hemangiosarcoma and adenocarcinoma).

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1272

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Most of the information available is derived from small
case series and retrospective data.

­Signalment
Golden retrievers and German shepherds are predisposed
to cardiac HSA. Afghan hounds, English setters, American
cocker spaniels, Doberman pinschers, Labrador retriev­
ers and miniature poodles have been reported to be at
increased risk as well.
English bulldogs, Boxers, and Boston terriers are the
most common breeds diagnosed with HBTs. Brach­
ycephalic breeds are predisposed, but HBTs may develop
in other breeds.
Cats of all breeds may develop cardiac lymphoma.
Cardiac lymphoma is quite rare in the dog.

­History and Clinical Signs
Dogs that have acute cardiac tamponade from sudden
hemorrhage by RA/RAu HSA into the pericardial space
typically pant, may collapse or experience hemodynamic
shock. Cardiac tamponade occurs when the intraperi­
cardial pressure exceeds the diastolic right atrial and
ventricular pressures. This leads to collapse of the right
ventricular outflow tract, right atrium and right ventricle
(RV). Typically, the left atrial (LA) and left ventricular
(LV) pressure exceeds the intrapericardial pressure, pre­
venting collapse. Collapse of the right‐sided chambers
leads to impaired filling, decreased pulmonary blood
flow and decreased filling of the left atrium and ventricle.
Even a small amount of fluid, if it suddenly develops can
result in serious hemodynamic compromise, whereas
slow accumulation can lead to signs that are insidious in
onset. Chronic pericardial effusion leads to hepatic
venous congestion and functional right heart failure, and
may result in a large, pendulous abdomen from ascites as
well as dependent subcutaneous edema.
On physical examination, dogs classically have
decreased or muffled heart and ventral lung sounds as
well as weak pulses. Other potential findings include a
fluid wave on palpation of the abdomen, hepatomegaly
and pitting edema of the rear limbs. Beck’s triad of clini­
cal signs associated with cardiac tamponade is hypoten­
sion, distended jugular veins, and muffled heart sounds.
Attention should be paid to the quality of femoral pulses
as the pulses may noticeably get weaker with inspiration
and stronger with expiration. This phenomenon, due to
intrathoracic pressure changes and the subsequent
effects on the pulse pressure, is termed pulsus paradoxus
and is highly suggestive of pericardial effusion.

Many HBTs are discovered incidentally with no appar­
ent clinical signs. Patients that are symptomatic typically
have signs referable to pericardial effusion or outflow
obstruction to the right side of the heart, either of which
may result in ascites.
Patients with LSA may have weight loss or signs
­associated with pericardial effusion. Occasionally, the
patient may present with symptoms referable to conges­
tive heart failure. These include difficult or labored
­breathing, exercise intolerance, coughing, inappetence
or lethargy.
Most patients with mesothelioma have symptoms
associated with pericardial and/or pleural effusion. As a
result, many present with dyspnea or increased respira­
tory rate and effort. An abdominal component to the
­respiratory effort may be noted.
Rhabdomyosarcoma has been reported to be associ­
ated with right‐sided congestive heart failure (CHF)
but not pericardial effusion, and some patients may be
completely asymptomatic. Patients with intrapericardial
lipomas are typically asymptomatic.

­Diagnosis
Diagnosis of pericardial effusion can be made une­
quivocally with cardiac ultrasound (echocardiography).
Hemangiosarcoma is usually diagnosed via echocardiog­
raphy, revealing the presence of a mass lesion on the
RA/RAu or RV junction of mixed echogenicity with
irregular anechoic regions. Patients may be hypotensive.
Radiographs typically reveal a globoid cardiac silhouette
with pulmonary vascular underperfusion, but may be
deceivingly normal or only show mild cardiomegaly.
Electrocardiography (ECG) commonly reveals sinus
tachycardia. The QRS complex may be of lower ampli­
tude (low‐voltage QRS). These comprise the most com­
mon electrocardiographic abnormalities associated with
pericardial effusion. The R‐waves may vary in amplitude
from beat to beat, a phenomenon known as electrical
alternans. This occurs as a consequence of the heart
swinging back and forth in the fluid‐filled pericardium.
The angle of the vector of LV depolarization is varied due
to the positional changes, subsequently altering the
amplitude of the QRS complex. This generally happens
when the heart rate is between 90 and 140 bpm.
Ventricular premature complexes, accelerated idioven­
tricular rhythm, ventricular tachycardia, paroxysmal
atrial flutter or atrial fibrillation, atrioventricular block,
bundle branch blocks and other conduction system dis­
turbances may occasionally be encountered on ECG in
patients with cardiac neoplasia. The ECG may also be
completely normal. Often, physical examination is more
reliable than radiographs and ECG. Cardiac magnetic

VetBooks.ir

139 Cancer of the Heart

resonance imaging (MRI) has not been shown to improve
the diagnosis of cardiac neoplasia when compared to
conventional echocardiography.
Testing of the pericardial effusion tends to be of lim­
ited diagnostic utility. Cytology of hemorrhagic effusions
does not reliably differentiate between neoplastic and
nonneoplastic disease. Neoplastic effusions have been
associated with lower pH, bicarbonate and chloride lev­
els and higher lactate, hematocrit, and urea nitrogen as
compared with serum values. Serum cardiac troponin
I levels have been shown to be elevated in dogs with
­neoplastic pericardial effusions.
On necropsy, HSA appears as a red to black, blood‐filled
mass on the epicardium. Histopathologic confirmation is
rarely obtained antemortem but is marked by scattered,
elongated plump neoplastic endothelial cells. By the time
of diagnosis, most cases have associated metastasis and
in general HSA should be considered a systemic/dissemi­
nated disease. The clinician should always assume that
HSA is more advanced than what is evident based on
imaging modalities. Cardiac troponin I levels have not
been shown to be a reliable diagnostic screening tool.
Definitive diagnosis requires surgical biopsy.
Heart‐based tumors are most commonly diagnosed
via echocardiography. Typically, these are visualized as
masses of mixed or homogenous echogenicity immedi­
ately adjacent to the ascending aorta, aortic arch and
proximal branch pulmonary arteries. Thoracic radio­
graphs may show a ventral deviation of the caudal aspect
of the intrathoracic trachea, resulting in a “hook‐like”
appearance if a large HBT is present. Cytologic evalua­
tion of pericardial effusion when present is rarely
­diagnostic. Definitive diagnosis requires histopathologic
evaluation of surgically obtained biopsies, often taken
during palliative pericardectomy.
It is common for cats affected with LSA to have large
amounts of pericardial effusion, requiring pericardio­
centesis. The pericardial effusion should be submitted
for fluid analysis/cytology as lymphosarcoma may be
easily diagnosed. Most often, lymphosarcoma of the
heart ­produces infiltrative myocardial lesions. Echo­
cardiography may reveal irregular mottling and echo­
texture to the myocardium with focal areas of thickening,
and concentric left ventricular hypertrophy may mimic
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Grossly, white, pale
lesions arise from the myocardium.
Patients affected with pericardial mesothelioma may
reveal focal thickening and irregularity of the pericardial
sac on echocardiography. However, normal pericardial
adipose tissue may mimic infiltrative lesions. It is very
common to have associated pleural effusion, and the
presence of a modified transudate in the pleural and per­
icardial cavities for no obvious underlying reason should
alert the clinician to the possibility of mesothelioma.

Unfortunately, cytology of the effusion is rarely diagnos­
tic as nonneoplastic reactive mesothelial cells are diffi­
cult if not impossible to cytologically differentiate from
exfoliated neoplastic mesothelial cells. Pericardial and/
or pleural biopsies are typically required for confirma­
tion of diagnosis.
Pericardial lipomas may be diagnosed on thoracic
radiographs with the appearance of an adipose density
within the cardiac silhouette. Echocardiography gener­
ally reveals a homogenously echogenic mass within the
pericardial sac with variable degrees of compression of
the right heart chambers. Ultrasound‐guided fine needle
aspiration may be attempted, although definitive diagno­
sis generally requires surgical biopsy.
Cardiac myxomas, rhabdomyosarcomas and other
cardiac sarcomas require surgical biopsy for confirma­
tion of diagnosis.

­Therapy
Once hemodynamically important pericardial effusion is
confirmed, immediate pericardiocentesis is warranted.
Ideally, an intravenous (IV) catheter is placed and a
shock bolus of fluids is administered, but patients may
require immediate pericardiocentesis and a IV catheter
and fluids may need to follow.
Frequently, the fluid grossly resembles port wine
which appears similar to venous blood. The presence of
dark, hemorrhagic pericardial effusion is classically
seen with HSA, but its presence is not pathognomonic
for HSA or other cardiac neoplasia. Less commonly,
the fluid may be serosanguinous from CHF or neopla­
sia. Rarely, it may be grossly purulent from pericarditis.
Commonly, any residual fluid will leak into the pleural
cavity from the hole that has been created in the
­p ericardium. Complications associated with pericar­
diocentesis include puncture of a cardiac chamber,
­laceration of a cardiac tumor or coronary artery with
subsequent intrapericardial hemorrhage. Most com­
monly, transient arrhythmias may occur, though they
tend to be self‐­limiting and only rarely require antiar­
rhythmic therapy.
In select cases of cardiac HSA, surgical excision may
be attempted (RA appendectomy +/‐ inflow occlusion
via right thoracotomy or median sternotomy), but in
the majority of cases complete surgical excision is not
achieveable. Pericardectomy alone is not advised due to
the risk of exsanguination and dissemination of tumor
cells into the pleural cavity and has not been shown to
affect recurrence of clinical signs or survival. Various
chemotherapeutics (doxorubicin, dacarbazine, cyclophos­
phamide, vincristine) have been attempted with a posi­
tive trend in overall survival time and time to metastasis.

1273

VetBooks.ir

1274

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Metronomic chemotherapy, which is intended to prevent
tumor angiogenesis, is based on more frequent and
low‐dose drug administration lacking a rest period com­
pared with conventional chemotherapy. Metronomic
chemotherapy lends itself to minimal toxicity and is
often cost‐effective and convenient.
One small study evaluating canine splenic HSA com­
pared the use of low‐dose chemotherapy in combination
with piroxicam versus the standard of care chemother­
apy, doxorubicin. This study found no statistical differ­
ence in survival between the groups, leading to the
conclusion that low‐dose orally administered chemo­
therapy may be an effective alternative to conventional
chemotherapy. A group at Washington State University
used daily dosing of an alkylating agent, lomustine,
with or without nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) to evaluate the toxicity. The majority of the
81 dogs in this study had macroscopic tumor and/or
metastasis with osteosarcoma and visceral HSA most
prevalent. Thirty-six percent of dogs experienced stable
or improved disease. Although minimal, mild to moder­
ate adverse hematologic and gastrointestinal events
occurred and an unexpectedly higher number experi­
enced azotemia (13%). Currently, there are no placebo‐
controlled studies available for cardiac HSA. Tyrosine
kinase‐mediated proliferation inhibition has been
observed in cell lines of canine HSA when exposed to
dasitinib and imatinib alone and in conjunction with
doxorubicin. The use of tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy
alone or in combination with standard or metronomic
chemotherapy has yet to yield improved survival times in
the treatment of cardiac HSA.
Early surgical excision is the preferred method of treat­
ment for heart‐based tumors. However, in the majority
of cases complete surgical excision is not possible.
Palliative pericardiocentesis and partial pericardiectomy
are viable treatment options for patients with pericardial
effusion secondary to HBT. A retrospective study of 6
dogs treated with stereotactic body radiation therapy
(SBRT) for heart-base tumors confirmed or presumed to
be chemodectomas was performed at the North Carolina
State University Veterinary Hospital. Respiratory and
motion management was key to the accurate delivery of
a minimum of 30 Gray (Gy) delivered in three 10 Gy frac­
tions. Four tumors were assessed after SBRT; tumor vol­
ume decreased by 30-76%. Possible treatment-related
complications included cough, tachyarrhythmias, and
congestive heart failure. Two dogs experienced sudden
death 150 and 294 days after SBRT. Three dogs were
alive at the time of the report (408 and 751 days after
SBRT) and one dog died of unrelated disease 1,228 days
after SBRT. While this protocol offered rapid tumor
reduction, cardiac arrhythmias assumed to be tumor or
treatment related and sudden death commonly occurred

after SBRT. SBRT may be ideal for select patients and
likely not of benefit for dogs lacking cardiovascular
­disturbances and/or incidentally diagnosed. As the use
of SBRT evolves we will recognize appropriate candi­
dates, and better define the survival benefit. Standard
and metronomic chemotherapy alone or combined with
small molecule inhibitors may be attempted, especially if
metastasis is evident.
In patients affected by cardiac lymphoma with clini­
cally significant pericardial effusion, palliative pericardi­
ocentesis is required. Considered to be stage V, substage
B, cardiac lymphoma may be treated with CHOP‐based
chemotherapy protocols.
Mesothelioma patients may have a palliative pericard­
ectomy performed, but clinically significant pleural
­effusion typically develops, and pericardectomy has not
been shown to decrease the occurrence of clinical signs
or survival time. In patients affected with mesothelioma,
carcinomatosis or sarcomatosis (with or without malig­
nant effusion), short‐term benefit has been obtained
with intracavitary chemotherapy. Intracavitary carbopl­
atin and/or mitoxantrone yielded a 333‐day median sur­
vival time. Three dogs with pleural mesothelioma treated
with intracavitary cisplatin had complete resolution of
their effusions for 129, 289 and over 306 days. Resolution
of effusion occurred within one or two treatments for all
three dogs.
Intrapericardial lipomas may be addressed surgically if
clinically important right‐sided inflow obstruction of the
heart is documented.

­Prognosis
The prognosis for cardiac HSA is generally considered
to be grave. Median survival times (MST) with pallia­
tive pericardiocentesis alone have been reported at
11 days (range 0–208 days). A MST of 43 days was
achieved in eight dogs undergoing pericardiectomy
and surgical resection of a RA HSA. In eight dogs with
pericardiectomy and RAu masses, MST was 90 days.
This difference in MST may be explained by the smaller
size of auricular masses. In a separate report, 15 dogs
with pericardiectomy and RA mass resection experi­
enced a MST of 42 days. In eight postoperative patients,
the addition of doxorubicin‐based chemotherapy sig­
nificantly improved MST to 175 days. In nonsurgical
cases doxorubicin‐based protocols may offer MST of
120 days. Pericardiectomy may be performed by one
of two techniques: surgical (thoracotomy) or thoras­
copic‐assisted pericardiectomy. However, if mass
removal is intended, thoracotomy would be the
ideal approach based on the experience level of the
surgical team.

VetBooks.ir

139 Cancer of the Heart

Heart‐based tumors have a fair prognosis, but this is
highly dependent on the presence or absence of pericar­
dial effusion, secondary outflow obstruction, or other
cardiac function abnormalities. Patients having under­
gone palliative pericardectomy had a MST of 730 days
(42 days with palliative pericardiocentesis alone).
The prognosis for cardiac LSA is guarded, but variable
based on response and severity. Twelve dogs with car­
diac lymphoma were evaluated and dogs treated with
combination chemotherapy had a MST of 157 days com­
pared to a 22‐day MST in untreated dogs. Three of the
treated dogs survived >328 days. There is no evidence

that primary cardiac LSA should be treated differently
from other bulky aggressive lymphomas arising at other
anatomic sites.
Patients suffering from pericardial mesothelioma
­generally have a fair to guarded prognosis. Many patients
may survive months to years with palliative centesis +/corticosteroid administration alone.
A variety of primary and secondary cardiac tumors
have been reported in the veterinary literature. With
technologic advancement, we will gain a more detailed
picture and begin to unearth important factors regard­
ing biologic behavior, treatments and prognosis.

­Further Reading
Bonagura JD. Kirk’s Current Veterinary Therapy XIII
Small Animal Practice. St Louis, MO: Saunders, 2000,
pp. 772–7.
Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC. Textbook of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, 6th edn. St Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders,
2005, pp. 1104–18.
Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC. Textbook of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, 7th edn. St Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders,
2010, pp. 1344–52.

Kittleson MD, Kienle RD. Small Animal Cardiovascular
Medicine. St Louis, MO: Mosby, 1998, pp. 413–32.
Ware WA. Cardiovascular Disease in Small Animal
Medicine. London: Manson Publishing, 2007,
pp. 320–39.

1275

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1277

140
Cancer of the Airway and Lung
Joanne L. Intile, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)
College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA

­Cancer of the Airway
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Tumors of the larynx and trachea are rare in dogs and
cats. The most common primary tumors of the canine
larynx are carcinomas, with squamous cell carcinoma
occurring most frequently, followed by oncocytoma and
rhabdomyoma. Other reported laryngeal tumors
include mast cell tumor, extramedullary plasmacy­
toma, chondrosarcoma, osteosarcoma, melanoma,
lipoma, adenocarcinomas, fibrosarcoma, and papil­
loma. Metastatic tumors from a distant site are rarely
reported.
Feline primary laryngeal tumors include lymphoma,
squamous cell carcinoma, and adenocarcinomas. Lei­
omyoma, basal cell carcinoma, and polyps are also
reported.
Secondary invasion of the larynx can result from ingrowth
of primary thyroid tumors or regional lymphoma.
The most common tracheal tumors in dogs include
benign tracheal osteocartilaginous tumors, leiomyoma,
adenocarcinomas, mast cell tumor, and extramedullary
plasma cell tumor. In cats, adenocarcinomas, squamous
cell carcinoma, and other carcinomas are the most com­
monly reported.
Epidemiology
There are no known etiologic or epidemiologic factors
predisposing animals to developing laryngeal and tra­
cheal tumors.
Signalment
Other than a predilection for younger dogs to develop
oncocytomas, for older cats to develop malignant

laryngeal tumors, and a possible overrepresentation of
Siamese cats developing tracheal tumors, there is no
typical age, breed, or sex predilection for laryngeal and
tracheal tumors in dogs and cats. However, younger
animals with active osteochondral ossification sites are at
in­creased risk for developing benign tracheal osteocarti­
laginous tumors.
History and Clinical Signs
Patients with laryngeal tumors typically present with
signs directly related to the primary tumor, including
stridor, dyspnea, change in bark or voice, exercise intol­
erance, weakness, or dysphagia. Ptyalism may also be
noted.
Patients with tracheal tumors present with similar
symptoms as those with largyneal tumors, but are more
likely to cough.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of a laryngeal tumor is often made upon
direct visualization on awake or sedated oral exam. Oral
exam provides limited information regarding the exten­
siveness of the tumor, but the advantage is that tissue
biopsy samples can be obtained in a relatively noninva­
sive and economical manner.
Cervical radiographs are helpful in localizing tumors
of the distal portions of the larynx or trachea. Images
may show a discrete soft tissue mass within the lumen of
the trachea, and/or a calcified mass in cases of osteo­
chondromas/chondromas. Thoracic radiographs are
recommended to evaluate for the presence of metastatic
disease and also to assess for evidence of aspiration
pneumonia, which may occur secondary to laryngeal
dysfunction. Cervical ultrasound and tracheoscopy may be

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1278

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

helpful to determine the extent of tumors and can also
be used to obtain histopathologic samples. Computed
tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) provide three‐dimensional localization of the
tumor as well as its proximity to other vital structures
within the cervical region. This detailed imaging may
facilitate a diagnosis but is often required for treatment
planning.
Laryngeal/tracheal lymphoma should be considered
part of a systemic disease process, therefore warranting
complete staging as part of a diagnostic plan.
Therapy
There is limited information regarding the treatment
of laryngeal tumors in dogs and cats. In dogs, benign
tumors of the larynx such as a rhabdomyoma or cyst
can be removed surgically. Some cases require place­
ment of a temporary tracheostomy tube. Smaller benign
masses can be removed via a transoral approach or
through a ventral laryngotomy. Postoperative inflam­
mation and obstruction may necessitate temporary
tracheostomy. For larger and/or more invasive tumors,
a partial or complete laryngectomy with a permanent
tracheostomy can be considered. Permanent tracheos­
tomy, providing relief of upper airway obstruction, is a
form of treatment for humans but has limited use in
veterinary medicine.
Reported complications of complete laryngectomy
in dogs include stomal collapse, the formation of a
tracheoesophageal fistula, pharyngeal dehiscence,
and ablation of the parathyroid glands. Permanent
tracheostomy in cats carries a 67% complication rate
with 29% in‐hospital mortality. A temporary gastrostomy
tube should be considered for any patient undergoing
aggressive laryngotomy.
Radiation therapy is used for treating invasive or nonre­
sectable tumors and is effective for treating lymphomas
and plasma cell tumors. However, limited evidence‐
based information exists. Chemotherapy, with or with­
out surgery, may also be effective.
Tumors of the trachea should be treated with surgery,
which is curative for benign osteochondral tumors.
Experimental evidence indicates that up to 50% of the
length of the trachea can be removed with successful
closure. Tension on the site of anastomosis is the limiting
factor. Intraluminal stenting or bronchoscopic debulking
can be palliative measures for relieving obstruction. As
with laryngeal tumors, the efficacy of radiation and/or
chemotherapy for non-hematologic tumors remains
unproven but can be considered when surgery is not
feasible.

Prognosis
Benign tumors of the larynx and trachea have a good
prognosis when treated with surgical resection alone.
Long‐term survival is also expected with treatment of
extramedullary plasmacytomas and granular cell tumors.
Unfortunately, information is too limited to provide spe­
cific prognosis’ for dogs with other malignancies of the
airway.
Similar to dogs, little information is available regarding
the prognosis for cats. In one reported study, the median
survival time for 27 cats with a variety of laryngeal and
tracheal tumors was only five days, with only 7% of
patients alive 12 months after diagnosis.

­Cancer of the Lung
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Primary lung tumors are rare in dogs and cats c­ ompared
to humans. The most common primary lung tumor in
dogs is bronchoalveolar carcinoma, followed by adeno­
carcinoma, adenosquamous carcinoma, and s­ quamous
cell carcinoma. Other primary lung tumors include his­
tiocytic sarcoma, neuroendocrine tumors, and primary
pulmonary sarcomas. Benign primary lung tumors
include adenomas and fibromas. The most common pri­
mary lung tumor in cats is adenocarcinoma, followed by
bronchoalveolar carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma,
and adenosquamous carcinoma.
In both cats and dogs, primary lung tumors can spread
via hematogenous or lymphatic routes. This may occur
regionally, to intrathoracic lymph nodes, other lung
lobes, and the pleura, or distantly throughout the body.
More than three‐quarters of cats with pulmonary tumors
will develop metastasis. Local invasion of tumors within
the adjacent pulmonary parenchyma can occur.
In some cases, it is difficult to determine if a p
­ ulmonary
tumor represents a primary cancer versus a metastatic
lesion from a distant site. Immunohistochemical stains
can be helpful in such cases, as can complete and thor­
ough staging to evaluate for disease at distant sites.
Epidemiology
The relationship between environmental carcinogens
and the development of lung tumors in dogs has been
studied. One study showed that 75% of dogs with primary
lung tumors live in urban environments, but the results of
two other studies did not support this finding. The risk of
exposure to second‐hand smoke and development of lung
cancer in dogs has also been evaluated with conflicting

VetBooks.ir

140 Cancer of the Airway and Lung

results. The association in natural settings appears to be
weak, but the risk may be increased in brachycephalic dogs
compared to dolichocephalic dogs. It is hypothesized that
dolichocephalic dogs possess greater surface area for fil­
tration of inhalant carcinogens.
There are no known epidemiologic factors influencing
the development of primary pulmonary tumors in cats.
Signalment
The average age of dogs with primary lung tumors is
approximately 11 years (range 2–18 years). The risk of
developing lung cancer rises after the age of 13. Males
and females are equally susceptible. Tumors occur more
frequently in larger dogs, with 60% of cancers developing
in dogs weighing 20–30 kg. In cats, the average age at
diagnosis is 12–13 years (range 2–20 years) with most
cats being >5 years of age. No breed or sex predisposition
is consistently found in felines.
History and Clinical Signs
Between 52–93% of dogs with primary lung tumors
present with a chronic nonproductive cough. Other
­
signs include dyspnea, lethargy, weight loss, tachypnea,
pyrexia, inappetence, and lameness. Many dogs are diag­
nosed with primary lung tumors without any obvious
clinical signs during routine geriatric screening tests
(e.g., thoracic radiographs). Pleural effusion may occur
secondary to direct invasion of the tumor into the pleura
or regional pulmonary lymphatics. This may occur with
primary or metastatic tumors within the lung tissue.
Pneumothorax and hemoptysis may rarely occur.
Signs related to the respiratory system are detected in
one‐quarter to two‐thirds of cats with lung tumors.
Vomiting is reported in 20% of cats. Cats with lung
tumors are more likely to show nonspecific signs such as
lethargy, malaise, and inappetence compared with dogs.
Hypertrophic osteopathy is a known paraneoplastic syn­
drome associated with primary and metastatic lung tumors
in dogs and cats. Animals present with lameness of one or
more limbs. Radiographs will show periosteal proliferation
occurring perpendicular to the shaft of the long bones.
Hypertrophic osteopathy can resolve following removal
of a primary lung tumor. Other known paraneoplastic
effects in dogs include hypercalcemia, polyneuropathy,
polymyopathy, fever, and ectopic adrenocorticotropic
hormone production leading to hyperadrenocorticism.
Metastasis to the digits is a well‐described clinical con­
sequence of primary pulmonary tumors in cats and some
feline patients are initially diagnosed with bony lesions
within the phalanges prior to diagnosis of a pulmonary

tumor. Metastasis occurs more commonly to the weight‐
bearing digits. Multiple digits and multiple limbs are
commonly affected.
Diagnosis
Many dogs with primary and metastatic lung tumors are
diagnosed via thoracic radiography. Most dogs will show
a solitary pulmonary mass that is well circumscribed and
located in the caudodorsal lung lobes. Diffuse and
­alveolar infiltrative forms are also described. Radiographs
may also show regional l­ymphadenopathy or extension
of tumor into the surrounding pulmonary parenchyma.
Computed tomography is being more frequently uti­
lized for the diagnosis of pulmonary neoplasia in dogs
and cats and is ideal for surgical planning. Thoracic
CT scan is superior to thoracic radiography for the
detection of tracheobronchial lymph node metastases
and for detecting pulmonary metastases. The accuracy
rate for thoracic CT in detecting tracheobronchial
lymph node metastases was 93%, compared to 57% for
radiographs. In another study, thoracic radiographs
detected only 9% of CT‐detected pulmonary metastases.
Twenty one of 33 (64%) dogs had pulmonary nodules
or masses detected on CT. Of the dogs that had positive
CT findings, 17 of 21 (81%) had pulmonary nodules or
masses detected on radiographs by at least one inter­
preter. In another study using CT as the gold standard
diagnostic tool, the sensitivity of radiography for
detecting pulmonary metastases ranged from 71% to
95%, and specificity ranged from 67% to 92%. Radiography
had a positive predictive value of 83–94% and a nega­
tive predictive value of 65–89%. This increased accu­
racy of CT for detecting lesions is likely, in part, due to
its higher resolution for identifying smaller lesions
(e.g., thoracic CT can detect lesions of 1 mm in size)
compared to radiographs (can detect lesions only when
>7 mm in size). MRI of the thorax is not recommended
due to excessive motion artifact.
Pleural effusion is more common in cats, and is identi­
fied in approximately one‐third of patients. The diagnos­
tic utility of cytology of pleural effusion in providing a
diagnosis of pulmonary neoplasia is variable, but if effu­
sion is detected, it is recommended to submit a sample
for analysis as this is a relatively noninvasive technique
that can provide significant information.
Bronchoalveolar lavage can be considered and has
been found to be superior to transtracheal wash for diag­
nosing lung cancer in dogs.
Fine needle aspiration of lung tumors is safe, but there
is a theoretical risk of seeding tumor cells within the tho­
racic cavity during this procedure. Studies indicate fine

1279

VetBooks.ir

1280

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

needle aspirate cytology is diagnostically accurate in up
to 90% and 100% of dogs and cats with pulmonary
tumors, respectively. Ultrasound and/or CT‐guided aspi­
ration has been described, as well as techniques utilizing
thoracoscopic or keyhole lung biopsy methods.
Therapy
Surgery is the treatment of choice for solitary pulmonary
tumors in dogs and cats. For unilateral tumors, surgery can
be performed through either an intercostal thoracotomy or
median sternotomy approach. Thoracoscopic and keyhole
techniques have also been described. Complete lung lobec­
tomy is the preferred surgical approach, but techniques for
partial lung lobectomy are described. The use of automatic
stapling equipment allows for decreased surgical time with
minimal complications, but is more difficult in small
patients. It is important to note that biopsy of hilar lymph
nodes at the time of thoracic surgery should be performed
to complete staging.
Pneumonectomy is considered for lesions that have
extended to all lobes of one lung while the contralateral
side is unaffected. The resulting physiologic alterations
are much greater than performing a single lobectomy.
Dogs can survive a 50% decrease in lung volume, but not
75%. Therefore excision of all lung tissue on the left side
can be tolerated since it represents less than 50% of total
lung volume.
There is little information regarding the utility of
chemotherapy for treating primary lung tumors in dogs
and cats. In dogs, doxorubicin and mitoxantrone have
been shown to provide little to no response. Two of seven
dogs with measurable pulmonary tumors showed a par­
tial response to treatment with vinorelbine. Single‐agent
vinorelbine was also evaluated in the microscopic dis­
ease setting in three dogs, and survival time for those
patients was 112, 169, and >730 days.
Inhalational therapy has also been evaluated in dogs,
resulting in complete and partial responses for dogs with
metastatic tumors compared to stable to progressive dis­
ease for dogs with solitary ones.
Intracavitary chemotherapy with cisplatin, carbopl­
atin, or mitoxatrone, as well as sclerosing agents such
as talc, has been used to treat malignant effusions
in dogs.
In people with non-small cell lung cancer, treatment
benefits have been obtained using targeted therapy
with either monoclonal antibodies or tyrosine kinase
inhibitors directed against cell signaling pathways. The
role of such targeted therapy in veterinary patients is
unknown.

The role of radiation therapy, interventional radiology,
and regional chemotherapy remains relatively unexplored
for veterinary patients with pulmonary neoplasia.
Prognosis
Most information regarding prognosis for animals with
pulmonary tumors is derived from the behavior of epi­
thelial tumors.
The median survival time of 24 beagle dogs diagnosed
with pulmonary carcinomas treated with symptomatic
care alone was 10 months (range five days to 42 months).
The prognosis for dogs with pulmonary tumors treated
surgically is variable and depends on a number of fac­
tors, some of which can only be determined postop­
eratively (e.g., histologic grade and completeness of
excision). An older study reported a median survival
time of 13 months with lung lobectomy alone. For dogs
with incompletely excised tumors, median survival time
was only about 1–2 months compared to 11 months for
completely excised tumors.
Several specific prognostic factors have been identified
in dogs with pulmonary tumors (Table 140.1). Tumor stage
is prognostic: T1 (solitary tumor) = median survival time
of 26 months, T2 (multiple tumors) = median survival time
seven months, and T3 (invasive into surrounding tissue) =
median survival time of three months. The presence of
metastatic disease within intrathoracic lymph nodes is a
negative prognostic factor for dogs with primary lung
tumors (11–15 months if no metastatic disease present;
1–2 months if metastases are detected). The presence of
clinical signs at the time of tumor detection is also a nega­
tive prognostic factor: 18 months with no clinical signs
compared to eight months when clinical signs are present.
Tumor size and location are also prognostic. Dogs with
tumors <100 cm3 and those with peripherally located
tumors have longer survival times compared with dogs
with tumors >100cm3 or encompassing entire lung lobes.
Histologic grade is a prognostic factor for both dogs
and cats. The median survival time for dogs with well‐
differentiated, moderately differentiated, and poorly dif­
ferentiated tumors was 28 months, eight months, and
five days, respectively. The median survival time for cats
with well‐differentiated tumors treated surgically was 23
months, compared to 2.5 months for cats with poorly
differentiated tumors. Other prognostic indicators for
cats include the presence of clinical signs (median sur­
vival time of 4 days if present vs. 78 days if not), pleural
effusion (median survival time 2 days vs. 31 days), and
the presence of metastatic disease (median survival time
3 days vs. 60 days.)

VetBooks.ir

140 Cancer of the Airway and Lung

Table 140.1 Prognostic factors and associated median survival times for dogs with lung tumors
Median survival time
Prognostic marker for dogs with lung tumors

Present                  Absent

Lymph node metastasis

1 month

15 months

Microscopic disease following surgery

1 month

11 months

Metastases

<1 month

15 months

Clinical signs at diagnosis

8 months

18.1 months

Median survival time
Histologic grade
Grade 1

26.3 months

Grade 2

8.3 months

Grade 3

<1 month

Histologic type
Squamous cell carcinoma

8 months

Adenocarcinoma

19 months

Solitary tumor

26 months

Multifocal tumors

7 months

Tumors invading into surrounding tissue

3 months

­Further Reading
Ambrust LJ, Biller DS, Chun R, Garrett LD, Sanderson
MW. Comparison of three‐view thoracic radiography
and computed tomography for detection of pulmonary
nodules in dogs with neoplasia. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2012; 240(9): 1088–94.
Carlisle CH, Biery DN, Thrall DE. Tracheal and
laryngeal tumors in the dog and cat: literature review
and 13 additional patients. Vet Radiol 1991; 32(5):
229–35.
Hahn FF, Muggenburg BA, Griffith WC. Primary lung
neoplasia in a beagle colony. Vet Pathol 1996; 33(6):
633–8.

Hahn KA, McEntee MF. Primary lung tumors in cats: 86
cases (1979–1994). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 211(10):
1257–60.
Norris CR, Griffey SM, Samii VF, et al. Comparison of results of
thoracic radiography, cytologic evaluation of bronchoavleolar
lavage fluid, and histologic evaluation of lung specimens in
dogs with respiratory tract disease: 16 cases (1996–2000).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001; 218(9): 1456–61.
Poirier VJ, Burgess KE, Adams WM, et al. Toxicity,
dosage, and efficacy of vinorelbine (Navelbine) in dogs
with spontaneous neoplasia. J Vet Intern Med 2004;
18(4): 536–9.

1281

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1283

141
Cancer of the Esophagus and Stomach
Avenelle I. Turner, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)
Veterinary Cancer Group, Culver City, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Esophageal sarcomas have been reported secondary to
infection with Spirocerca lupi, an esophageal worm
found sporadically in the tropic warm temperate areas
and throughout the United States. There is no known
cause for the more commonly seen esophageal carcinomas. In cats, squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) are located
in the middle third of the esophagus, just caudal to the
thoracic inlet. These tumors are locally invasive and
metastasis to regional lymph nodes occurs early.
No definitive etiology has been identified in the development of gastric cancer but experimentally, long‐term
administration of nitrosamines may induce carcinomas
in dogs.

­Epidemiology
Cancer of the esophagus and stomach is rare and
accounts for less than 0.5% and 1% of all malignancies
respectively.
Esophageal tumors can be primary or metastatic.
Metastatic tumors are three times more common than
primary esophageal tumors and occur through local
invasion from the stomach, thymus, thyroid, and heart
base as well as from mammary adenocarcinoma and
lymphoma. In dogs, the most common primary esophageal tumors are SCC, osteosarcoma (OSA), fibrosarcoma
(FSA), and leiomyosarcoma. Sarcomas are seen more
commonly in areas where Spirocerca lupi is endemic.
In cats, the most common primary esophageal tumor is
SCC which is seen more commonly in females.
The most common gastric tumor in the dog is
­adenocarcinoma. Belgian shepherds, chow chows, rough‐
coated collies, and Staffordshire bull terriers appear predisposed to gastric adenocarcinoma, implying a genetic

component. The average age of patients affected with
carcinoma is 8 years with a 2.5:1 male‐to‐female ratio.
Other tumors affecting the stomach are lymphoma
(LSA), leiomyoma, leiomyosarcoma, gastrointestinal
stromal cell tumor (GISTs), extramedullary plasmacytoma (EPC), mast cell tumor (MCT), and carcinoid.
Leiomyomas occur in older dogs (mean age >15) as a
discrete, often pedunculated lesion in the cardia or
­
gastroesophageal junction. Recent studies utilizing
­
immunohistochemistry to detect CD117 (c‐kit protein),
a transmembrane receptor with a tyrosine kinase
­component, have shown up to 50% of leiomyomas and leiomyosarcomas are reclassified as GISTs. Leiomyosarcomas
do not express the c‐kit protein.
Lymphoma is the most common gastric tumor in cats
and males are more commonly affected. Gastric LSA is
covered in more detail in another section. Chronic
g­ astritis, Helicobacter, and common heritage have been
implicated in feline gastric cancer.

­Signalment
Most animals with esophageal cancer are older and no
breed predilection is evident. The average age for dogs
diagnosed with gastric carcinoma is 8 years. Males are
diagnosed 2.5 times more often than females. Cats with
gastric carcinoma are typically older with mean ages
reported between 10.6 and 12.6 years.

­History and Clinical Signs
Clinical signs associated with esophageal cancer are generally noted late in the course of disease. Symptoms occur
when the tumor is large and has caused an obstruction or
motility dysfunction. This can result in dysphagia and

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1284

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

regurgitation. Other symptoms include weight loss, anorexia, halitosis, pain, and aspiration pneumonia. In some
cases, respiratory signs may be the only symptom. The
paraneoplastic syndrome hypertrophic osteopathy has
been reported secondary to S. lupi‐induced sarcomas.
A history of progressive vomiting, often with digested
blood “coffee grounds” or tinged with fresh blood, is
common in cases of gastric cancer. Weight loss, anorexia,
and cachexia are often noted over a period of weeks to
months. Paraneoplastic hypoglycemia can be seen secondary to leiomyomas or leiomyosarcomas and is likely
due to the production of insulin‐like growth factors.
EPCs may be associated with hyperproteinemia, monoclonal gammopathy, and hypercalcemia. On occasion,
occult blood or melena can be documented in the feces.

­Diagnosis
Staging for tumors of the esophagus should include thoracic radiographs (three‐view), minimum database
(complete blood count [CBC], serum biochemistry profile, and urinalysis) and an abdominal ultrasound to rule
out a possible primary tumor when the esophageal tumor
is suspected to be metastatic.
Thoracic radiographs of the cervical region and thorax
may be helpful in localization of esophageal tumors and/
or secondary aspiration pneumonia. Esophageal tumors
appear as a homogeneous mass in the region of the
esophagus, with gas retention and dilation proximal to
the lesion. Some esophageal tumors may appear calcified. Positive contrast esophagrams with barium will
usually demonstrate the lesion with or without fluoroscopy. Lesions appear as a rounded or lobulated, smoothly
elevated filling defect.
When available, esophagoscopy is definitive because it
can locate the lesion and obtain diagnostic tissue samples for histopathology. Esophageal tumors are typically
submucosal over which the mucosa is usually freely movable. Narrowing of the lumen is common, while stenosis
and obstruction are rare. Computed tomography (CT) or
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be helpful in
determining extent of involvement, location, and invasiveness. Leiomyoma can be presumptively diagnosed
based on endoscopic examination and CT results that
indicate a well‐defined, round‐to‐ovoid encapsulated
mass, with no ulceration of the overlying mucosa or evidence of local invasion. Endoscopic biopsies are contraindicated with leiomyomas, as they increase the risk
of complications and mucosal perforation during surgery. Endoscopic fine needle aspiration is effective for
obtaining a tentative diagnosis and does not affect surgical outcome. EPCs have a predilection for the terminal
esophagus and cardia. A thoracotomy or cervical exploration can be performed to obtain a biopsy.

Staging for gastric tumors includes abdominal ultrasound, thoracic radiographs (three‐view) and minimum
database. Abdominal radiographs rarely reveal gastric
tumors. Anemia is the most common laboratory abnormality. Paraneoplastic hypoglycemia can be seen with
leiomyomas or leiomyosarcomas. Sporadically, elevated liver enzymes and elevated gastrin levels can be
documented.
Grossly, there are three variations of gastric carcinoma
that have been identified. Diffuse neoplastic infiltration
of the gastric wall can produce a thickened, nondistensible stomach known as “leather bottle stomach.” Gastric
adenocarcinoma may also manifest as a discrete,
­polypoid lesion or as mucosal plaques with ulceration.
Histopathologically, gastric adenocarcinomas may be
classified as a diffuse type with randomly arranged,
malignant epithelial cells or an intestinal type with
neoplastic cells that are well organized into distinct,
­
glandular structures. The clinical significance of these
histopathologic types is not currently known.
Ultrasonography is a useful imaging modality.
Carcinomas tend to be sessile and occur most commonly
on the lesser curvature and gastric antrum. Benign
lesions are pedunculated or well circumscribed and
often occur at the cardia. Sometimes, it is easier to find
gastric lymphadenopathy secondary to metastasis than
the primary gastric lesion. An ultrasound‐guided fine
needle aspirate or Tru‐Cut biopsy can be utilized to
obtain a diagnostic sample.
Gastroscopy with a flexible endoscope is the most
­sensitive and specific noninvasive way to identify and
localize lesions and obtain biopsies. When obtaining
biopsies, multiple samples should be taken from multiple
sites because the majority of gastric tumors have significant necrosis, ulceration and inflammation, making
­histopathologic examination difficult.
Barium contrast gastrograms can often document
infiltrative disease of the gastric wall, but these contrast
studies are cumbersome and take a relatively long time
to perform. Poor motility, delayed gastric emptying time
and/or prolonged adherence of contrast material to
ulcerated tissue are common findings. It should be noted
that it could take over 24 hours for barium to completely
leave the stomach, which would delay the ability to perform gastroscopy.
Open surgical biopsy is the most definitive method of
diagnosis. Leiomyoma/leiomyosarcmas should be stained
with CD117 (c‐kit) to differentiate GISTs.

­Therapy
There are limited therapeutic options for esophageal cancer. Intrathoracic access is challenging and surgery usually results in tension on the anastomosis site and

VetBooks.ir

141 Cancer of the Esophagus and Stomach

postoperative complications. Esophageal surgery is prone
to serious complications, including stricture, dehiscence,
infection, regurgitation, esophagitis, and f­istula formation. This has been attributed to many f­ actors, including
esophageal movement during swallowing, high wound
tension, lack of a serosal layer and the presence of a segmental blood supply to the esophagus. After esophageal
surgery, use of a gastrostomy tube is recommended to
decrease the amount of motion occurring at the surgical
site and facilitate mucosal healing. En bloc resection is
associated with the best prognosis but submucosal resection to debulk the mass without a full resection and anastomosis can be an acceptable treatment with successful
outcomes for leiomyomas/low‐grade leiomyosarcomas.
Short‐term palliation can be achieved with placement of
a gastric or percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube.
In people, palliation is commonly achieved by the placement of an endoluminal stent. An interventional technique to perform this procedure in veterinary patients is
potentially possible.
Radiation therapy is of limited use due to the tissue
tolerance of the surrounding structures. In humans,
­
radiation therapy alone is used as a palliative treatment
for esophageal tumors or following surgery. Results
­following radiation therapy alone are short‐lived and
universally poor unless done in combination with
s­ urgery and chemotherapy.
Complete surgical excision is the treatment of choice
for gastric adenocarcinomas but is typically complicated
due to advanced disease, predilection for the lesser curvature, antrum and pylorus, extensive gastric involvement and/or metastasis to regional lymph nodes and
liver. Surgical approaches such as a Billroth I (partial gastrectomy and gastroduodenostomy) or Billroth II (partial
gastrectomy and gastrojejunostomy) can provide immediate relief of gastric outflow obstruction and clinical
improvement in the early postoperative period. Careful
staging prior to pursuing surgery is recommended to
insure the morbidity associated with the procedure can
be justified.
The beneficial effects of chemotherapy alone or in the
adjuvant setting for gastric adenocarcinoma are largely
unknown. Reported chemotherapy protocols utilizing
5‐fluorouracil, 5‐fluorouracil and cyclophosphamide,
5‐fluorouracil, doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide (FAC
protocol) or cis‐platinum appeared to provide some clinical benefit in a few cases. Comparatively, 80% of people

with metastatic or nonresectable GISTs had a favorable
response with the use of imatinib (Gleevec®), a selective
tyrosine kinase inhibitor. This resulted in stabilization or
resolution of disease for a median of 20 months. Two
tyrosine kinase inhibitors are currently approved for use
in veterinary medicine (Palladia™, Pfizer, and Kinavet‐
CA1®, AB Science) and may also prove to be effective
against GISTs in dogs.

­Prognosis
The prognosis for esophageal cancer is very poor. These
cancers are usually not diagnosed until they are advanced,
by which time they are typically difficult or impossible to
resect and often are metastatic. Photodynamic therapy
has been attempted, but with modest results. The median
survival for dogs with esophageal sarcoma following surgery and doxorubicin chemotherapy was 267 days.
Interestingly, in many cases, the cause of death was secondary to aspiration pneumonia due to abnormalities in
esophageal motility.
The prognosis for gastric adenocarcinoma is poor following the onset of clinical signs. Without treatment,
animals usually succumb to their disease within 1–3
months. Surgery affords the best chance for improving
the long‐term prognosis. Animals that survive the perioperative period have reported median survival times of
4–6 months but a small number of long‐term survivals of
greater than 36 months have been reported. Most
patients eventually succumb due to recurrent or metastatic disease. Leiomyosarcomas and GISTs have a
slightly better prognosis with reported median survival
times of 6–12 months. Surgery can be curative for benign
lesions that are completely resected. EPCs have an
excellent prognosis with surgery and chemotherapy.
­
Information on long‐term follow‐up is lacking in the literature, but a dog treated with surgery and doxorubicin
chemotherapy was alive and asymptomatic 30 months
post diagnosis. Less than 10% of cases of gastric MCT,
regardless of treatment(s) utilized, lived beyond six
months. Occasionally, there are cases of gastric MCT
that appear to do significantly better than this, suggesting there may be a less aggressive variant of this disease.
This supports the palliative use of systemic chemotherapy in patients with minimal clinical symptoms and a
reasonable quality of life.

­Further Reading
Gillespie V, Baer K, Farrelly J, Craft D, Luong R.
Canine gastrointestinal stromal tumors:
immunohistochemical expression of CD34 and

examination of prognostic indicators including
proliferation markers Ki67 and AgNOR. Vet Pathol
2011; 48(1): 283–91.

1285

VetBooks.ir

1286

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Rissetto K, Villamil AJ, Selting KA., Tyler J, Henry CJ.
Recent trends in feline intestinal neoplasia: an
epidemiologic study of 1,129 cases in the veterinary
medical database from 1964 to 2004. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 2010; 47(1): 28–36.
Russell KN, Mehler SJ, Skorupski KA, Baez JL, Shofer FS,
Goldschmidt MH. Clinical and immunohistochemical

differentiation of gastrointestinal stromal tumors
from leiomyosarcomas in dogs: 42 cases (1990–2003).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007; 230(9): 1329–33.
Willard MD. Alimentary neoplasia in geriatric dogs
and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2012; 4(4): 693–706.

VetBooks.ir

1287

142
Cancer of the Small and Large Intestine
Edwin Brodsky, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)
Veterinary Medical Center of Long Island, West Islip, NY, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
The majority of canine intestinal lymphomas are primary in nature, although extension from multicentric
lymphoma can occur. Most intestinal lymphomas in
dogs are multifocal or diffuse throughout the intestinal
tract with lesions located in the mucosa, submucosa, and
lamina propria. The majority of intestinal lymphomas
in dogs have been found to be of T cell origin on
immunohistochemistry
Small intestinal adenocarcinoma is uncommon in dogs
and the small intestine in general is an uncommon site
for cancer in dogs and people. Some possible explanations for this include rapid transit times through the
small intestine decreasing exposure to carcinogens, large
volume of mucosal secretions diluting out carcinogens,
a microbial population incapable of activating carcinogens, and microsomal enzymes in the small intestine that
may detoxify some carcinogens.
Forty seven percent of intestinal adenocarcinomas
expres COX‐2 in the neoplastic epithelium. The presence of the COX‐2 enzyme has been found to c­ ontribute
to tumorigenesis in rodent models and is a potential target for nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
Leiomyosarcoma is a slow‐growing, locally invasive,
malignant tumor originating from smooth muscle and is
generally slow to metastasize. A recent study reclassified
some dogs previously diagnosed with intestinal leiomyosarcomas as gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs)
based on the expression of the tyrosine kinase growth
factor receptor, KIT. It is thought that activating mutations in c‐kit are involved in the pathogenesis of these
tumors. Differentiating between a leiomyosarcoma and a
GIST may have implications for both biologic behavior
and treatment of the neoplasia.
Both adenocarcinoma and leiomyosarcoma of the
small intestine have the potential to metastasize (43.5%

and 16–50%, respectively). The most common site of
metastasis for an adenocarcinoma is the regional lymph
node and the most common site for a leiomyosarcoma is
the liver or the mesentery. Russell et al. reported a metastatic rate of 7% for canine GISTs based on immunohistochemical staining for CD117.
Feline intestinal lymphoma is generally not associated
with feline leukemia virus (FeLV) infection. An increased
incidence of feline lymphoma, specifically nasal and
intestinal, was found in cats exposed to environmental
tobacco smoke. Another possible cause of intestinal
­lymphoma is chronic inflammation, as there has been an
association between low‐grade or small cell intestinal
lymphoma and inflammatory bowel disease. It is thought
that intestinal lymphoma derives from the mucosa‐­
associated lymphoid tissue (MALT). However, the tumor
can progress and invade the submucosa and muscularis
layers of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Lesions can be
solitary, multifocal or diffuse throughout the intestinal
tract. Involvement of mesenteric lymph nodes is common and dissemination to other organs such as the liver,
spleen, kidneys, mediastinal lymph nodes or bone marrow can occur as the disease progresses. Intestinal lymphoma may either be small cell/lymphocytic (low-grade)
or large cell/lymphoblastic (high-grade). Reports are
mixed regarding the prevalence of low‐ versus high‐
grade alimentary lymphoma in cats. Earlier reports
­indicate that high‐grade lymphomas were more common, but more recent reports indicate the low‐grade
lymphomas are more prevalent.
Feline small intestinal adenocarcinoma usually affects
the jejunum and ileum. Approximately 50% of cats
with intestinal adenocarcinoma experience metastasis.
The most common sites of metastasis include the
­ esentery,
regional lymph nodes, peritoneum, omentum, m
liver, and lungs. Ascites may be present secondary to
carcinomatosis.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1288

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

The intestinal lesion with feline intestinal mast cell
tumor can be diffuse, solitary or multifocal. The neoplasia may be either intraluminal or intramural. The small
intestine is the most common location for feline intestinal mast cell tumor but colonic involvement can occur.
Widespread metastasis is common at the time of diagnosis. One study found that 64% of cats with intestinal mast
cell tumor had multiorgan involvement. The most common sites of metastasis include lymph nodes, liver,
spleen, and rarely lung. Intestinal mast cell tumors can be
difficult to diagnose because their cytoplasmic granules
may not stain. This may be due to their anaplastic nature
or degranulation. It has been suggested that mucosal
mast cells are different from mesenchymal mast cells and
require special fixation to enhance the metachromasia.
Diff‐Quik staining of feline mast cell tumors sometimes
fails to reveal cytoplasmic granules. Circulating mast
cells are uncommon with intestinal mast cell tumors,
although peripheral eosinophilia has been reported.
Adenomatous polyps and carcinoma in situ are usually
solitary. However, multiple and diffuse varieties have
been identified. Furthermore, malignant transformation
to invasive carcinoma has been reported.
Canine colorectal adenocarcinoma generally can be
grouped into three categories based on its gross appearance: pedunculated, cobblestone, and annular. When
metastasis does occur with colorectal adenocarcinoma,
it usually travels via lymphatics to the local lymph nodes
and may sometimes seed the peritoneum, leading to carcinomatosis. The metastatic rate for colorectal adenocarcinoma ranges from 0% to 80%. Malignant transformation
from in situ tumors has been reported in 17–50% of dogs.
Approximately 75% of cats with colonic adenocarcinoma have metastasis. Half have distant metastasis and
half are local. Metastatic sites included the colonic lymph
nodes, mesenteric lymph nodes, liver, omentum, and
lungs. Carcinomatosis may also occur.

pacemaker cells of the intestinal tract and regulate peristalsis. Tumors derived from these cells are called gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs). GISTs can be
distinguished from leiomyosarcomas based on the
expression of c‐kit (CD117). In one recent study, two‐
thirds of dogs diagnosed with intestinal leiomyosarcomas were reclassified as GISTs based on positive staining
for CD117. In this study, GISTs were most common in
the cecum and large intestine (64%) as compared to the
stomach and small intestine (36%). In oposition to
GISTs,leiomyosarcomas appear to develop more commonly in the stomach and small intestine (90%) and are
less common in the large intestine (10%).
It is reported that up to 60% of all intestinal tumors in
dogs are located in the colon and rectum. Dogs are typically middle‐aged to older with males reported to be
affected more frequently than females. Unlike in the
small intestine, adenomatous polyps and carcinoma in
situ are commonly identified in the large intestine.
Malignant tumors, such as those that develop in the
small intestine also occur.
Lymphoma is the most common intestinal neoplasia in
cats. It is the most common anatomic form of lymphoma
in cats since the advent of FeLV vaccine as well as routine
FeLV testing and separation of FeLV‐positive cats.
Anatomic forms of feline lymphoma ­generally associated
with FeLV infection, such as the mediastinal and nodal
forms, are becoming less prevalent. Adenocarcinoma is
the ­second most common small intestinal tumor in cats.
Siamese may be overrepresented. Intestinal mast cell
tumor is the third most common intestinal tumor in cats.
Colonic adenocarcinoma (along with lymphoma) is one
of the two most common neoplasias that develop in the
feline large intestine.
Other less common intestinal tumors include
extramedullary plasmacytoma, extraskeletal osteosarcoma, and hemangiosarcoma.

­Epidemiology

­Signalment

Small intestinal tumors are in general, uncommon in
dogs. According to most reports, lymphoma is the most
common specific type. The intestinal tract is the most
common extranodal site for this malignancy, affecting
5–7% of all dogs diagnosed. Intestinal adenocarcinoma
and leiomyosarcoma are the two most common nonlymphomatous small intestinal tumors in dogs. In particular,
leiomyosarcoma is the most frequently diagnosed intestinal sarcoma and it commonly involves the jejunum and
cecum.
Recently, it was found that tumors previously categorized as leiomyosarcomas were in fact derived from the
interstitial cells of Cajal. Interstitial cells of Cajal are the

The median age for dogs with all types of lymphoma,
including intestinal, is 6–9 years. Small i­ntestinal neoplasia should be considered a differential diagnosis in a
middle‐aged to older dog with signs ­
consistent with
intestinal obstruction. The median age of onset for
canine intestinal leiomyosarcoma/GIST is 10.5 years.
They are reportedly more common in female dogs. Dogs
with colorectal polyps have a mean age of 7–8 years.
Colorectal adenocarcinoma most commonly affects
older male dogs. Feline intestinal lymphoma is more
common in older cats with a median of age of 10–12
years. Domestic short‐hairs are more commonly
affected. The average age of cats with small intestinal

VetBooks.ir

142 Cancer of the Small and Large Intestine

adenocarcinoma is 10–11 years. Siamese may be overrepresented. Feline intestinal mast cell tumors tend to
affect older cats with a mean age of 13 years. Feline
colonic adenocarcinoma generally affects older cats with
no discernible sex or breed predilection.

­History and Clinical Signs
Clinical signs for most small intestinal neoplasias in dogs
and cats are similar and include one or more of the
following: anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, weight loss,
­
melena, and lethargy. Signs may be subacute, acute or
chronic in nature, depending on the underlying disease
process. A patient may present with acute vomiting, anorexia, and abdominal discomfort secondary to a gastric
or small intestinal obstructive lesion or with a history of
chronic weight loss, decreased appetite and intermittent
vomiting over the course of months if a low‐grade intestinal lymphoma is the underlying problem. Therefore,
the chronicity of signs should not dissuade the clinician
from keeping neoplasia on the differential list for many
common GI presentations. Some patients may present in
shock if a GI perforation occurs secondary to underlying
intestinal neoplasia. Dogs with intestinal leiomyosarcomas may present with signs secondary to paraneoplastic
hypoglycemia, such as weakness, ataxia, and seizures.
Some patients with intestinal tumors may present with
signs referable to anemia such as weakness and lethargy
secondary to gastrointestinal bleeding.

­Diagnosis
A complete blood count, biochemistry profile, and urinalysis are recommended as part of a minimum database
but are not helpful in establishing a definitive diagnosis.
Anemia can be seen in up to ~64% of dogs with intestinal
neoplasia and is associated with intestinal hemorrhage
or anemia of chronic disease.
The chemistry panel can reveal a paraneoplastic
­hypoglycemia in dogs with intestinal leiomyosarcoma.
When a dog presents primarily for signs secondary to
hypoglycemia, rather than gastrointestinal signs, a serum
sample should be held for simultaneous blood glucose
and blood insulin levels to rule out inappropriate insulin
secretion secondary to an insulinoma (beta‐cell tumor of
the pancreas). Hypoproteinemia is a common laboratory
finding secondary to malabsorption or intestinal loss
in dogs and cats with diffuse intestinal lymphoma.
Cobalamin and folate should be assessed to ­evaluate for
malabsorption and small intestinal bacterial overgrowth.
Animals with intestinal extramedullary plasmacytomas
should be thoroughly staged for systemic disease with

serum electrophoresis, bone marrow aspiration/evaluation, abdominal ultrasound, and survey skeletal radiographs. In cats with intestinal lymphoma or intestinal
carcinoma, an abdominal mass can be palpated in over
50% of cases. Abdominal radiographs may show an
obstructive pattern or abdominal mass. Three‐view thoracic radiographs should be performed but are usually
negative for metastasis at the time of diagnosis.
The imaging test that will give the clinician the most
useful information is abdominal ultrasound which provides information regarding size and location of the mass
as well as evidence of metastatic spread. It also provides a
means to achieve a diagnosis through less invasive procedures such as ultrasound‐guided aspiration and ultrasound‐guided biopsy. Ultrasound‐guided aspirates and
biopsies both can result in a false negative if a cystic,
necrotic or inflammatory area of the tumor is sampled.
As with any neoplasia, biopsy and histopathology is
the preferred method of diagnosis. Occasional misdiagnosis of neoplasia can occur with aspiration/cytology,
where a tumor may be aspirated and the cytology is consistent with one type of neoplasia (i.e., carcinoma) but
when a biopsy and histopathology are performed, the
diagnosis changes to another tumor type (i.e., lymphoma). This can occur when the aspiration contains
cells which are not representative of the underlying
lesion, the tissue sampled does not exfoliate well or in
order to make a correct diagnosis of neoplasia the evaluation of the tissue architecture is needed, not just evaluation of the cell type. Endoscopy and colonoscopy may
be helpful in diagnosing proximal small intestinal lesions
and colorectal lesions respectively. However, endoscopic
biopsy may underdiagnose intestinal lymphoma in dogs
and cats. Ultimately, abdominal exploratory surgery with
either incisional or excisional biopsy and histopathology
may be necessary to obtain a definitive diagnosis.
Immunohistochemistry for the expression of c‐kit
(CD117) is recommended in dogs with intestinal sarcomas to differentiate between GISTs (CD117 positive)
and leiomyosarcoma (CD117 negative). The differentiation between GISTs and leiomyosarcomas can have both
prognostic and therapeutic implications.
Routine immunohistochemistry has identified that T
cell is the most common immunophenotype of intestinal lymphoma in dogs. Feline intestinal lymphoma can
be either T cell or B cell in origin.

­Therapy
Surgical excision via intestinal resection and anastomosis, with or without adjuvant chemotherapy, is the
­primary treatment for most animals with intestinal neoplasia. Intestinal lymphoma is the one notable exception,

1289

VetBooks.ir

1290

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

where chemotherapy is the primary treatment recommendation. Surgery is only recommended in patients
with intestinal lymphoma when there is evidence of
intestinal perforation or obstruction. It is recommended
that 5–6 cm of normal intestine on either side of the
tumor be excised. For animals with colonic tumors, subtotal colectomy may be necessary. One study found that
cats that had subtotal colectomy for colonic adenocarcinoma had improved survival times over cats that had just
mass resection or mass biopsy. The authors of the study
do not suggest that every cat with a colonic mass should
receive subtotal colectomy but wide surgical margins are
recommended. Biopsy of the local lymph nodes, liver,
and any other abnormal‐appearing abdominal organ is
recommended to assess for metastasis. For dogs and cats
with rectal tumors, a transanal pull‐through procedure
has been found to be effective. A combined abdominal‐
transanal approach may be necessary for tumors located
at the cranial extent of the rectum extending to the
descending colon.
The benefit of postoperative chemotherapy is unknown
for dogs with small intestinal adenocarcinoma. However,
due to the moderate to high metastatic rate, the inclusion of adjuvant chemotherapy with doxorubicin‐based
protocols would be l­ogical. Approximately 50% of intestinal adenocarcinomas in dogs expres COX‐2. The products of the COX‐2 enzyme have been associated with
protumorigenic effects such as angiogenesis, cell proliferation, and inhibition of apoptosis. Therefore, the
author recommends including NSAIDs in the treatment
protocol for dogs with intestinal adenocarcinomas as
they have antineoplastic activity that may help improve
response and survival. The metastatic rate of small
intestinal carcinoma in cats is also high. Postoperative
chemotherapy is recommended to help control metastasis and to prolong survival. A study evaluating cats with
large intestinal carcinoma did show a survival advantage
for those that received doxorubicin chemotherapy postoperatively. Whether this chemotherapy protocol is beneficial in cats with small intestinal carcinoma has yet to
be determined but it is a logical choice for postoperative
therapy.
As with small intestinal adenocarcinoma, the use of
postoperative chemotherapy in dogs with small intestinal leiomyosarcoma has yet to be investigated in a randomized clinical trial. However, based on the moderate to
high metastatic rate (16–50%), chemotherapy should be
included in the treatment protocol. Surgical removal
alone results in prolonged survival times (over three
years) for dogs with GISTs. However, for those few cases
in which GISTs are nonresectable or metastatic, adjuvant treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors may be
useful. In humans with nonresectable or metastatic
GISTs, treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors has

been shown to result in longer survival times compared
to other treatments. Therefore, the use of tyrosine kinase
inhibitors in dogs with nonresectable, recurrent or metastatic GISTs is reasonable as GISTs in both species
express KIT/CD117. Activating mutations have been
found involving c‐kit in both dogs and humans and are
thought to be the driving force for GIST development.
There are two oral tyrosine kinase inhibitors in veterinary medicine, toceranib phosphate (Palladia™) and
masitinib mesylate (Masi). Only Palladia, is approved for
use in dogs with mast cell tumors in the USA. Regardless,
both inhibit KIT but their use in dogs with GISTs has yet
to be investigated.
Chemotherapy is the primary treatment for intestinal
lymphoma in dogs due to the multifocal or diffuse nature
of the disease. Although CHOP (cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone)‐based protocols
are considered the standard of care for dogs with multicentric lymphoma, due to the poor response of dogs
with intestinal lymphoma other alkylating agent‐based
protocols, including MOPP (mechlorethamine HCL,
vincristine sulfate, procarbazine, prednisone), lomustine
or DTIC/lomustine, may provide improved survival
times.
In cats with intestinal lymphoma, the treatment protocol varies depending on whether they have low‐grade
versus intermediate to high‐grade lymphoma. The treatment of low‐grade lymphoma consists of the administration of prednisolone and chlorambucil. One study
evaluating cats with low‐grade intestinal lymphoma
found that 78% were cobalamin (vitamin B12) deficient,
thus requiring cobalamin supplementation. Cobalamin
is absorbed exclusively in the ileum, complexed with
intrinsic factor. Low cobalamin is associated with metabolic derangements and low concentrations of several
amino acids. Intermediate to high‐grade lymphomarequires more aggressive therapy. The best response,
remission duration, and survival time is generally
achieved with CHOP‐based chemotherapy protocols.
Eventually, most cats relapse and/or develop resistant
disease. If relapsing after completing their initial CHOP
chemotherapy ­protocol, it can be restarted. The second
remission is generally about half the duration of the first.
Once they fail CHOP, rescue chemotherapy can be
attempted. The most successful rescue chemotherapy
protocols include MOPP and lomustine.
If a solitary mass is present and there is no evidence of
metastatic disease, surgical removal can be attempted in
cats with intestinal mast cell tumors. Due to the high rate
of disseminated disease with intestinal mast cell tumors,
postoperative chemotherapy is recommended based on
the likelihood of residual micrometastasis. If the intestinal mast cell tumor is not resectable or metastatic disease is present at the time of diagnosis, chemotherapy

VetBooks.ir

142 Cancer of the Small and Large Intestine

can be attempted. A study evaluating lomustine for cats
with a variety of mast cell tumors (cutaneous, splenic,
intestinal) found that two cats with intestinal mast cell
tumors responded. Whether lomustine would be effective in a large population of cats with intestinal mast cell
tumors is unknown. Other chemotherapy agents used in
dogs with mast cell tumors include vinblastine, cyclophosphamide, hydroxyurea, and prednisone. Their effectiveness in cats with mast cell tumors is unknown.
Many cat mast cell tumors have mutations in the gene
c‐kit leading to constitutive activation of the tyrosine
kinase growth factor receptor KIT. Activating mutations
of c‐kit have been implicated in mast cell tumor development and progression in dogs. Small molecule targeted
therapies (toceranib phosphate and masitinib meslyate)
have been approved for use in dogs with mast cell tumors.
As mentioned previously only toceranib phosphate is
approved for use in the USA. These targeted therapies
inhibit the activation of the abnormal growth factor
receptor KIT, resulting in cessation of cell growth and
proliferation and potentially leading to cell death through
apoptosis. A recent study evaluating Palladia in cats with
mast cell tumors reported a clinical benefit in 76%
(13/17) of those with the gastrointestinal form. However,
further studies are necessary.
Aside from definitive treatment with chemotherapy
and/or a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, all patients with intestinal mast cell tumors should receive prednisolone or
prednisone as well as a histamine receptor 1 and 2
­
antagonist.
For dogs with colorectal polyps, the use of NSAIDs has
been found to be of benefit in reducing clinical signs and
may be an alternative treatment to surgical excision. The
author recommends placing dogs that have had surgical
removal of colorectal polyps on NSAIDs postoperatively
in an attempt to prevent local recurrence, development
of additional polyps or malignant transformation of polyps. Although there are no clinical studies evaluating the
use of NSAIDs in this particular setting, NSAIDs have
been found to have various antineoplastic properties.
Surgical excision of colorectal plasmacytomas is curative in most cases. Plasmacytomas of other areas of the
intestinal tract can have a high metastatic rate and if
metastasis is observed, follow‐up chemotherapy in the
form of prednisone and melphalan is recommended.
Extraskeletal osteosarcomas are both locally and systemically aggressive. Adjuvant chemotherapy has been
shown to help prolong survival in dogs with extraskeletal
osteosarcoma. Therefore, postoperative carboplatin is
recommended for intestinal extraskeletal osteosarcoma.
Visceral hemangiosarcoma is an aggressive disease with
a high rate of metastasis. Adjuvant doxorubicin chemotherapy is recommended after surgical resection of intestinal hemangiosarcoma.

Many animals with intestinal neoplasia need supportive medications for nausea, decreased appetite, gastrointestinal protection, and diarrhea. The most commonly
used antiemetics include maropitant, ondansentron,
dolasetron, and metoclopramide. Appetite stimulants
include capromorelin, mirtazapine, cyproheptadine, and
megestrol acetate. Effective gastroprotectants include
famotidine, omeprazole, and sucralfate. Common antidiarrheal medications include metronidazole, tylosin, sulfasalazine, and loperamide.

­Prognosis
The prognosis for dogs with intestinal lymphoma is
generally much worse than for dogs with multicentric
lymphoma. A recent study using a CHOP‐based protocol with consolidation resulted in a 56% response rate
(50% complete response, 6% partial response). The
median survival time for the entire study population
was 2.5 months. The response rate for dogs with multicentric lymphoma is up to 90–95% with median survival times of 12–18 months. Another study evaluating
dogs with intestinal lymphoma treated with multiple
treatment modalities revealed very poor survival, with a
median survival time of 13 days. In dogs with intestinal
lymphoma, the presence of diarrhea and lack of
response to chemotherapy were negative prognostic
factors
In dogs treated with surgical excision for small intestinal adenocarcinoma, the presence of metastasis at the
time of surgery is associated with statistically shorter
survival time (median survival time three months, 20%
survival at one year) when compared to dogs without
metastasis (median survival time 15 months, 66.7%
­survival at one year).
Long‐term survival has been reported in dogs with
metastatic intestinal leiomyosarcoma. In one study, 50%
of dogs with intestinal leiomyosarcomas had metastasis
at the time of surgery. The median survival time of the
entire study population was 21.3 months. Another study
revealed a median survival time of 1.1 years for dogs
with small intestinal leiomyosarcoma that survived the
immediate postoperative period, with 29% of the dogs
dying of leiomyosarcoma. The results of these historical
studies should be viewed ­in light that some might have
been GISTs that had been misdiagnosed. In one study
evaluating both GISTs and leiomyosarcomas, the median
survival time for dogs with GISTs that survived the perioperative period was 37.4 months, whereas the median
survival time for dogs with leiomyosarcomas was only
7.8 months. Further, 7% of the dogs with GISTs developed metastasis. There were no reports of metastasis in
those with leiomyosarcomas.

1291

VetBooks.ir

1292

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Recurrence of clinical signs is uncommon with removal
of colorectal adenomatous polyps (17%). However,
recurrence of clinical signs after removal of carcinoma in
situ is fairly common (55%). The presence of multiple
lesions was also associated with recurrence of clinical
signs. Malignant transformation has been reported with
rectal polyps, although more commonly with carcinoma
in situ (17–50%).
The prognosis for dogs with colorectal adenocarcinoma has been linked to the gross appearance of the
tumor. The mean survival time for those with pedunculated lesions is 32 months, cobblestone lesions 12
months, and annular lesions 1.6 months.
Cats with small cell, low‐grade intestinal lymphoma
treated with prednisone and chlorambucil have a good
prognosis with response rates of 69–95% and median
survival times of 18–24 months.
Cats with intermediate to high‐grade intestinal lymphoma have a worse prognosis compared to those with
the low‐grade intestinal type. When compared to other
anatomic sites, cats with intermediate to high‐grade
intestinal lymphoma tend to have the second best prognosis, after nasal lymphoma. ­However, the response
rate, remission duration, and survival time for cats with
intermediate to high‐grade intestinal lymphoma are generally less than dogs with multicentric intermediate to
high‐grade lymphoma. The response rate for cats treated
with multiagent (CHOP‐based) chemotherapy is 50–86%
(complete response rate of 50–70%) with a median
remission duration of 4–9 months and a median survival
time of up to 7–9 months. Response to therapy, FeLV

status, substage, anatomic site, and chemotherapy
­
­protocols that include doxorubicin have been linked to
remission duration and survival. Unlike dogs, immunophenotype (T cell vs B cell) is not a prognostic factor
in cats with lymphoma.
The prognosis can be fairly good for cats with small
intestinal adenocarcinoma that survive the postoperative period, with average survival times of 15 months
reported. In one study, even those that had lymph node
metastasis at the time of surgery and survived the perioperative period fared well (average survival time of 12
months). In the study, recurrent adenocarcinoma was
the cause of death in 50% of long‐term survivors.
The prognosis for intestinal mast cell tumor has
­historically been considered to be poor due to the high
percentage of patients that present with metastatic disease. However, a recent study of cats indicated that the
prognosis may be better than once thought (median survival time 531 days).
Reported cats that had subtotal colectomy for colonic
adenocarcinoma had significantly longer survival times
than cats with either mass resection or biopsy. Median
survival time with subtotal colectomy was 138 days versus 68 days and 10 days for mass resection and biopsy
respectively. In the study, the presence of metastasis was
also associated with a shorter survival time (median survival time 49 days) compared to those cats that did not
have metastasis (259 days). Finally, cats that receive doxorubicin chemotherapy appear to have a significantly
longer survival time (median survival 280 days) compared to those that do not receive doxorubicin (56 days).

­Further Reading
Culp WT, Drobatz KJ, Glassman MM, et al. Feline
visceral hemangiosarcoma. J Vet Intern Med 2008;
22: 149–52.
Daters AT, Mauldin GE, Mauldin GN, et al. Evaluation
of a multidrug chemotherapy protocol with
mitoxantrone based maintenance (CHOP‐MA) for
the treatment of canine lymphoma. Vet Comp Oncol
2010; 8: 11–22.
Gregory‐Bryson E, Bartlett E, Kiupel M, et al. Canine
and human gastrointestinal stromal tumors display
similar mutations in c‐kit exon 11. BMC Cancer
2010; 10: 559.

Kiselow MA, Rassnick KM, McDonough SP, et al.
Outcomes of cats with low‐grade lymphocytic
lymphoma: 41 cases (1995–2005). J Am Vet Med Assoc
2008; 232: 405–10.
Rassnick KM, Moore AS, Collister KE, et al. Efficacy of
combination chemotherapy for treatment of
gastrointestinal lymphoma in dogs. J Vet Intern Med
2009; 23: 317–22.
Russell KN, Mehler SJ, Skorupski KA, et al. Clinical and
immunohistochemical differentiation of gastrointestinal
stromal tumors from leiomyosarcomas in dogs: 42
cases (1990–2003). J Am Vet Assoc 2007; 230: 1329–33.

VetBooks.ir

1293

143
Exocrine Pancreatic Cancer
Avenelle I. Turner, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)
Veterinary Cancer Group, Culver City, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology

­History and Clinical Signs

Nearly all cancers of the exocrine pancreas are epithelial
and most are adenocarcinoma arising from either the
ductal or acinar epithelium. This is in contrast to insulinomas which arise from the islet cells of the endocrine
pancreas. Insulinomas are covered in more detail in a
different section. There are no known causes for exocrine pancreatic cancer (EPC) in veterinary medicine.
Experimentally, intraductal administration of N‐ethyl‐
N’‐nitro‐N‐nitrosoguanidine induces EPC in dogs.

Exocrine pancreatic cancer is rare and accounts for less
than 0.05% of all cancers in the dog and cat. Older female
dogs, spaniels, and Airedales have been described in previous publications as being at higher risk. In humans,
EPC remains the fourth most common cause of cancer‐
related death in the United States and it occurs most
commonly in people who smoke or have chronic pancreatitis or diabetes mellitus. It is not clear if this is true
in veterinary medicine but recently there have been several published reports of diabetes mellitus and EPC in
cats which are suggestive of a possible association. It is
unknown whether diabetes mellitus develops secondary
to compression of islet cells by tumor, secondary to cortisol‐induced beta‐cell degeneration, or secondary to
decreased carbohydrate metabolism, which is common
in humans with pancreatic carcinoma.

Symptoms associated with EPC are nonspecific and may
mimic pancreatitis. Anorexia, weight loss, lethargy, weakness, vomiting, maldigestion syndrome, abdominal distension, abdominal effusion, and icterus are common findings.
In cats that presented with EPC, 75% had anorexia, 63%
vomiting, and 38% abdominal pain, a palpable abdominal
mass, and/or jaundice. Duration of clinical signs appeared
to be bimodal, with 50% of cats having signs for <7 days
and the other 50% having signs for >1 month.
Paraneoplastic alopecia is a rare syndrome seen in cats
with pancreatic neoplasms. The pathogenesis of this dermatologic disease is unknown. Alopecia begins acutely
and typically starts with loss of clumps of hair on the
ventrum, and then spreads to the legs and eventually the
face. Dorsal alopecia is uncommon. Other changes noted
are poor, dry, thinning hair coat and focal areas of
­erythema. Often, there is a characteristic appearance to
the skin and in areas where cats groom, the skin can
appear shiny. Lesions develop rapidly over 2–10 weeks
and spread over much of the body. They appear in association with the tumor and in one case resolved with
tumor removal.
Histopathologically, the skin changes are characterized by loss of the stratum corneum and severe follicular
atrophy with miniaturized hair bulbs. The majority of
cases die or are euthanized within eight weeks of development of lesions so the presence of this condition on
physical examination is highly suspicious for EPC and
appears to be a poor prognostic factor.

­Signalment

­Diagnosis

The median age at diagnosis is 10 years for dogs and 12
years for cats. It occurs almost equally in both sexes.

Staging for EPC includes radiographs of the thorax (three‐
view), abdominal radiographs (two‐view), ­minimum

­Epidemiology

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1294

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

database (complete blood count, biochemistry profile,
urinalysis) and abdominal ultrasound. In cases where an
aspirate is going to be obtained, a clotting profile is advisable as prolongation in partial thromboplastin time (PTT)
and clotting disorders have been described in cats and
people with EPC respectively. In cases where surgery is
being considered, a computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen may be
useful in preoperative planning and identifying metastatic disease.
Laboratory findings are generally nonspecific but can
include leukocytosis, anemia, hyperglycemia, and elevations in liver enzymes. Dogs with pancreatic neoplasia
may have significant elevations in serum lipase with only
minimal elevations of serum amylase, implying tumor
production of lipase. These findings are inconsistent,
however. In a small case series of eight cats with EPC,
50% had neutrophilia, 33% had elevations in serum alkaline phosphatase activity, and 57% had increased alanine
aminotransferase. Mild hyperglycemia was identified in
63% of cats.
Physical examination findings can include abdominal
pain, icterus, abdominal distension, and/or ascites. In
small dogs or cats, palpation of a cranial abdominal mass
can occasionally be appreciated.
Survey abdominal radiographs may show decreased
serosal detail or a cranial abdominal mass effect. The
sensitivity for the detection of pancreatic tumors in dogs
has been reported to be 19% for radiographs and 75% for
ultrasound. Abdominal radiographs were helpful in identifying abdominal disease in cats with EPC. In one study,
abdominal radiography was able to identify abdominal
disease in all cases of pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
Ultrasonography is superior to abdominal radiographs for detecting EPC in both dogs and cats. It is a
useful diagnostic tool for localization of the tumor,
confirmation of ascites, and documentation of lymphadenopathy and metastasis. In cats, the ultrasound
findings seen with nodular hyperplasia of the pancreas
are similar to changes seen with malignant pancreatic
neoplasms. There was a trend, however, for malignant
masses to appear as a single, larger lesion exceeding
2 cm in at least one dimension. Hyperplastic nodules
typically did not measure more than 1 cm in diameter
and were n
­ umerous. Differentials for masses of the
pancreas are insulinoma, gastrinoma, adenocarcinoma,
adenoma, pancreatic pseudocyst, abscess, pancreatitis,
and lymphoma.
When effusion is present, cytology and fluid analysis
may reveal a modified transudate and neoplastic cells
indicating carcinomatosis. Solitary masses can be diagnosed with cytology. Cytologic samples obtained with
ultrasound guidance correctly diagnosed EPC in 92%
of cases.

­Therapy
The majority of EPCs are diagnosed at an advanced
stage. Fifty to seventy percent of animals have metastatic
disease to regional lymph nodes and distant sites documented at the time of diagnosis. In a study where necropsy findings were documented in cats with EPC,
metastases to the liver, abdominal lymph nodes, lung,
heart, diaphragm, tracheobronchial and cranial mediastinal lymph nodes were found. The incidence of metastasis seemed to be unrelated to the duration of clinical
signs. Cats with the longest history of clinical signs were
equally likely to have metastasis noted at necropsy as
cats with short histories. This suggests that the duration
of clinical signs prior to diagnosis is not a negative prognostic indicator.
Complete pancreatectomy or pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure) has been described in
humans and in dogs but carries a high perioperative
morbidity and mortality without significant cure rates.
Chemotherapy and radiation therapy have shown limited value in humans and animals and information
regarding the use of chemotherapy in veterinary medicine is scarce. In humans, external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) alone does not provide optimal tumor
control and local failure rates are as high as 72%. These
dismal results have spawned efforts to improve outcomes
by the concurrent administration of drugs that act as
radiation sensitizers, including 5‐fluorouracil, gemcitabine, and, most recently, paclitaxel.
Palliative therapy to address effusions can be attempted
with regular, periodic abdominocentesis and intracavitary chemotherapy. Protocols utilizing cisplatin and
­carboplatin have been described and appear to provide
palliation for select patients. When effective, this can
result in temporary relief from discomfort, slow the reaccumulation of the effusion, and possibly delay progression of the disease. Palliative responses, when seen, are
generally short‐lived.

­Prognosis
The prognosis of EPC is generally poor, with few animals living beyond a year although a small percentage
of dogs and cats have experienced long‐term survival.
In dogs, a unique variant of EPC described as hyalinizing pancreatic adenocarcinoma appears to be biologically less aggressive. The neoplasm is generally a
solitary mass usually involving the right limb of the
pancreas. Dogs without postoperative complications
or concurrent life‐threatening diseases survived
longer than expected (four months, 16 months, and
>19 months).

VetBooks.ir

143 Exocrine Pancreatic Cancer

In a retrospective study evaluating 34 cats with EPC,
metastatic disease was confirmed in 11 cats and overall
median survival was 97 days. The median survival times
for patients who received chemotherapy or had their
masses surgically removed was 165 days. Patients with
abdominal effusion present at diagnosis had a median
survival of 30 days. Interestingly, however, three patients
survived over one year.
A cat with metastatic EPC to the spleen treated with
partial pancreatectomy and splenectomy was reported
to be alive and disease free >2 years later. Therefore, the
prognosis for EPC in select dogs and cats may not be as
dismal as previously reported.

Comparatively, about 45 220 people develop cancer of
the exocrine pancreas each year in the US, and almost all
are expected to die from the disease. The median survival is 8–12 months for patients with locally advanced
disease and less for those with metastatic disease at presentation. Five‐year survival rates are consistently <18%.
The majority of these tumors (85%) are adenocarcinomas arising from the ductal epithelium. Surgical resection offers the only chance of cure. However, only
15–20% of patients have resectable disease at diagnosis,
approximately 40% have metastatic disease, and another
30–40% have locally advanced unresectable tumors.

­Further Reading
Bennett PF, Hahn KA, Toal RL, Legendre AM.
Ultrasonographic and cytopathological diagnosis of
exocrine pancreatic carcinoma in the dog and cat. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 2001; 37(5): 466–73.
Dennis MM, O’Brien TD, Wayne T, Kuipel M, Williams M,
Powers BE. Hyalinizing pancreatic adenocarcinoma in
six dogs. Vet Pathol 2008; 45: 475–83.
Hecht S, Penninick DG, Keating JH. Imaging findings in
pancreatic neoplasia and nodular hyperplasia in 19 cats.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2007; 48(1): 45–50.
Linderman MJ, Brodsky EM., Lorimier LP, Clifford CA,
Post GA. Feline exocrine pancreatic carcinoma: a
retrospective study of 34 cases. Vet Compar Oncol 2013;
11(3): 208–18

Miller WH, Griffin CE, Campbell KL. Paraneoplastic
alopecia. Muller and Kirk’s Small Animal Dermatology,
7th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders 2013, pp. 558–9.
Rosatelli P, Menicagli F, Citro G, Baldi A, Spugnini EP.
Long‐term survival in a cat with pancreatic carcinoma
and splenic involvement after surgical excision. Case Rep
Vet Med 2011; 2011: article ID 653859.
Seaman RL. Exocrine pancreatic neoplasia in the cat: a
case series. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2004; 40(3): 238–45.
Shearin AL, Ostrander EA. Leading the way: canine
models of genomics and disease. Dis Models
Mechanisms 2010; 3(1‐2): 27–3.

1295

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1297

144
Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors
Karen Eiler, DVM, MS, DACVIM (SAIM)
VCA West Los Angeles Animal Hospital, Los Angeles, CA, USA

­Insulinoma
Etiology/Pathophysiology
The pancreas is made up of endocrine and exocrine tis­
sue. The endocrine pancreas is composed of islets of
Langerhans, which make up approximately 1–2% of the
mass of the pancreas. Within the islets there are four cell
types: alpha, beta, delta, and polypeptide cells. Beta‐cells
secrete various hormones, with insulin being the pri­
mary product. Approximately 60–75% of the islet cells
are of beta‐cell origin.
Insulin is the hormone that is primarily responsible for
regulating blood glucose concentration. Insulin does not
influence entry of blood glucose into beta‐cells, as in
other tissues. Entry of glucose into the beta‐cell is pro­
portional to the blood glucose concentration. Beta‐cells
are extremely sensitive to glucose concentrations and
therefore the regulation of insulin secretion.
The central nervous system (CNS) has limited glyco­
gen storage and is unable to use energy sources other
than glucose. Thus, it is dependent on blood glucose to
maintain its energy requirements. With hypoglycemia,
cells within the cerebral cortex are affected first due to
their higher metabolic rate. Counterregulatory hormones
such as catecholamine, glucagon, growth hormone, and
cortisol are secreted in response to hypoglycemia and aid
in recovery from the hypoglycemic episode.
Insulinomas (beta‐cell insulin‐secreting tumor, beta‐
cell adenocarcinoma/adenoma) are insulin‐secreting
tumors of the pancreatic beta‐cells. They are the most
common endocrine pancreatic tumor in companion ani­
mals and are usually malignant.
Insulinomas can be found in both the right and left
lobes of the pancreas with equal frequency. Occult insu­
linomas are most frequently found in the pancreatic body.

Epidemiology
Insulinomas are uncommon in dogs and rare in cats.
One estimated report cites an incidence of 17.8/100 000
patient‐years in the dog and 12.6/100 000 patient‐years
at risk in the cat. Insulinomas have been associated with
multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type I in people.
This is an inherited disease that also results in parathy­
roid and pituitary tumors. Although we do not have a
clear understanding of the epidemiology of canine insu­
linomas, there have been rare cases of canine MEN that
involve an insulinoma.
Signalment
In dogs, middle‐aged to older, medium to large breeds
are predisposed. Large‐breed dogs are overrepresented.
Breed predispositions have not been noted in cats.
History and Clinical Signs
Clinical signs are predominantly related to hypoglyce­
mia, resulting in neuroglycopenic manifestations and,
less commonly, stimulation of the sympathoadrenal sys­
tem. The degree and onset of clinical signs are related to
the severity and rate of development of hypoglycemia.
Gradual or chronic hypoglycemia may go unnoticed.
When chronically affected by hypoglycemia, some ani­
mals adjust to blood glucose levels of 20–30 mg/dL.
Clinical symptoms consistent with hypoglycemia
include seizures, lethargy, weakness, coma, and ataxia.
Catecholamine release can cause tachycardia, muscle
fasciculations, hunger, and restlessness. Exercise causes
rapid consumption of glucose and may precipitate an
episode of collapse or seizure.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1298

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Diagnosis
Differential diagnosis for other causes of hypoglycemia
include hypoadrenocorticism, juvenile hypoglycemia, sep­
sis, growth hormone deficiency, nonpancreatic tumors,
insulin overdose, hepatic disease, glycogen storage diseases,
artifacts related to sample handling, and toxins. Other
types of neoplasms that can lead to paraneoplastic hypo­
glycemia include hepatocellular carcinoma, hepatoma,
leiomyosarcoma, leiomyoma, lymphoma, myeloma, and
hemangiosarcoma.
A minimum database (complete blood count, serum
chemistry, urinalysis) should be collected to rule out
other causes of hypoglycemia. Nonspecific findings that
may be associated with insulinomas include elevated
liver enzymes, hypokalemia, and hypophosphatemia.
Radiographs may help rule out other causes of hypoglyce­
mia. However, radiographic changes directly related to
insulinomas should not be expected. Sensitivity of identi­
fying insulinomas with abdominal ultrasound can be as
low as 36%. It may be more beneficial in identifying metas­
tasis in the liver and local lymph nodes. Failure to identify
a pancreatic mass does not rule out an insulinoma. Serum
insulin concentrations that are normal to high in the pres­
ence of hypoglycemia support a diagnosis of insulinoma.
Insulin:glucose and glucose:insulin ratios have high false‐
positive rates and are not recommended. Rather, insulin
concentration should be measured on a serum sample
taken when the blood glucose is below 60 mg/dL. Insulin
concentrations should be low or undetectable at this blood
glucose concentration. The serum glucose and insulin are
evaluated as a pair. Animals may need to be fasted in order
to obtain the appropriate samples and serial samples may
need to be drawn every 2–4 hours until the blood glucose
concentration is below 60 mg/dL. Provocative testing is not
recommended as it has not been shown to be more sensi­
tive than paired insulin and glucose measurement and can
be dangerous due to potentiation of hypoglycemia.
Additional preoperative and intraoperative methods of
tumor identification may be utilized. Nuclear scintigra­
phy with indium 111‐labeled pentetreotide has been
used to image somatostatin receptors in dogs with insu­
linomas. Insulinomas express high‐affinity somatostatin
receptors of subtype sst2 (SST2), thus allowing abnormal
foci of activity to be detected. Direct intraoperative
ultrasonography and intravenous injection of methylene
blue may also be beneficial in identifying insulinomas.
Methylene blue concentrates in the neoplastic tissue.
However, side‐effects including Heinz body anemia and
renal failure have been reported to occur.
Therapy
Surgery is the mainstay of treatment. However, even
when resectable, a cure is still unlikely. Gross or occult

metastasis should be expected. Debulking of gross
­disease may significantly assist in controlling clinical
signs. The goal of surgery is to remove as much neoplas­
tic tissue as possible. Special attention should be given to
regional lymph nodes and the liver. Complications
include hyperglycemia (diabetes mellitus), continued
hypoglycemia, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, and
pancreatitis.
First‐line medical management is glucocorticoid ther­
apy. In particular, prednisone administered at 0.25–3 mg/
kg orally twice daily can be utilized. The dose should be
increased as needed to control hypoglycemia. Prednisone
is used with small frequent feedings (four times daily)
and limited exercise. Exercise leads to an increased
peripheral demand for glucose in spite of impaired glu­
coneogenesis and glycogenolysis. As a result, insulin
secretion continues even as blood glucose falls.
Diazoxide decreases insulin release from beta‐cells
and stimulates epinephrine release from adrenergic cells.
The result is decreased insulin release and increased
hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis. It is effec­
tive in 64–85% of dogs. The recommended dose is 5 mg/
kg every 12 hours but may be increased up to 30 mg/kg
every 12 hours if necessary. Thiazide diuretics potentiate
the effects of diazoxide. The most common side‐effects
of diazoxide are gastrointestinal in nature.
Octreotide is a somatostatin analog that activates
somatostatin receptors resulting in the inhibition of
­synthesis and secretion of insulin. Octreotide is only
effective if the malignant beta‐cells are expressing soma­
tostatin receptors (~60% in people). It is given at a start­
ing dose of 2 μg/kg SC twice daily. The dose can be
increased to three times daily. Limited studies suggest
that long‐term efficacy is poor. Side‐effects are limited
but the drug is costly.
Streptozotocin is a chemotherapeutic agent that has
direct toxic effects on pancreatic beta‐cells. It is nephro­
toxic and therefore intravenous fluid diuresis is required.
It is administered once every 2–3 weeks at a dosage of
500 mg/m2 for five treatments. If diabetes mellitus
occurs, treatment is discontinued. In one study on the
use of streptozotocin in dogs with insulinoma, controls
lived for 90 days. Dogs had a median duration of normo­
glycemia of 163 days when given streptozotocin every
three weeks. In another study, streptozotocin was given
every two weeks and the average return of hypoglycemia
was 196 days.
Prognosis
The World Health Organization (WHO) classification
for tumor staging is prognostic for insulinomas. Factors
that affect prognosis include presence or absence of
tumor (T0 or T1), regional nodal involvement (N0 or

VetBooks.ir

144 Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors

N1), and distant metastasis (M0 or M1). Therefore, full
staging (thoracic radiographs, abdominal ultrasound,
serum chemistry, complete blood count, and urinalysis)
is recommended.
Overall, the prognosis is guarded because of the high
rate of metastasis and recurrence of clinical signs.
Approximately 36–51% of dogs have detectable meta­
static disease at the time of surgery. With surgery alone,
stage I (T1N0M0), II (T1N1M0), and III (T1N0M1 or
T1N1M1) dogs have an expected median survival of 19
months, nine months, and six months respectively.
Survival time for dogs treated medically is less than
when surgery combined with medical management is
used. In one study, medical management with pred­
nisone and dietary change alone resulted in a median
survival time (MST) of 74 days. In a separate study, the
median survival time for dogs that had a partial pancrea­
tectomy was reported at 496 days. In a subset of nine
dogs that received postsurgical medical treatment
(diazoxide and prednisone) at the time of relapse, the
median survival time was extended to 1316 days.
Streptozotocin therapy, especially as an adjunctive to
surgery, should be considered. Although data are lim­
ited, normoglycemia has been shown to be prolonged
with use of streptozotocin when compared to dogs that
were medically managed with diet and prednisone (163
versus 90 days respectively). In addition, reduction in
metastatic lesions and resolution of hypoglycemic poly­
neuropathy in dogs have been reported.
Persistent postoperative hypoglycemia has also been
reported to be prognostic. In one study, dogs that became
normoglycemic postoperatively had a median survival of
680 days compared to those that remained hypoglyce­
mic, which had a MST of 90 days.

­Glucagonoma
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Alpha‐cells secrete glucagon and constitute about
20–25% of the endocrine pancreas. Glucagon has a pro­
found hyperglycemic effect. In people, glucagonomas are
commonly associated with diabetes mellitus and severe
paraneoplastic dermatologic disease. Dogs with gluca­
gonomas can have a similar dermatologic syndrome
called superficial necrolytic dermatitis, necrolytic migra­
tory erythema, or metabolic epidermal necrosis. This
dermatologic disease has been identified in multiple
dogs with glucagonomas but it is more commonly asso­
ciated with liver disease and is not pathognomonic for a
glucagonoma.
Glucagon has catabolic effects and opposes the effects
of insulin. It causes gluconeogenesis, glycogenolysis, and
lipolysis that cause the conversion of glycogen to ­glucose,

resulting in elevation of blood sugar. The catabolic effects
of glucagon result in hypoaminoacidemia. Requirements
for histidine and lysine‐rich keratohyalin granules in the
stratum granulosum make the epidermis susceptible to
hypoaminoacidemia.
Epidemiology
Glucagonomas are rare in people (<250 reported) with
only a few case reports in dogs. They have not been
reported in cats.
Signalment
The typical signalment is an older dog. There are no
reported breed dispositions.
History and Clinical Signs
Dermatologic manifestations include lesions of the foot­
pad, pressure points, periocular area, and mucocutane­
ous junctions such as the perineum, genitalia, and
muzzle. Hyperkeratosis of the footpads also occurs.
Weight loss is associated with the catabolic effects of the
glucagon. Hyperglucagonemia can cause diabetes melli­
tus resulting in polyuria and polydipsia.
Diagnosis
An elevated plasma glucagon level in the absence of
hypoglycemia is supportive of the presence of a gluca­
gonoma. Histopathology of skin biopsies will be consist­
ent with superficial hydropic dermatitis and marked
parakeratosis. A definitive diagnosis is obtained through
histopathology of the pancreatic tumor. In animals with
skin lesions, elevations in liver enzymes and hypoalbu­
minemia may also be present.
Therapy
Surgical debulking or resection is the treatment of
choice. Octreotide may be helpful in animals that have
alpha‐cells that are expressing somatostatin receptors.
Streptozotocin has been used with limited success in
people for palliative treatment. When dermatologic
lesions are present, a high‐quality protein diet such, as
Hill’s Science Diet a/d should used in nonencephalo­
pathic animals. Supplementation with 3–6 egg yolks per
day may also be beneficial. Intravenous amino acid ther­
apy has been useful. A 10% crystalline amino acid solu­
tion (Aminosyn®, Abbott Labs) at 25 mL/kg over 6–8
hours repeated every 7–10 days has been used to treat
hypoaminoacidemia. Ideally, the hypertonic amino acid
solution is administered via a central vein to decrease

1299

VetBooks.ir

1300

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

risks of thrombophlebitis. Supplementation with zinc
and fatty acids may also be indicated. Corticosteroids
should be avoided as development of diabetes mellitus
worsens the prognosis.
Prognosis
The prognosis for pancreatic glucagonomas is poor.

­Gastrinoma
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Gastrinomas in dogs and cats are nonislet cell pancreatic
tumors that secrete gastrin. In humans, the majority
arise in the duodenum and less commonly the pancreas.
There is only one report of a duodenal gastrinoma in
the dog.
Parietal cells are stimulated to release acid by gastrin,
acetylcholine, and histamine. The primary effect of
hypergastrinemia is acid hypersecretion resulting in gas­
trointestinal ulceration. In humans, it is referred to as
Zollinger–Ellison syndrome.
Epidemiology
Gastrinomas are rare in dogs and cats.
Signalment
Dogs are typically middle aged and cats are typically
older. No breed dispositions have reported.
History and Clinical Signs
Common clinical signs are vomiting and weight loss.
Other clinical signs may include hematemesis, diarrhea
or melena, lethargy, and pale mucous membranes.
Prolonged elevation of circulating gastrin can cause gas­
tric antral hypertrophy. Perforated ulcers can result in
shock and peritonitis.
Diagnosis
A minimum database should be collected. Abnormalities
are typically associated with gastrointestinal bleeding,
vomiting, and liver metastasis. Biochemical abnormali­
ties may include anemia, hypokalemia, hypochloremia,
hypoalbuminemia, hypoproteinemia, and increases in
liver enzymes and hyperbilirubinemia.

Unless a perforated ulcer is present, abdominal radio­
graphs are of limited use. Contrast may be useful in iden­
tifying areas of thickened gastric wall.
Transabdominal ultrasonography is of limited
use because the tumors are typically small in size.
Abnormalities that may be identified include a primary
pancreatic tumor, evidence of metastasis in the liver and
regional lymph nodes and a thickened gastric wall.
Endoscopic evaluation of the upper gastrointestinal
tract may reveal esophagitis, esophageal and gastroduo­
denal ulcerations, and a thickened pylorus. Biopsies may
reveal inflammation, gastric mucosal hypertrophy, and
loss of the mucosal barrier.
Serum gastrin concentrations are typically three times
the upper normal range. However, they can be in the
normal range. In cases of suspected gastrinoma with
normal gastrin levels, provocative testing can be used.
Intravenous secretin or calcium infusion can stimulate
gastrin release.
A definitive diagnosis is obtained via biopsy. His­
topathology and immunohistochemistry will confirm a
gastrinoma.
Therapy
Surgery is typically only palliative due to the high meta­
static rate. Surgical treatment may be limited by the small
size of the tumor making identification difficult. The
techniques used to identify the mass are similar to those
used for identification of insulinomas and include
transabdominal and intraoperative ultrasound, magnetic
resonance imaging, and computed tomography. Most
gastrinomas express somatostatin receptors on the cell
surface. Therefore, indium 111‐labeled octreotide nuclear
scintigraphy has been used. Methylene blue injection has
been used for tumor identification in humans.
The goal of medical management is gastric acid
­reduction and treatment of gastroduodenal ulceration.
Histamine receptor antagonists and proton pump inhibi­
tors are used. Proton pump inhibitors block all three gas­
tric acid secretory pathways. Octreotide has two
beneficial effects: it suppresses tumor gastrin release and
inhibits gastrin from stimulating the parietal cells.
Prognosis
The prognosis is guarded to poor as approximately 76% of
cases have metastatic disease at the time of diagnosis. In
animals that receive both surgical and medical manage­
ment, survival times range from one week to 18 months.

VetBooks.ir

144 Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors

­Further Reading
Gal A, Ridgway MD, Fredrickson RL. An unusual clinical
presentation of a dog with gastrinoma. Can Vet J 2011;
52(6): 641–4.
Madarame H, Kayanuma H, Shida T, Tsuchiya R.
Retrospective study of canine insulinomas: eight cases
(2005–2008). J Vet Med Sci 2009; 71: 905–11.
Northrup NC, Rassnick KM, Gieger T, et al. Prospective
evaluation of biweekly streptozotocin in 19 dogs with
insulinoma. J Vet Intern Med 2013; 27(3): 483–90.

Oberkirchner U, Linder KE, Zadrozny L, Olivry T.
Successful treatment of canine necrolytic migratory
erythema (superficial necrolytic dermatitis) due to
metastatic glucagonoma with octreotide. Vet Dermatol
2010; 21(5): 510–16.
Proverbio D, Spada E, Perego R, et al. Potential variant of
multiple endocrine neoplasia in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 2012; 48: 132–8.

1301

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1303

145
Liver and Biliary Tract Tumors
Amanda K. Elpiner, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)
VCA Great Lakes Veterinary Specialists, Cleveland, OH, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
The etiology of hepatobiliary tumors in dogs and cats is
largely unknown although human cases are often linked
to infection with the hepatitis virus (B and C) and cirrho­
sis. Cirrhosis, which may be secondary to chronic disease
or alcohol consumption in people, is rare in dogs and a
viral etiology has not been documented in dogs or cats.
Other theories behind the development of hepatocel­
lular carcinoma (HCC) and other hepatobiliary tumors
include exposure to chemical carcinogens (aflatoxins or
nitrosamines, for example) and chronic infections or
inflammatory diseases of the liver. Trematodes are
thought to be involved in the development of bile duct
carcinomas in people and this link has also been explored
in dogs and cats but seems unlikely to be a major cause or
concern. More recently, somatic genetic alterations are
thought to likely play a role in tumor development, such
as mutations in p53, PIK3CA, beta‐catenin, and others
which have been documented in people.
There are four main histologic categories of primary
hepatobiliary tumors in both dogs and cats: hepatocel­
lular, bile duct, neuroendocrine (carcinoid), and mesen­
chymal (sarcoma). Within in each individual category is
an array of both malignant and benign tumors. In gen­
eral, dogs are thought to be more likely affected by
­malignant tumors whereas cats more often have benign
tumors.
Primary hepatobiliary neoplasms can also be described
using three morphologic subtypes: massive, nodular, or
diffuse. The definition of a massive liver tumor is a large,
solitary mass confined to a single liver lobe; nodular
tumors have discrete nodules scattered throughout mul­
tiple liver lobes; diffuse tumors consist of coalescing
nodules within all liver lobes or widespread infiltration
of the hepatic parenchyma by neoplastic cells. As we will
discuss further, the histologic and morphologic features

of hepatobiliary tract tumors help us to make determina­
tions about prognosis for both dogs and cats.
Hepatocellular Tumors
Hepatocellular tumors develop from the hepatocyte.
These tumors include hepatocellular adenomas and
hepatocellular carcinomas. Hepatocellular adenomas are
benign tumors and while they can be found in both dogs
and cats, they are more common in the cat. Hepatocellular
adenomas are typically considered incidental findings
and rarely cause clinical signs in affected patients.
Adenomas can, however, reach a large size, necessitating
surgical removal. These tumors are also difficult to
­clinically distinguish from a massive HCC without the
aid of a biopsy.
Hepatocellular carcinoma is the most common pri­
mary liver tumor in the dog and the second most com­
mon in the cat. The majority of HCCs are morphologically
massive (53–84%) followed by nodular (16–25%) and
­diffuse (0–19%) presentations. The left side of the liver is
more commonly affected than the right, with over two‐
thirds of tumors arising from the left lateral, medial, and
papillary process of the caudate lobe. HCCs have the
ability to metastasize but the likelihood of metastasis is
largely based on the morphologic subtype. Massive HCC
have a low reported rate of metastasis (0–37%) whereas
the nodular and diffuse subtypes have dramatically
higher metastatic rates of 93% and 100% respectively.
Metastasis is most commonly reported to the regional
lymph nodes, peritoneum, and lungs.
Bile Duct Tumors
There are two primary tumors that can arise from the
bile duct epithelium in dogs and cats: bile duct adenomas
and biliary carcinomas. Bile duct adenomas are also called

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1304

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

biliary cystadenomas or hepatobiliary cystoadenomas.
These are considered benign tumors and are the most
common hepatobiliary tumor found in the cat (account­
ing for 50% of all feline hepatobiliary tumors). Similar to
hepatocellular adenomas, biliary adenomas typically do
not cause clinical signs in affected patients unless they
reach a large enough size to cause abdominal discomfort,
necessitating surgical removal. Male cats are thought to
be overrepresented.
Bile duct carcinomas (also called cholangiocarcino­
mas) are malignant tumors in both dogs and cats. They
have an aggressive clinical course with metastasis
detected in 60–80% of affected patients. Metastasis to
the local lymph nodes and lungs is most common but
other intraabdominal sites have been reported. In cats,
metastasis resulting in diffuse carcinomatosis can occur
in 67–80% of cases. Bile duct carcinomas can be intrahe­
patic, extrahepatic, or occasionally within the gallblad­
der itself. Morphologically, bile duct carcinomas are
similar to HCC in that 37–46% are massive, 0–46% are
nodular and 17–54% are diffuse. In dogs, females and
Labrador retrievers are thought to be predisposed
whereas there is no sex or breed predisposition yet
­confirmed in cats.
Neuroendocrine Tumors
These tumors arise from the neuroectodermal cells.
They are considered rare tumors in both the dog and cat
and are often referred to as carcinoids. Carcinoids have
a tendency to occur in younger animals compared to
other hepatobiliary tumors. They have an aggressive
clinical course and carry a poor prognosis, primarily
due to the fact that early metastasis is found in >90% of
patients diagnosed. The most common sites of metasta­
sis were the peritoneum and lymph nodes. These
tumors are t­ypically intrahepatic and have a predilec­
tion for a nodular or diffuse presentation, making
­surgical resection often difficult or impossible. A small
number of extrahepatic neuroendocrine tumors of the
gallbladder have been reported for which surgical
­resection was performed but long‐term follow‐up is
unavailable.
Mesenchymal Tumors (Sarcomas)
Mesenchymal tumors, also called sarcomas, arise from
the stromal cells of the liver. They are considered rare,
making up less than 15% of all primary hepatic tumors.
There are several different subtypes of sarcomas that
have been reported in the canine and feline liver
­including hemangiosarcoma (most common in the dog),
­leiomyosarcoma (most common in the cat), fibrosar­
coma, osteosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and liposar­
coma. Primary hepatic sarcomas carry a poor prognosis

due to their aggressive clinical course and high rate
of metastasis. Metastasis to the lungs and spleen is
most common and is reported in 86–100% of cases.
Morphologically, approximately 36% of mesenchymal
tumors are massive and 64% are nodular. Bear in mind
that the liver is also a common site for secondary
sarcomas including metastatic hemangiosarcoma and
­
disseminated histiocytic sarcoma.

­Epidemiology
As discussed earlier, liver tumors in the dog and cat can
be of either primary or secondary origin. In the dog, ret­
rospective studies have indicated that the prevalence of
primary hepatic neoplasia is low (0.6–1.5% of all canine
tumors). Secondary neoplasia, the result of metastasis to
the liver, is a much more common occurrence. Tumors
originating in the spleen, pancreas, and gastrointestinal
tract are the most likely to result in metastasis to the
liver. However, other systemic neoplasms such as lym­
phosarcoma, malignant histiocytosis or systemic masto­
cytosis often involve the liver as part of their widespread
clinical course.
In cats, the prevalence is similar, with 1.0–2.9% of all
feline tumors being of primary hepatic origin. However,
when one study excluded hematopoietic neoplasms, the
prevalence increased to 6.9%. There are currently no
studies documenting the frequency of metastatic disease
to the liver in cats.

­Signalment
Hepatobiliary tumors are most common in older animals
(over the age of 10), the exception to this being carci­
noids which are typically found in younger animals (71%
of dogs were under the age of 10). Some studies indicate
that miniature schnauzers may be overrepresented
for the development of HCC and Labrador retrievers
may be predisposed to bile duct carcinomas but there are
no other known breed propensities in either species.
One study documented a male predilection for canine
HCC and a female predilection for bile duct carcinoma.
In cats, some studies have indicated a male predomi­
nance for carcinoids and bile duct tumors.

­History and Clinical Signs
In dogs with hepatobiliary tumors, clinical signs are often
lacking or will be somewhat vague. These may include
things such as anorexia, weight loss, lethargy, and vomit­
ing. Less frequently, symptoms such as abdominal

VetBooks.ir

145 Liver and Biliary Tract Tumors

discomfort, polyuria, polydipsia, diarrhea, seizures,
­
weakness, ataxia, dyspnea, hematochezia or melena may
be observed. If neurologic symptoms do occur in an
affected patient, they may be caused by s­econdary
hepatic encephalopathy or paraneoplastic hypoglycemia.
Physical examination may reveal the presence of a cra­
nial abdominal mass affect in up to 75% of patients.
However, some massive tumors or nodular and diffuse
tumors may not cause any obvious physical exam changes
and can be easily missed. Occasionally, a patient may
become jaundiced secondary to a hepatobiliary tumor or
develop ascites. Overall, dogs and cats with malignant
tumors are more likely to become symptomatic than
those patients with benign tumors.

­Diagnosis
Laboratory Tests
There are no distinguishing complete blood count
abnormalities found in patients with hepatobiliary
tumors. Hematologic profiles most often show mild and
nonspecific changes such as anemia, leukocytosis, and
thrombocytosis. A mild, nonregenerative anemia is most
common (present in 20–53% of patients). The cause is
largely unknown but speculated to be secondary to ane­
mia of chronic disease, red blood cell sequestration,
microangiopathic destruction through torturous tumor
vessels, or iron deficiency. A leukocytosis may also be
present and can be caused by inflammation or necrosis
of any large tumor. Thrombocytosis has been reported in
approximately 50% of dogs diagnosed with a massive
HCC. The cause of this is not fully understood but is
speculated to be secondary to anemia, inflammatory
cytokine production, chronic iron deficiency, or a para­
neoplastic process.
Similarly, serum biochemical profiles often show non­
specific changes. Liver enzyme elevations are commonly
found in dogs with hepatobiliary tumors but there is no
association with the magnitude of elevation and the
severity of disease. These abnormalities are also in no
way specific to hepatobiliary neoplasia as many other
clinical conditions can affect these values. There are,
however, some trends that may be helpful. Alkaline
phosphatase (ALP) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
are the most common values to be elevated in dogs with
primary hepatic neoplasia whereas aspartate ami­
notransferase (AST) and bilirubin are more commonly
elevated in metastatic neoplasia, with >90% of dogs hav­
ing elevations in more than one liver enzyme. In cats,
one study showed that ALT, AST, and bilirubin were
higher in cats with malignant tumors compared to
benign tumors The ratio of liver values to one another
has also been examined. An AST:ALT ratio of less than 1

is most common with HCC or bile duct carcinoma
whereas a ratio greater than 1 is more likely with a neu­
roendocrine or mesenchymal tumor.
Other biochemical abnormalities commonly seen
with hepatobiliary neoplasia include hypoalbuminemia,
hyperglobulinemia, hypoglycemia, and elevated bile
acids. In cats, azotemia has been reported as the most
common biochemical abnormality. Studies have not
clarified the cause of the azotemia though it may repre­
sent concurrent and unrelated chronic renal disease.
Imaging
Abdominal radiographs may be helpful at confirming the
presence of a large hepatobiliary mass but can easily miss
small, nodular or diffuse tumors. In some cases, radio­
graphs may show the presence of mineralization within
the biliary tree of dogs with bile duct carcinoma although
this is a rare and nonspecific finding. Therefore, ultra­
sound is the recommended method of imaging for both
dogs and cats. Ultrasound also allows for the detection of
intraabdominal metastasis, ascites, and the location of
the disease and its relationship to other anatomic struc­
tures. Most importantly, ultrasound will allow us to
determine the morphologic features (massive, nodular,
or diffuse) of the tumor and help guide whether surgical
resection should be attempted.
Ultrasound images alone, however, are not adequate to
diagnose histologic tumor type. An ultrasound‐guided
fine needle aspiration (FNA) or needle biopsy is recom­
mended, and is especially useful in cases of nodular or dif­
fuse disease. An accurate diagnosis is possible using these
techniques in approximately 60% of FNA samples and
90% of needle biopsy samples. Both of these procedures
are considered minimally invasive. In some cases, laparo­
scopic biopsy may be considered more appropriate and is
also an excellent means of determining histologic tumor
type. In cases of massive tumors, it may not be clinically
warranted to know the histologic diagnosis of a particular
tumor prior to proceeding with exploratory surgery since
the mass will most likely be fully removed and biopsied
postoperatively anyway. Advanced imaging modalities
such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic reso­
nance imaging (MRI) are the primary imaging modalities
utilized in human medicine for hepatobiliary tumors but
have not been fully evaluated in veterinary medicine.

­Therapy and Prognosis
Hepatocellular Carcinoma
The prognosis for patients with HCC is dependent
­primarily on the morphologic subtype. Massive HCC
generally carries a good prognosis as it is confined to one

1305

VetBooks.ir

1306

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

liver lobe and is therefore amenable to surgical resection.
In addition to surgical resectability, other prognostic fac­
tors for massive HCC include the side of the liver affected
(right side worse than left side), pretreatment ALT and
AST elevations, and ratio of ALP:AST and ALT:AST. In
a paper evaluating surgery in 42 dogs with massive HCC,
the median survival time after liver lobectomy was 1460
days versus 270 days for dogs managed medically only.
Many of the dogs that underwent liver lobectomy were
lost to follow‐up as they were still alive or went on to die
of other unrelated causes at the end of the study period.
Right‐sided liver tumors are considered to have a worse
prognosis because of their proximity to the caudal vena
cava, resulting in an increased risk of intraoperative
death. Massive HCC has a low metastatic potential
(0–37%) and a low recurrence rate (0–13%) after surgical
resection.
In contrast, the prognosis for dogs with nodular or dif­
fuse HCC is poor. This is primarily because that these
tumors are not typically surgically resectable due to the
involvement of multiple liver lobes and they have a high
metastatic rate (93% and 100%, respectively). It is often
not possible to clinically determine if nodular and diffuse
types of HCC are secondary to intrahepatic metastasis
prior to diagnosis or represent multiple foci of disease.
There is little information in the veterinary field about
chemotherapy for the treatment of nonresectable HCC.
In general, HCC is thought to represent a chemoresist­
ant cancer as response rates of less than 20% are reported
in the human literature. This is thought to be secondary
to the development of drug resistance within the hepat­
ocytes, owing to their role in detoxification, or through
the expression of P‐glycoprotein. A recent paper evalu­
ated the chemotherapy agent gemcitabine (2’,2’‐dif­
luorodeoxycytidine), which has been used in human
medicine for the treatment of solid tumors, including
HCC. This study did not find a statistical improvement
in survival time for those patients with nodular, diffuse
or nonresectable massive HCC with the use of gemcit­
abine but the overall survival time of this small patient
population was 983 days. Other treatment techniques
that have been explored more recently include arterial

chemoembolization, immunotherapy, and antiangio­
genic medications.
Bile Duct Tumors
Initial treatment for bile duct tumors should be surgical
resection if they are confined to one (or two) liver lobes
with no evidence of distant metastatic disease. The prog­
nosis for surgically excised adenomas is excellent with no
reports of local recurrence of metastasis. On the other
hand, bile duct carcinomas carry a guarded prognosis
even when surgically excised due to their high rate of
metastasis and local recurrence. The median survival
time for patients with bile duct carcinoma is less than six
months despite surgical removal. Chemotherapy can be
considered to slow disease progression but specific
chemotherapy protocols and recommendations have not
been effectively evaluated to date in veterinary medicine.
There is also no known effective treatment for nodular
or diffuse tumors which cannot be surgically excised.
Neuroendocrine Tumors
Neuroendocrine tumors carry a poor prognosis.
Metastatic disease is documented in greater than 90% of
patients at the time of diagnosis. These tumors are often
morphologically nodular or diffuse, limiting the ability to
surgically excise them. There is currently no known
effective treatment or chemotherapy protocol and the
role of these treatments is largely unknown.
Hepatic Sarcomas
Liver lobectomy is recommended if tumors are confined
to a single liver lobe. Hepatic sarcomas, however, carry a
poor prognosis despite surgical resection due to their
high metastatic rate (86–100%). The role of chemother­
apy is still under investigation but protocols utilizing
doxorubicin and ifosfamide as well as antiangiogenic
protocols should be considered to slow disease progres­
sion based on their use in sarcomas in other locations
such as the spleen.

­Further Reading
Heishima K, Iwasaki R, Kawabe M, et al. Short‐term
administration of single‐agent toceranib in six cases of
inoperable massive canine hepatocellular carcinoma.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2018; Nov 14. doi: 10.5326/
JAAHA‐MS‐6788.
Leela‐Arporn R, Ohta, Nagata, et al. Epidemiology of
massive hepatocellular carcinoma in dogs: a 4‐year
retrospective study. Vet J 2019; 248: 74–8.

Leela‐Arporn R, Ohta H, Tamura M, et al. Plasma‐free
amino acid profiles in dogs with hepatocellular carcinoma.
J Vet Intern Med 2019; May 8. doi: 10.1111/jvim.155.
Selmic LE. Hepatobiliary neoplasia. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2017; 47(3): 725–35.
van Sprundel RG, van den Ingh TS, Guscetti F, et al.
Classification of primary hepatic tumours in the cat.
Vet J 2014; 202(2): 255–66.

VetBooks.ir

1307

146
Tumors of the Urinary Tract
Pedro A. Boria, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Oncology)
Blue Pearl Veterinary Partners, Northfield, IL, USA

­Tumors of the Urinary Bladder
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Tumors of the urinary bladder are uncommon in dogs
and rare in cats. Transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) is the
most common primary tumor of the urinary bladder in
both species. Other tumors reported include squamous
cell carcinoma, leiomyosarcoma, leiomyoma, undifferentiated carcinoma, lymphoma, hemangiosarcoma,
rhabdomyosarcoma, fibroma, and other mesenchymal
tumors.
Transitional cell carcinoma is most often located in the
trigone region of the bladder in dogs and at the apex in
cats. Mass lesions and thickening of the bladder wall can
lead to partial or complete urinary tract obstruction.
Urethral and prostatic involvement has been reported
in 56% and 29% of cases respectively. At the time of
­diagnosis, lymph node involvement is reported in 16% of
cases, with 14% demonstrating spread to distant sites.
The overall metastatic rate is 50%.
Epidemiology
The overall incidence of bladder tumors is 2% of all
reported malignancies in the dog. In cats, bladder cancer
is rarely reported. Risk factors associated with the development of TCC include exposure to older‐generation
topical flea and tick control products (i.e., flea and tick
dips), lawn herbicides and pesticides, obesity, female sex,
and a strong breed‐associated risk. The female:male
ratio of dogs with TCC has been reported to range from
1.71:1 to 1.95:1. The risk is higher in neutered dogs than
in intact dogs of both sexes. New‐generation spot‐on
flea control products do not appear to be associated
with TCC.

Signalment
Affected dogs and cats are usually older, with an average
age of 11 years and 13 years respectively. The most
commonly affected breeds include West Highland
­
white terriers, beagles, dachshunds, Shetland sheepdogs,
and Scottish terriers which have an 18‐fold risk of
­ eveloping TCC.
d
History and Clinical Signs
The most common clinical signs associated with TCC are
stranguria, pollakiuria, hematuria, dysuria, and urinary
incontinence. Urinary tract signs may present for weeks
to months prior to diagnosis. Temporary relief of these
signs may be a­ssociated with the use of antibiotics.
In more severe cases, abdominal palpation may reveal a
palpable caudal abdominal mass. Rectal examination
abnormalities include urethral thickening or sublumbar
lymphadenopathy. TCC can also metastasize to the inguinal lymph nodes, so palpation of the inguinal fat pads
may reveal firm masses. Other lower urinary tract conditions resembling bladder TCC include other types of neoplasia, ­cystitis, polypoid cystitis, polyps, granulomatous
­cystitis/urethritis, and cystic calculi. Rarely, dogs have
shifting leg lameness or warm, swollen, and painful limbs
due to paraneoplastic hypertrophic osteopathy.
Diagnosis
Diagnostic evaluation of a patient with suspected TCC
should include deep abdominal palpation and rectal
evaluation. Rectal examination may reveal thickening
of the urethra and enlargement of internal lymph nodes.
The complete blood count and serum biochemical panel
may reveal signs of renal involvement. Urine sediment

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1308

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

reveals malignant cells in only 30% of cases. In cases with
high index of suspicion for a bladder mass, cystocentesis
should be avoided to decrease the chance of tumor
­transplantation or bladder rupture. Concurrent urinary
tract infection is prevalent in TCC cases, therefore urine
culture is recommended.
Diagnostic imaging is essential for documentation of
a bladder mass. Abdominal radiographs are usually
unrewarding unless the lesion is mineralized. However,
radiographs may show sublumbar lymphadenopathy,
prostatomegaly, a caudal abdominal mass or bony metastases. Thoracic radiographs demonstrate pulmonary
metastasis in 17% of cases at the time of diagnosis.
Pulmonary changes may include nodular interstitial or
lobar interstitial opacities and alveolar infiltrates.
Ultrasonography is a sensitive diagnostic tool to evaluate the urinary tract and has largely replaced the use of
double‐contrast cystography. Ultrasonography can also
confirm ureteral obstruction when there is dilation of the
renal pelvis alone or accompanied by hydronephrosis.
Histopathology is the gold standard for the diagnosis
of TCC. However, cytology can also be utilized. There
are multiple methods for obtaining bladder tissue samples such as cystotomy, cystoscopy, and traumatic catheterization. Due to sampling size, multiple tissue samples
should be submitted to increase the diagnostic yield.
Most recently, A DNA based assay to detect genetic
mutations specifically in the BRAF gene has proven to be
highly sensitive and specific for the diagnosis of TCC
(CADET® BRAF, Sentinel Biomedical). The test evaluates
malignant cells naturally shed and is therefore p
­ erformed
on voided urine samples. However, the assay is limited
TCC and experimentally it has been found that up to
15% do not have the mutation.
Therapy
Because the trigone and urethra are most commonly
involved in dogs, complete removal of the tumor is
­usually not possible. In addition, many dogs develop
multifocal bladder lesions. As a result, most dogs with
bladder tumors are managed medically, with chemotherapy, radiation and/or photodynamic therapy.
If a patient is suffering from urinary obstruction, surgery may be considered to reestablish urine flow or place
a cystostomy tube. The most common disadvantages of
tube cystostomy are recurrent urinary tract infections
and premature removal of the tube by the patient.
Urethral stents are gaining favor over cystostomy tubes.
Stents are placed surgically and nonsurgically using
fluoroscopy. The most common indication for urethral
stenting is luminal obstruction secondary to tumor infiltration. In a series of 12 cases, urethral stents relieved
obstruction in all cases. The outcome was fair to excel-

lent in 10/12 cases. Urinary incontinence is the most
common complication.
The use of radiation therapy for the treatment of TCC
of the bladder is limited. The reported one‐ and two‐year
survival rates following intraoperative radiation therapy
were 69% and 23%, respectively. Therapy‐related complications include urinary incontinence, pollakiuria, and
stranguria, all of which affect the patient’s quality of life.
A report of weekly course fractional external beam radiation therapy in combination with mitoxantrone and
piroxicam was well tolerated but results were no better
when compared to medical therapy alone. However,
90% of the dogs had amelioration of their clinical signs.
The mainstay treatment of TCC in dogs is systemic
medical therapy with cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitors
alone or in combination with chemotherapy. Cure rates
are relatively low but several different drugs can lead to
remission or stable disease. In dogs, single‐agent therapy
with piroxicam or cisplatin has shown a response rate of
20% with a median survival time of approximately six
months. Although the concurrent use of cisplatin and
piroxicam combination therapy has shown a response
rate of 70%, the high incidences of renal failure lead to
early termination of the protocol.
The most commonly used chemotherapy combination in dogs is mitoxantrone (5 mg/m2 IV q3 weeks) and
piroxicam (0.3 mg/kg once a day). This combination
has a documented response rate of 35% and median
survival of 291 days. Indications to continue therapy
include positive response such as complete or partial
remission. Stable disease is considered a positive
response as long as the patient has no detrimental
effects associated with chemotherapy administration
and a good quality of life.
Deracoxib (Dermaxx®, Novartis), a COX‐2 inhibitor, at
a dose of 3 mg/kg/day, has shown positive responses,
with 17% of dogs having a partial response and 71% of
dogs having stable disease.
Prognosis
The prognosis for TCC in dogs will largely depend on
tumor size, location, and metastasis at the time of diagnosis. Multiple different treatments have been identified
that result in remission and stable disease for several
months. Most of these patients will have an excellent
quality of life while on treatment. Prognostic factors
for survival are tumor stage at the time of diagnosis
(Box 146.1), younger age (increased risk of distant metastasis), prostate involvement (increased risk of distant
metastasis), and higher T stage (increased risk of nodal
and distant metastasis). Information regarding prognostic factors in other bladder tumors is limited. Prognostic
factors for bladder tumor in cats have not been well

VetBooks.ir

146 Tumors of the Urinary Tract

Box 146.1 TNM clinical staging system for canine
bladder cancer
T – primary tumor
Tis Carcinoma in situ
T0 No evidence of a primary tumor
T1 Superficial papillary tumor
T2 Tumor invading the bladder wall, with induration
T3 Tumor invading neighboring organs (prostate,
uterus, vagina, and pelvic canal)

­cystadenocarcinoma, and uterine tumors. This syndrome
is similar to Birt–Hogg–Dubé syndrome in humans.
Pulmonary metastases have been detected radiographically in 16–34% of dogs with primary renal tumors
at the time of diagnosis. At death, metastases were
detected in 69% of dogs with carcinomas, 88% of dogs
with sarcomas, and 75% of dogs with nephroblastomas.
Epidemiology

N – Regional lymph node (internal and external iliac
lymph node)
N0 No regional lymph node involvement
N1 Regional lymph node involved
N2 Regional lymph node and juxtaregional lymph
node involved

The etiology of renal tumors in dogs and cats is unknown.
The previously mentioned syndrome in German
­shepherd dogs is the result of a dominantly inherited
missense mutation of a tumor suppressor gene. In cats,
feline leukemia virus (FeLV) is strongly associated with
development of renal lymphoma.

M – Distant metastases
M0 No evidence of metastasis
M1 Distant metastases present

Signalment

defined. The reported median survival of cats treated
with surgery and adjunctive therapy (i.e., chemotherapy
or NSAIDs) was 269 days.

Most renal tumors occur in older dogs (mean age 8 years)
but nephroblastoma may occur at any age. The male to
female ratio of dogs with epithelial renal tumors has
been reported to be 1.2:1. In cats, the median age at
­diagnosis was 11 years with a similar number of male and
female cats.

­Urethral Tumors

History and Clinical Signs

Most tumors affecting the urethra are malignant.
Transitional cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma
are the most commonly reported tumor types. Smooth
muscle tumors (e.g., leiomyosarcoma) have been reported
less frequently. Granulomatous urethritis, a benign
­condition of the urethra, must be differentiated from
malignant tumors due to the different treatment
approaches and prognosis. Treatment recommendations
and response rates for urethral tumors are similar to
those of the bladder.

Clinical signs associated with renal tumors are not specific. Presenting complaints may include weight loss,
polyuria, lethargy, hematuria, abdominal pain or signs
suggestive of renal failure (vomiting, anorexia). Physical
examination may reveal a midabdominal mass and
­occasionally bilateral renal enlargement.

­Renal Tumors
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Primary renal tumors are uncommon in dogs and cats. The
majority of these tumors are malignant and more than half
are epithelial in origin. In cats, lymphoma is the most common renal tumor and can affect both kidneys. In a report of
54 dogs with renal tumors, the most common was renal
cell carcinoma. Other tumors that can occur in the kidney
include TCC, nephroblastoma, hemangiosarcoma, other
sarcomas, and lymphomas. An unusual syndrome in
female German shepherd dogs consists of slow‐growing
dermal fibrosis and fibromas, concomitant renal

Diagnosis
Clinicopathologic findings include mild anemia alone or
accompanied with marked neutrophilia, or abnormalities
consistent with renal azotemia. Paraneoplastic ­syndromes
such as polycythemia, neutrophilia, and hypertrophic
osteopathy have been reported.
Ultrasonography is highly sensitive for the diagnosis of
renal neoplasia. Tissue samples can be obtained by
­ultrasound‐guided percutaneous biopsy or at the time of
surgery.
Therapy and Prognosis
Nephrectomy is the treatment of choice for dogs with
unilateral renal tumors without evidence of azotemia
or distant metastasis. Excretory urography, computed
tomography (CT), and evaluation of glomerular filtration rate (GFR) via scintigraphy may also be useful,

1309

VetBooks.ir

1310

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

­especially for surgical planning. Evaluation of possible
tumor extension into the vena cava is important if surgery is considered.
The reported median survival time for dogs with
renal cell carcinoma treated with nephrectomy is eight
months. Standardized chemotherapy as an adjunct or in
the metastatic setting for renal carcinoma has not been
well defined. In humans, sunitinib, a multikinase receptor inhibitor, has shown antitumor activity against metastatic renal cell carcinoma. At this time, controlled
studies using tyrosine kinase inhibitors against renal

­carcinoma in veterinary patients are lacking. Toceranib
phosphate, a multikinase receptor inhibitor similar to
sunitinib, is approved for mast cell neoplasia in veterinary patients and may be considered for the treatment of
metastatic renal carcinoma.
Chemotherapy treatment for renal lymphoma is similar to protocols used to treat lymphoma in other organs.
Approximately 60% of cats achieve complete remission.
Negative prognostic factors included involvement of
other organ system (CNS), FeLV infection, and severity
of renal failure.

­Further Reading
Knapp DW. Tumors of the urinary system. In: Withrow S,
Vail D, Page R, eds. Withrow and MacEwen’s Small
Animal Clinical Oncology, 5th edn. St Louis, MO:
Elsevier, 2013, pp. 572–81.

Pressler BM. Cancer and the kidney In: Scansen B,
Bonagura J, eds. Kirk and Bonagura’s Current
Veterinary Therapy XVI. St Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2009,
pp. 925–30.

VetBooks.ir

1311

147
Tumors of the Male Reproductive System
Trina Hazzah, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)
VCA West Los Angeles Animal Hospital, Los Angeles, CA, USA

­Testicular Tumors
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Testicular tumors are the most common cancer found in
the male reproductive tract and are typically considered
nonaggressive. Primary testicular neoplasia commonly
arises from three separate areas of the testis: the susten­
tacular cells of Sertoli (Sertoli cell tumors), interstitial
cells (Leydig cell tumors), and germinal epithelium (sem­
inoma). A recent study evaluated 345 testicular tumors;
seminomas (33.9%) were the most common followed
by interstitial cell tumors (33%), and lastly Sertoli cell
tumors (26.4%). Although less frequently seen, other tumor
types can be found such as lymphoma, hemangiosarcoma,
and others.
Epidemiology
The prevalence of testicular tumors in dogs is 27%, which
has increased from previous years. A cryptorchid testicle
has an approximately 10 times increased risk of develop­
ing cancer compared to a descended testicle. This effect
may be in part due to the higher temperature of the
retained testis within the body. Of retained testes tumors,
34% are seminomas and 54% are Sertoli cell tumors.
Other risk factors are age, breed, and exposure to envi­
ronmental carcinogens. In one study, intact dogs over 6
years of age had an increased incidence of testicular
tumors. Collies and Shetland sheepdogs were five times
more likely to develop testicular tumors, specifically
Sertoli cell tumors. Environmental carcinogen exposure
has also been a proven risk factor.
Military working dogs in the Far East that were exposed
to chemical sprays like Agent Orange, herbicides, and
dioxin demonstrated an increased risk of seminomas.

Signalment
Testicular tumors are diagnosed in older dogs, with a
median age of approximately 10 years. No specific breed
predilection has been consistently described.
History and Clinical Signs
Sertoli cell tumors are often large (1–5 cm). Atrophy of
the contralateral testicle is common. Dogs with Sertoli
cell tumors can present with bilateral dorsal alopecia,
hyperpigmentation of the skin or scrotum, enlarged nip­
ples, squamous metaplasia of the prostate, gynecomas­
tia, and thinning of the skin. Many of these clinical signs
are associated with hyperestrogenism which causes signs
of feminization and is found in approximately 20% of
cases. Severe bone marrow hypoplasia leading to life‐
threatening pancytopenia can result from the excessive
endogenous estrogen production from the tumor.
Leydig cell tumors are relatively small (usually under
2 cm) in size, and can be found as either solitary or mul­
tiple and unilateral or bilateral.
Seminomas are larger tumors (can be greater than
5 cm) and often appear as nodules. They can occur along
with interstitial and Sertoli cell tumors. Hyperestrogenism
is rarely seen with this tumor type although a recent case
study described a 5‐year‐old Yorkshire terrier with con­
firmed hyperestrogenemia and secondary alopecia.
Diagnosis
Staging with full blood analysis, urinalysis, thoracic radi­
ographs, and abdominal ultrasound should be performed
in all patients with testicular tumors. Results typically
reveal no abnormalities unless the presence of hyperes­
trogenemia results in blood dyscrasias or pancytopenia.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1312

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

The metastatic rate for seminomas and Sertoli tumors
is approximately 10%. Metastasis occurs through lym­
phatic invasion. Therefore, evaluation for regional
metastasis is warranted prior to surgery. There are
reports of aggressive seminomas in dogs with distant
metastasis to the spleen, lungs, meninges, eyes, and skin.
Testicular ultrasound is recommended in dogs with clin­
ical signs of testicular neoplasia and nonpalpable disease.
For dogs with signs of feminization, obtaining serum lev­
els of estradiol‐17‐beta may help support a diagnosis of
functional testicular tumor. Paraneoplastic hypertrophic
osteopathy, although rare, has been reported in a dog
with a Sertoli cell tumor. Therefore, extremity radio­
graphs should be performed in dogs with Sertoli cell
tumors with concomitant lameness.
Therapy
Castration, including scrotal ablation, is considered the
treatment of choice for testicular tumors and is curative
for dogs with nonmetastatic disease. However, when
metastatic disease is present, adjunctive chemotherapy
or radiation therapy is necessary. The use of cesium‐137
external beam radiation therapy for regional lymph node
metastasis in four dogs with seminoma has been
described and shown to be 100% effective. There is lim­
ited information regarding the usefulness of chemother­
apy, but there is suggested efficacy with both cisplatin
and bleomycin. There is recent evidence that seminomas
and Leydig cell tumors express kit (CD117), making the
use of a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (such as Palladia™, or
Gleevec®) a reasonable treatment option for cases with
metastatic disease. The use of metronomic chemother­
apy for high‐grade seminomas is also a valid treatment
option, as one study found that seminomas demon­
strated increased angiogenesis.
Prognosis
The prognosis is excellent for nonmetastatic testicular
tumors and guarded for metastatic tumors or dogs that
have blood dyscrasia secondary to hyperestrogenism.
Also, seminomas with high mitotic index and increased
numbers of agyrophilic nucleolar organizer regions
(AgNORs) had increased risk of metastasis.

­Prostate Tumors
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Carcinomas are the most common prostatic tumor, with
transitional cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma being
the most frequent types. Other types such as squamous

cell carcinoma, undifferentiated carcinoma, and sarco­
mas are rarely found. In dogs, most prostatic carcinomas
are suspected to be ductal or urothelial in origin, rather
than acinar, as in humans. The absence of androgen
receptors in ductal epithelial cells suggests that canine
prostatic carcinoma formation is likely androgen inde­
pendent. Controversy still exists regarding the effects of
castration on the development of canine prostatic
­carcinoma. Regardless, three studies did reveal that cas­
trated dogs were at increased risk for developing prostatic
­carcinoma with odds ratios ranging from 3.86 to 4.34.
Epidemiology
Prostate tumors are rare neoplasms in dogs, having a
prevalence of less than 1% of all canine cancers. These
tumors are extremely uncommon in cats with only a few
reported cases.
Signalment
There is no known breed predilection and prostatic car­
cinoma typically affects older dogs, median age 10 years.
Although exceedingly rare, prostatic carcinoma can
occur in older cats.
History and Clinical Signs
The most common presenting clinical sign in a dog with
a prostate tumor is either tenesmus or dysuria, including
hematuria, stranguria or pollakiuria. Older, castrated,
male dogs presenting with any of the above clinical signs
should be evaluated for urogenital cancer as few other
diseases cause such signs. Other possible presenting
signs are anorexia, weight loss, acute lameness or back
pain which may indicate metastasis to the pelvis or lum­
bar spine.
In cats, clinical signs vary but include dysuria, urethral
obstruction, and obstipation. Physical exam findings and
diagnostics are similar to those for prostate tumors in
dogs.
Diagnosis
Physical exam findings are variable but the most com­
mon abnormality is prostatomegaly that can be palpated
as irregular, firm, and painful and/or demonstrates loss of
the median raphe. Complete blood count and serum bio­
chemistry rarely reveal any specific changes. Urinalysis
often indicates pyuria or bacteriuria as secondary bacte­
rial infection is commonly associated with this neoplasia.
Many owners report improvement of clinical signs if
treated with antibiotic therapy, but this improvement is
often short‐lived. Three‐view thoracic radiographs are

VetBooks.ir

147 Tumors of the Male Reproductive System

recommended, although pulmonary metastasis occurs in
<10% of dogs at the time of diagnosis. Abdominal radio­
graphs are helpful in identifying prostatomegaly, miner­
alization of the prostate, sublumbar lymphadenopathy,
and/or bony lesions of the lumbar spine or pelvis (typi­
cally osteoblastic [proliferative] in nature).
Metastatic, hormone‐refractory, androgen‐independ­
ent prostate cancer in men is similar in biologic behavior
to canine prostatic carcinoma. Eighty five to ninety per­
cent of those diagnosed with this form of prostate cancer
will have evidence of skeletal metastasis during the
course of disease. Skeletal metastasis has been reported
to occur in 22% of dogs, with the majority of these lesions
found in the axial skeleton.
Abdominal ultrasound is the most useful of all imaging
modalities as it can help confirm regional metastasis
which occurs in approximately 50% of dogs at presenta­
tion. Definitive diagnosis requires cytology or histopa­
thology. Fine needle aspiration, via ultrasound guidance,
has been shown to be 80% accurate in confirming a diag­
nosis of carcinoma. As an alternative, a prostatic wash
can be performed. Although less invasive, it is also less
sensitive.
In the published feline cases, metastatic disease varied
in location, but included pulmonary, pancreatic, renal,
and myocardial.

Palliative irradiation, urethral stenting, laser ablation
or cystostomy tube placement can be considered in dogs
with urethral obstruction. These options are palliative
and may only increase survival time minimally.
Treatment for cats with prostatic carcinoma is
unknown. One reported cat underwent a prostatectomy
and received doxorubicin (30 mg/m2) and cyclophospha­
mide (300 mg/m2) and was euthanized 10 months later
due to recurrent disease.

Therapy

­Penis, Prepuce, and Scrotum Tumors

There is limited information regarding treatment effi­
cacy for dogs with prostate tumors. Androgen ablation
therapy is ineffective in dogs, as tumors arise from
androgen‐independent regions. For tumors confined to
the prostate, total or partial prostatectomy can be con­
sidered. Due to persistent incontinence and recurrent
urinary tract infections, patient morbidity is high while
owner satisfaction is expectedly low. Radiation therapy,
an alternate local treatment option, was not found to be
useful in one series of dogs which received a palliative
protocol. However, a more recent study indicated a 60%
response rate and an extended survival time (median
survival time 645 days) when intensity‐modulated
and image‐guided radiation therapy (IM/IGRT) were
utilized.
Due to the high metastatic rate in dogs, local treatment
alone is not effective. Cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitor
therapy is reported to be successful in treating various
types of urogenital carcinomas. Two studies indicated
that approximately 75–88% of canine prostate carcino­
mas express COX‐2. A previous publication indicated
that COX inhibitors were effective in the treatment of
canine prostatic carcinoma (MST 6.9 versus 0.7 months).
In a separate study, the addition of mitoxantrone chemo­
therapy to piroxicam did not increase survival.

Prognosis
The overall prognosis for prostate cancer is guarded to
grave as this tumor is both locally and distantly aggres­
sive. The rate of metastasis at the time of death is approx­
imately 80%, with the most common sites being the lungs,
regional lymph nodes, liver, and bone. Prognostic indica­
tors that have been found to be negatively associated with
survival include the presence of metastasis at diagnosis,
presence of clinical signs at diagnosis, and the lack of
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug (NSAID) therapy.
It is difficult to confirm treatment and prognostic
information for cats based on the limited reports availa­
ble. However, it would be reasonable to consider that
these tumors have a similar prognosis to their canine
counterparts as they also tend to be aggressive.

Etiology/Pathophysiology
Tumors of the penis, prepuce, and scrotum are rare in
dogs and even rarer in cats. The most common tumors
of the penis are transmissible venereal tumor (TVT) and
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). The prepuce can also
be affected by TVT. Most tumors of the prepuce and
scrotum are those associated with skin, specifically SCC,
melanoma, and mast cell tumor (MCT). Other reported
tumors that can affect all three areas include hemangio­
sarcoma, lymphoma, lipoma, plasmacytoma, soft tissue
sarcoma, ossifying fibroma, chondrosarcoma, and osteo­
sarcoma of the os penis.
Epidemiology
Limited information is available for this group of tumors.
See the section on epidemiology for transmissible vene­
real tumors below and the respective chapters for spe­
cific tumor types.
Signalment
With the exception of TVT, tumors of the penis, pre­
puce, and scrotum are generally diagnosed in older dogs.

1313

VetBooks.ir

1314

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

For TVT, young, sexually active dogs are most com­
monly affected.
History and Clinical Signs
Presenting signs are dependent on tumor location and
include stranguria, hematuria, discharge, foul odor, con­
stant licking, and a large mass.
Diagnosis
Complete staging including abdominal ultrasound to
evaluate for regional lymphadenopathy and three‐view
thoracic radiography is recommended. Fine needle aspi­
ration or preferably biopsy is recommended to obtain a
definitive diagnosis.

wolves. When evaluating the karyotype of TVTs, world­
wide, they are similar and are characterized by 59 chro­
mosomes (versus 78 in normal dogs).
Epidemiology
There is a higher prevalence of TVT in warm climates
and in rural areas where there are large numbers of free‐
roaming, reproductively unaltered dogs.
Signalment
Transmissible venereal tumor affects both female and
male dogs. There is an increased risk in young, sexually
active dogs.
History and Clinical Signs

Therapy
Surgery is the treatment of choice for the majority of
tumors in this group. The exception is TVT (see section
on TVT below). Penile amputation may be required
when tumors are invasive or when extensive prepuce
removal is performed. For scrotal tumors, castration
with scrotal ablation is recommended. Adjunctive ther­
apy relevant to the tumor type is warranted when metas­
tasis or recurrence occurs.
Prognosis
The reader is encouraged to refer to the specific tumor
type chapters for a more in‐depth review. Overall, the
prognosis for nonmetastatic tumors, that can be com­
pletely excised, is good to excellent. However, for meta­
static or recurrent tumors the prognosis is guarded to
poor. Osteosarcoma of the os penis may have a guarded
prognosis as this tumor has the potential to metastasize
similar to other axial forms.

­Transmissible Venereal Tumor
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Transmissible venereal tumor is often transmitted
through coitus but can also spread through close contact
such as sniffing or licking of the genitalia. The exact ori­
gin of this tumor is unclear but evaluation of antigen
expression suggests that TVT expresses similar markers
to histiocytes. Canine TVT can be observed in leishma­
niotic dogs, and amastigotes can be harbored in canine
TVT cells.
Transmissible venereal tumors can affect other mem­
bers of the canine family such as foxes, coyotes, and

Transmissible venereal tumor can present as solitary or
multiple nodules on the external genitalia that appear as
pedunculated or cauliflower‐like masses. In males, it
usually occurs on the bulbus glandis but can be seen on
the penis or prepuce. In female dogs, the lesions develop
in or around the vagina. Infected dogs can present with a
few weeks (or months) history of bloody discharge,
deformed external genitalia, ulceration or swelling of the
affected area. Differential diagnosis may include urinary
tract infections, prostatitis, other causes of paraphimosis
or phimosis or other malignancies (urogenital carcino­
mas, sarcomas, or other round cell tumors).
Rarely, dogs can have extragenital lesions without a
primary lesion. These ulcerative, hemorrhagic lesions
can occur in the mouth, nose, eyes or skin caused by bit­
ing or rubbing which can predispose the skin to implan­
tation of the TVT.
Diagnosis
Transmissible venereal tumor should be suspected if the
geographic location, history, lifestyle, and clinical signs
fit the diagnosis. To obtain a definitive diagnosis, either
cytologic or histopathologic confirmation is required.
Microscopically, the cells are large, discrete (round cells)
with abundant blue cytoplasm containing distinct clear
vacuoles. Single or multiple nucleoli and mitotic figures
may be seen (Figure 147.1).
Transmissible venereal tumors have the immunohisto­
chemical staining characteristics of histiocytes. They
stain positive to antibodies against vimentin, lysozyme,
­macrophage‐specific immunostain (ACM)1, and alpha‐1‐
antitrypsin (AAT). Therefore, the use of immunohisto­
chemistry may be helpful in cases where it is difficult
to confirm a diagnosis or if there are atypical metastatic
sites present.

VetBooks.ir

147 Tumors of the Male Reproductive System

Figure 147.1 Fine needle aspirate of a canine TVT. Note the
homogeneous population of discrete round cells with mild
anisocytosis and anisokaryosis. The cells have a moderate amount
of cytoplasm with multiple discrete clear cytoplasmic vacuoles.

Any dog with suspected TVT should undergo full
staging, including urinalysis, as there is evidence that
dogs with TVT are at high risk of developing urinary
tract infections. Although metastatic disease occurs in
less than 10% of reported cases, evaluating for local
metastasis with abdominal ultrasound and three‐view
thoracic radiographs is recommended. A differential for
suspected metastasis is transplantation (autologous or
allogeneic) of TVT from the primary genital lesion.
Therapy
There are multiple treatment options for TVT. The least
invasive, least expensive and most effective option is
the use of single‐agent vincristine chemotherapy. Admin­
istering vincristine at the recommended dose of 0.5–

0.7 mg/m2 IV once weekly for 3–6 treatments elicits a
complete response in over 90% of dogs. Other protocols
involving cyclophosphamide, vinblastine, doxorubicin,
and methotrexate have been used with less success.
However, for vincristine‐resistant tumors, doxorubicin
given at 30 mg/m2 IV every three weeks can be effective.
Radiation therapy is an effective treatment modality
for TVT. Orthovoltage radiation was evaluated in 18
dogs with solitary primary genital and cutaneous lesions.
All lesions were treated with a total dose of 10–30 Gy.
Seven dogs had a complete response to a single fraction
of 10 Gy. The remaining patients required an additional
2–3 fractions to achieve a complete response. In a sepa­
rate study, 15 dogs with primary genital TVT received
cobalt irradiation. A 100% complete response rate was
reported.
Surgery can be used in cases of primary or metastatic
lesions, but it is not typically recommended as the recur­
rence rate can be up to 70%.
Lastly, the use of immunotherapy with intralesional
bacillus Calmette–Guérin (BCG) has been shown to be
effective as a single agent and in combination with
­vincristine therapy.
Prognosis
The prognosis for TVT is good to excellent as some dogs
can experience spontaneous regression. The majority of
dogs that receive single‐agent vincristine therapy or radi­
ation therapy will be cured of their disease. The progno­
sis is, however, guarded for dogs that have ocular or
central nervous system invasion or evidence of dissemi­
nated metastasis. An increase in the AgNOR area in the
nucleus was found to be a negative prognostic indicator
in dogs with TVT.

­Further Reading
Ganguly B, Das U, Das AK. Canine transmissible venereal
tumor: a review. Vet Compar Oncol 2016; 14(1): 1–12.
Grieco V, Riccardi E, Greppi GF, Teruzzi F, Iermanò V,
Finazzi M. Canine testicular tumours: a study on 232
dogs. J Compar Pathol 2008; 138(2‐3): 86–9.
Hazzah T, Kass P, Brodsky E, et al. Evaluation of
mitoxantrone with piroxicam as first line chemotherapy

for carcinoma of the prostate in dogs. Int J Appl Res Vet
Med 2013; 11(1): 16–24.
Nødtvedt A, Gamlem H, Gunnes G, Grotmol T, Indrebø A,
Moe L. Breed differences in the proportional morbidity
of testicular tumours and distribution of histopathlogic
types in a population‐based canine cancer registry. Vet
Compar Oncol 2011; 9(1): 45–54.

1315

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1317

148
Gynecologic Cancers
Trina Hazzah, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)
VCA West Los Angeles Animal Hospital, Los Angeles, CA, USA

­Uterine Tumors
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Uterine cancer is extremely rare in dogs and cats. This is
in part because the overwhelming majority of pets are
spayed. Leiomyoma is the most common uterine tumor
in the dog, followed by leiomyosarcoma. Other types of
tumors have been reported such as fibroma, lipoma,
hemangiosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, angiolipoleiomyoma,
adenoma, adenocarcinoma, and extramedullary plasmacytoma. In women, estrogen is considered to be the
­primary factor in the development of uterine carcinoma.
It is believed that both endogenous and exogenous
­estrogen can result in endometrial hyperplasia. It also
potentiates the transformation of endometrial hyperplasia to endometrial carcinoma. Estrogen is not the underlying hormone responsible for endometrial changes in
dogs. In fact, it is progesterone that plays a large role in
both neoplastic and nonneoplastic gynecologic diseases
of the dog. Dogs develop cystic endometrial hyperplasia
which is much less likely to transform into carcinoma.
The most common uterine tumor in the cat is adenocarcinoma which arises from the endometrium. Although
much rarer, leiomyoma, leiomyosarcoma, hemangioma,
squamous cell carcinoma, and carcinosarcoma have
been reported. An association of feline l­eukemia virus
(FeLV) and the development of uterine adenocarcinoma
in cats have been reported.
Birt–Hogg–Dubé (BHD) syndrome is a rare inherited
condition that occurs in German shepherd dogs resulting from a mutation in the canine orthologue (folliculin)
tumor suppresser gene. It manifests in multiple uterine
leiomyomas, bilateral renal cystadenocarcinomas, and
nodular dermatofibrosis. A similar BHD syndrome has
been noted to occur in humans.

Epidemiology
The incidence of uterine tumors is less than 0.5% in dogs
and approximately 1% in cats. BHD is inherited through
an autosomal dominant pattern.
Signalment
Uterine tumors typically occur in middle‐aged to older
dogs and cats, but there are reports in dogs under 1 year
of age. These tumors are overwhelmingly more common
in intact females, but there are reports of uterine stump
carcinomas in spayed females. There is no s­ pecific breed
predilection.
History and Clinical Signs
Most dogs and cats with uterine tumors are asymptomatic. However, purulent to hemorrhagic vaginal discharge, lethargy, anorexia, constipation, and pyometra
can occur. Other signs may be associated with the
­metastatic lesions themselves.
Diagnosis
A minimum database including complete blood count,
biochemistry, and urinalysis is recommended for any
animal with potential gynecologic cancer. Abdominal
radiographs may reveal a mass effect in the caudal
­abdomen. To thoroughly evaluate the extent of disease
or for the presence of regional metastasis, an abdominal
ultrasound is required. Although the majority of uterine
tumors are benign in the dog, three‐view thoracic
radiographs should be performed. In cats, thoracic
­
­radiographs and abdominal ultrasound are mandatory
as malignant uterine tumors are associated with a high

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1318

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

metastatic rate (up to 50%). Definitive diagnosis
requires histology and is easily obtained at the time of
hysterectomy.
Therapy
Ovariohysterectomy is the treatment of choice in all
cases of uterine tumors, except in the setting of distant
metastasis or carcinomatosis. Surgical excision of any
regional metastatic foci is also recommended.
In women, adjunctive chemotherapy has been shown
to have a mild to modest benefit for metastatic leiomyosarcomas and carcinosarcomas when compared to surgery or radiation alone. Although there are no veterinary
reports on the use of chemotherapy for uterine tumors,
it is highly recommended in cases of malignant or
­metastatic tumors. Based on human data, it would be
reasonable to consider chemotherapeutics such as cisplatin, carboplatin, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, gemcitabine, and ifosfamide as viable therapeutic options.
A 2007 study evaluated the presence of estrogen and
progresterone receptors in smooth muscle genital
tumors. Estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) was found in
56.3% and progesterone receptor (PR) in 84.4% of canine
tumors. This finding makes hormone receptor antagonist therapy a reasonable treatment option.
Prognosis
The prognosis is excellent for dogs and cats with benign
tumors following complete ovariohysterectomy. For
malignant tumors localized to the uterus, the prognosis
can be good as many of these dogs can still be cured with
surgery. However, the prognosis is guarded for metastatic tumors. In cats with uterine adenocarcinomas, the
prognosis is guarded to poor as they often metastasize.

­Vaginal Tumors
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Vaginal tumors are the second most common tumor of
the female reproductive system. The most common
­histologic type is leiomyoma. These tumors, similar to
the uterine leiomyomas, are slow growing and do not
metastasize. Other less common tumors include fibroma,
polyp, lipoma, myxoma, lymphoma, liposarcoma, mast
cell tumor, adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma,
fibrosarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, osteosarcoma, hemangiosarcoma, and TVT.
One study found that all pedunculated masses were
benign. And of the sessile, broad‐based masses, all were
malignant (with the majority being TVT).

Feline vaginal tumors are extremely rare, with most
being benign.
Epidemiology
In dogs, there is some evidence that vaginal neoplasia
may be associated with a history of mammary tumors,
ovarian cysts, pyometra or previous treatment with
reproductive hormones. One study found that the
­majority of dogs with vaginal cancer are sexually intact
and nulliparous.
Signalment
The mean age for dogs with vaginal cancer is 10.8 years.
Although there is no breed predilection, both boxers and
poodles have been reported to have an increased risk.
History and Clinical Signs
Common clinical signs reported include purulent to
hemorrhagic vaginal discharge, swelling of the vulva or
perineal region, a vulvar mass, constant licking of the
vulva, dysuria or tenesmus. Tumors typically arise from
the vulva, vestibule, or vaginal roof. There is no correlation between the location of the mass and histologic
tumor type.
Diagnosis
Definitive diagnosis of malignancy requires histology.
However, the presence of a vaginal mass is often easily
determined based on history, clinical signs, and physical
exam findings (including a digital vaginal exam). For
small lesions, vaginoscopy may be required. Full staging
is recommended for all animals with vaginal tumors:
complete blood count, biochemistry, three‐view t­ horacic
radiographs, and an abdominal ultrasound. Paraneoplastic
hypercalcemia has been infrequently reported to be
associated with older basset hounds with clitoral
adenocarcinoma.
Treatment
Surgical excision with dorsal episiotomy is the treatment of choice. Concurrent ovariohysterectomy is also
recommended as some malignancies such as leiomyomas may be hormone dependent. For highly invasive
vaginal tumors, either subtotal vaginectomy or a complete ­
v ulvovaginectomy and perineal urethrostomy
can be performed. It is advised that any metastatic foci
should be removed at the same time.
Adjunctive radiation therapy and chemotherapy can
be considered for animals that have incompletely excised

VetBooks.ir

148 Gynecologic Cancers

malignant tumors or metastatic/high‐grade tumors,
respectively.
The use of carbon dioxide laser ablation in conjunction
with doxorubicin chemotherapy(at 30 mg/m2 intravenously) every four weeks for a total of two treatments has
been shown to provide long‐term control in one case
report of a poodle with vaginal fibrosarcoma.
Another potential treatment is the use of the progesterone receptor antagonist aglepristone, as neoadjuvant
therapy prior to surgery for large benign vaginal tumors.

­typically unilateral but can be found bilaterally. Similar
to dogs, granulosa cell tumors in cats can metastasize
and are hormonally active. Although there are few reports
of teratomas in cats, they have been noted to occur in
young animals and rarely metastasize.

Prognosis

Signalment

Surgery is often curative for benign tumors and the
­prognosis is guarded for malignant tumors as they have
the potential to metastasize and recur.

The majority of ovarian tumors affect older dogs, with
the exception of teratomas. One study found pointers
had an increased risk of developing epithelial tumors
while English bulldogs were at higher risk for granulosa
cell tumors. German shepherds and poodles were
also reported to have a higher occurrence of ovarian
tumors.

­Ovarian Tumors
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Ovarian tumors can arise from different locations
within the ovary and are classified based on their origin,
such as epithelial cells, sex cord stromal elements of the
ovary and germ cells. Epithelial tumors are further characterized as adenoma, cystadenoma, adenocarcinoma,
and undifferentiated carcinoma. Tumors referred to as
sex cord stromal tumors are granulosa cell tumors,
­luteomas, and thecomas. Although more common in
the male, this group also includes Sertoli, Leydig and
Sertoli‐Leydig cell tumors. Lastly, the germ cell tumors
include dysgerminoma, teratocarcinoma, teratoma, and
choriocarcinoma. Other rare tumor types include
hemangiosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, fibrosarcoma,
and carcinosarcoma.
The majority of ovarian tumors, regardless of their histologic subtype, are unilateral. However, adenocarcinomas and mixed sex cord stromal tumors (specifically
Sertoli‐Leydig cell tumor) can occur bilaterally in about
30% of cases. The rates of occurrence for each type v­ aries
depending on the study, but granulosa cell tumors and
epithelial tumors account for most ovarian tumors in
dogs and granulosa cell tumors are the most common
ovarian tumor found in cats.
The overall metastatic rate for ovarian tumors in dogs
is approximately 25%, with a higher incidence, approximately 50%, in both adenocarcinomas and teratomas.
Sex cord tumors are the only histologic type that has the
potential of being hormonally active, as they arise from
gonadal tissue of the ovary and can produce steroid
hormones.
In cats, the most common ovarian tumor is granulosa cell tumor, followed by dysgerminomas. They are

Epidemiology
As ovarian tumors are extremely rare in both dogs and
cats, the true prevalence is unknown.

History and Clinical Signs
The clinical signs reported are variable but may include
vaginal discharge, distended abdomen, pyometra, and an
abnormal estrus cycle. If metastasis occurs, clinical signs
may be associated with the location of involvement, such
as ascites secondary to tumor effusion. As sex cord
tumors can cause hormonal dysfunction, signs associated with excess sex hormones (both estrogen and
progesterone) can be observed. Examples of such
­
changes include bilateral alopecia, vulvar enlargement,
vaginal bleeding, pyometra, and endometrial hyperplasia. Granulosa cell tumors rarely produce enough sex
hormone to cause bone marrow aplasia, but rare examples of sepsis or bleeding secondary to neutropenia and
thrombocytopenia have been reported.
Diagnosis
Although the metastatic rate for ovarian tumors is relatively low, it is still recommended that thorough staging
is performed including complete blood count, biochemistry, three‐view thoracic radiographs, and abdominal
ultrasound. An ultrasound is especially important to
help evaluate for local metastasis to regional lymph
nodes, surrounding organs, and peritoneum. It is not
recommended that ultrasound‐guided cytology/biopsy
be performed. If the tumor is malignant, seeding or
translocation of the tumor cells can occur. If histopathology cannot differentiate tumor type, the use of immunohistochemistry may be helpful. HBME‐1 (and cytokeratin
7) and inhibin‐alpha are useful markers to confirm epithelial and sex cord stromal tumor origin, respectively.

1319

VetBooks.ir

1320

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Many dogs with metastatic ovarian carcinoma can
present with secondary ascites. One study found that
the overall accuracy of using cytology to differentiate
ovarian carcinoma effusions from other types is approximately 95%.
Therapy
A complete ovariohysterectomy is the treatment of
choice for dogs with ovarian tumors that have no
­evidence of metastasis and typically results in a cure.
There are limited reports of dogs with metastatic
tumors. In one report, a dog was treated with cisplatin
50 mg/m2 intraperitoneally for ovarian carcinomatosis,
resulting in long‐term control. In humans, platinum
drugs, taxanes, and monoclonal antibodies are considered first‐line therapies. Based on human research and
success with chemotherapy, platinum agents should be
considered for metastatic ovarian tumors. In a recent

study, cyclooxygenase 2 (COX‐2) was found to play a
potential role in carcinogenesis and was expressed in
81% of canine ovarian carcinomas. Therefore, the use
of NSAID therapy, similar to what has been found in
other urogenital tumors, should be considered for
­ovarian carcinomas.
Prognosis
The prognosis is excellent for solitary ovarian tumors that
are completely excised with no evidence of metastasis. If
metastatic disease is present, the prognosis is guarded
to poor, depending on the response to c­hemotherapy.
The use of platinum drugs and COX‐2 inhibitors is
recommended.
Treatment and prognosis are similar in cats. Surgery is
the treatment of choice, and if metastatic disease is
present, carboplatin (intravenous or intraperitoneal)
­
and/or COX‐2 inhibitors are recommended.

­Further Reading
Bertazzolo W, Bonfanti U, Mazzotti S, Gelain ME.
Cytologic features and diagnostic accuracy of analysis of
effusions for detection of ovarian carcinoma in dogs.
Vet Clin Pathol 2012; 41(1): 127–32.
Borzacchiello G, Russo V, Russo M. Immunohistochemical
expression of cyclooxygenase‐2 in canine ovarian
carcinomas. J Vet Med A 2007; 54(5): 247–9.

Riccardi E, Grieco V, Verganti S, Finazzi M.
Immunohistochemical diagnosis of canine ovarian
epithelial and granulosa cell tumors. J Vet Diagn Invest
2007; 19(4): 431–5.

VetBooks.ir

1321

149
Mammary Cancer
Julie Bulman‐Fleming, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)
Veterinary Cancer Group, Tustin, CA, USA

­Canine Mammary Cancer
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Mammary tumors occur most commonly in intact
female dogs and in female dogs spayed later in life.
Hormone exposure, primarily during development of
the mammary glands, is the most significant risk factor.
Increasing age and breed are also consistently reported
risk factors. Obesity at 9–12 months of age and diets
high in red meat have also been associated with increased
risk of tumor development. These factors may influence
the level of estrogen and progestin in the body or augment the effect of these hormones on mammary tissue.
Estrogens and progestins stimulate growth and development of mammary tissue and may contribute to tumorigenesis through direct growth factor activity. Secondary
increases in growth hormone and insulin‐like growth
factor 1 may also contribute. In humans, estrogen and
progestin also increase DNA and chromosomal damage.
Early ovariohysterectomy is protective against mammary tumor development. Dogs spayed before their first
estrus have 0.5% lifetime risk. Dogs spayed before the second estrus have 8% risk and those spayed before the third
estrus 26% risk. The benefit of ovariohysterectomy beyond
the third heat appears slight, if any, though ovariohysterectomy once a mammary mass has been diagnosed may be
of some benefit. The age of first pregnancy and parity does
not appear to influence tumor development. Exposure to
exogenous progestins and estrogens increases the risk, and
has also been linked to tumor development at younger age.
Hormone exposure was confirmed or suspected in most
male dogs diagnosed with mammary tumors.
The entire mammary chain is exposed to the same
hormones and growth factors, which is known as field
effect carcinogenesis. As such, dogs are at risk for multiple mammary masses. Up to 66% of dogs have more than

one mass. There is histologic and chronologic evidence
that mammary masses may progress through benign, in
situ, and noninvasive stages before developing into invasive carcinoma. Estrogen and progesterone receptor levels appear to decrease as tumors become larger, less
differentiated, and more invasive.
Epidemiology
Mammary gland tumors are the most common tumors
in intact females, though the overall incidence depends
on the population in question. The lifetime risk of intact
female dogs has been reported to be as high as 26%. The
incidence in North America is lower than many other
regions due to the more common practice of early ovariohysterectomy. Evaluation of several European registries
showed that mammary tumors account for 50–70% of
tumors in intact female dogs. Approximately 1% of mammary tumors occur in males.
Signalment
Mammary masses occur most frequently in older female
dogs. The risk increases with age from 7 to 13 years, and
dogs with malignant masses tend to be older than those
with benign tumors. Increased risk is reported for ­poodles,
Chihuahuas, dachshunds, Yorkshire terriers, Maltese,
cocker spaniels, English springer spaniels, Brittany
spaniels, German shepherd dogs, German shorthair
pointers, English setters, and Doberman pinschers.
History and Clinical Signs
Most dogs with mammary tumors are otherwise
healthy. Dogs usually present for a palpable mass or a
mammary mass may be an incidental finding. Careful
palpation of the other glands, inguinal and axillary

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1322

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

nodes is ­imperative. Some studies have found that the
two caudal mammary glands are more commonly
affected.
Inflammatory mammary carcinomas account for
approximately 8% of mammary masses. Dogs are often
systemically ill, with painful, edematous mammary
glands. Dogs may also be inappetent, lethargic, and
febrile. Inflammatory mammary carcinomas may be misdiagnosed as mastitis, severe dermatitis or vasculitis.
Diagnosis
Evaluation of the mammary chain should be part of a
routine examination. The size, mobility, and appearance
may increase suspicion for malignancy. A minimum
database, including complete blood count, chemistry
profile, urinalysis, and thoracic radiographs, should be
completed. An abdominal ultrasound to assess visceral
lymph nodes is indicated and regional lymph nodes
should be aspirated when possible. The lymphatic drainage is unpredictable, but axillary, sternal, and inguinal
lymph nodes should be assessed.
Tumor stage has important prognostic and treatment
implications, and most clinicians use a modified five‐tier
World Health Organization (WHO) tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) staging scheme (Table 149.1). The original
WHO staging scheme has four stages. Tumor size has
been found to be prognostic, and so this delineates the
first three stages. The presence of lymph node metastases determines stage 4 disease regardless of tumor size,
and dogs with distant metastases have stage 5 disease.
Surgical resection and histopathology provide a
definitive diagnosis in most cases. Cytology can be performed if presurgical diagnosis is desired. Cytology has
been reported to be 67.5–93% accurate at differentiating benign from malignant masses, with sensitivity of
86–96% and 88–100% specificity for malignancy.
Cytologic diagnosis of malignancy also correlated well
with survival.
Table 149.1 Canine mammary tumor staging. Modified World
Health Organization Tumor, Node, Metastasis (TNM) staging
scheme

Stage Tumor size

Lymph node
metastasis

Distant
metastasis

1

T1 (T <3 cm)

N0 (none)

M0 (none)

2

T2 (T
3–5 cm)

N0 (none)

M0 (none)

3

T3 (T >5 cm)

N0 (none)

M0 (none)

4

Any T

N1 (positive)

M0 (none)

5

Any T

Any N

M1 (positive)

Forty to fifty percent of canine mammary masses are
benign. Both benign and malignant tumors may be simple or complex. Simple tumors are composed of only one
cell type whereas complex masses have both luminal and
myoepithelial components. In complex carcinomas, the
epithelial cells are neoplastic while the myoepithelium is
benign.
The most common benign masses include ductal ectasia, lobular and fibroepithelial hyperplasia, adenomatous
masses, and benign mixed tumors. Most malignant
tumors are carcinomas. Simple mammary carcinomas
are most often tubular, tubulopapillary, cystic, papillary,
cribriform or solid. Mucinous carcinoma, squamous cell
carcinoma, and malignant mixed tumors are less common. A histopathologic grading system for mammary
carcinomas exists, and has been found to be prognostic
in several studies. Criteria include the extent of tubule
formation, nuclear pleomorphism, and mitotic rate.
Mammary sarcomas are also reported, with extraskeletal
osteosarcoma being most common.
Therapy
Surgery is an integral part of therapy for mammary
tumors, with the exception of inflammatory carcinomas
and those with widespread metastases. In dogs, it is
unclear whether the extent of surgery is prognostic.
Most studies suggest that for a single mass, the outcome
is the same for mass resection and radical mastectomy as
long as excision is complete. However, given the prevalence of multiple tumors, unilateral radical mastectomy
has also been advocated. In a 2008 study, 58% of dogs
developed a second tumor which would have been prevented by unilateral mastectomy. However, in the same
study, had all dogs received unilateral mastectomies, 42%
would have had unnecessarily aggressive surgeries. If
multiple mammary masses are present, a regional, unilateral or staged bilateral mastectomy is indicated.
One study found that ovariohysterectomy at the time
of mass resection or within two years of developing
mammary carcinoma improved two‐year survival. This
may be because tumors in intact females retain some
hormone responsiveness. Hormone therapy with agents
like tamoxifen (estrogen receptor blocker) is not commonplace, in part because of the ease of sterilization and
also because of the significant risk of pyometra in intact
females. If the dog is to be spayed at the time of mass
removal, ovariohysterectomy should be performed first
to avoid tumor seeding.
For large, high‐grade, or metastatic tumors, surgery
alone is unlikely to be curative. However, the role of
chemotherapy for canine mammary carcinoma is
unclear. Adequately powered, randomized, controlled
trials are lacking. Chemotherapy is often recommended

VetBooks.ir

149 Mammary Cancer

for masses larger than 3 cm in diameter, when aggressive
behavior is predicted histologically, or when metastasis
is present. It is also advised for mammary sarcomas.
In a small, nonrandomized clinical trial, adjuvant 5‐
fluorouracil and cyclophosphamide improved survival.
After two years, the median survival time of treated
dogs was not reached compared to six‐month median
survival for those treated with surgery only. A 2012
study evaluating carboplatin alone and in combination
with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents postoperatively also found significant benefit. A benefit for doxorubicin, docetaxol, and gemcitabine has not been shown.
Simon et al. (2006) showed a trend towards increased
local control and improved survival when doxorubicin
or docetaxol was administered postoperatively but the
results did not reach statistical significance. Larger,
randomized, controlled studies are needed to better
­
evaluate the role of chemotherapy and the most effective
agents.
Prognosis
The most significant prognostic factors are tumor size,
stage, and histologic grade. Several studies have found
that tumors less than 3 cm carry the best prognosis,
while others have shown that tumors up to 5 cm carry a
similar prognosis. The median survival time for dogs
with stage 1 and 2 disease exceeds two years in most
studies. One study found that tumor size in the absence
of lymph node metastasis was not prognostic. However,
86% of dogs with lymph node metastases had primary
tumors larger than 5 cm. Dogs with lymph node and distant metastases generally survive less than six months
when treated with surgery alone.
Inflammatory carcinomas and sarcomas carry a poor
prognosis. The reported survival time of dogs with
inflammatory carcinomas is 25–30 days. The prevalence
of metastases is extremely variable between studies, with
8–100% metastases reported at diagnosis. A recent study
found improved survival of 183 days when dogs with
inflammatory mammary carcinomas were treated with
piroxicam.

those spayed between 12 and 24 months have 11% reduction in risk. Ovariohysterectomy later in life has not been
found protective. Exposure to exogenous progestins is
also associated with increased risk. Female cats exposed
to exogenous hormones have 3.4 times the risk of unexposed cats. Over one‐third of affected male cats had a
known history of progestin exposure. Benign changes
are commonly associated with pregnancy, pseudopregnancy, and progestin administration.
Epidemiology
Mammary tumors are the third most common tumor
type in female cats, accounting for 12–25% of tumors in
female cats in North America. In Europe, the incidence
has been reported to be 25–40%. The three main risk
factors are hormone exposure, age, and breed, with
intact females having seven times the risk of spayed
female cats. Eighty to ninety-five percent of feline mammary masses are malignant.
Signalment
Mammary tumors most commonly affect intact females
and those spayed as adults. The risk of developing mammary tumors increases from 6 to 14 years of age, with
peak incidence at 10–12 years. Male cats account for
1–5% of malignant masses. Siamese cats are at increased
risk and also tend to be younger when diagnosed.
History and Clinical Signs
Most cats with mammary tumors present for a palpable
mass within the mammary chain and are otherwise
healthy. Large, adherent or ulcerated masses may be
painful. The caudal glands have been reported to be
affected more often although some studies have shown
equal occurrence. Multiple masses occur in up to 60% of
cats. Inflammatory mammary carcinomas are rare in
cats but present with systemic signs and edematous,
painful mammae as in the dog.
Diagnosis

­Feline Mammary Cancer
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Exposure to estrogen and progesterone during mammary development plays the most significant role in
tumor development. As in dogs, estrogen and progesterone serve as trophic factors for mammary tissue. Cats
spayed before 6 months of age have 91% reduced risk,
those spayed before 12 months 86% reduced risk and

As most feline mammary tumors are malignant, initial
diagnostic tests should include thorough screening
for metastatic disease. This includes a complete blood
count, chemistry profile, serum thyroxine level, urinalysis, thoracic radiographs, and abdominal ultrasound.
Regional lymph nodes should be aspirated when possible. Lymphatic drainage is unpredictable and so axillary,
sternal, and inguinal nodes should be assessed. Cytology
may be helpful to rule out cutaneous or lymphoid
tumors.

1323

VetBooks.ir

1324

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Benign masses do occur in cats, accounting for 10–20%
of masses. The most common benign diseases are fibroad­
enomas, mammary duct ectasia, and fibroadenomatous
hyperplasia. Fibroadenomatous hyperplasia usually
occurs in young females during pregnancy or pseudopregnancy but can be seen in male or altered cats due to
exogenous progestins.
Tubular, papillary, tubulopapillary, cribriform, and
solid carcinomas are the most common malignancies.
Sixty percent of mammary carcinomas are deemed moderately differentiated, 27.3% are poorly differentiated,
and only 12.7% are well differentiated. Feline mammary
sarcomas and inflammatory carcinomas have been rarely
reported. Metastatic disease occurs in 50–90% of cats,
with up to 83% showing lymph node or pulmonary
metastasis. Visceral metastasis and carcinomatosis also
occur.
Tumor stage has been found to be prognostic. The
most commonly used system is a modified WHO four‐
stage system (Table 149.2). The original staging system
was also four tier but criteria included whether a metastatic lymph node was fixed or mobile, which has not
been found prognostic.
Therapy
For most solitary tumors, a unilateral radical mastectomy
is recommended. For multiple tumors involving both
mammary chains, staged bilateral radical mastectomies
should be performed. Unlike in dogs, the extent of surgery is prognostic, with cats undergoing radical mastectomies having longer disease‐free intervals. One study
found a trend towards increased survival, but a more
recent report did not show survival advantage. Most
mammary carcinomas are estrogen and progesterone
Table 149.2 Feline mammary tumor staging. Modified World
Health Organization Tumor, Node, Metastasis (TNM) staging
scheme

Stage Tumor size

Lymph node
metastasis

Distant
metastasis

1

T1 (T <2 cm)

N0 (none)

M0 (none)

2

T2 (T
2–3 cm)

N0 (none)

M0 (none)

3

T3 (T >3 cm)

Any N

M0 (none)

Any T

N1 (positive)

M0 (none)

4

Any T

Any N

M1 (positive)

receptor negative and so the role of concurrent
ovariohysterectomy is unclear. For benign masses,
­
ovariohysterectomy or withdrawal of exogenous hormones can induce regression.
While surgery alone can result in long‐term survival
for cats with stage 1 or 2 disease, the median survival for
cats with more advanced stages is 4–6 months. The benefit of chemotherapy is unproven but is advocated by
most clinicians for cats with negative prognostic factors.
The use of doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide in the
setting of gross disease has been associated with a
45–50% overall response rate. Two studies, which lacked
control groups, found no overall benefit to postoperative
doxorubicin therapy, but did report survival times for
cats with stage 3 tumors which were longer than historical controls. In these reports, cats with stage 3 tumors
survived a median of 448 and 460 days. McNeill et al.
(2009) did not find a benefit of adjuvant doxorubicin
chemotherapy over surgery alone. Within the population
of cats in the study, 47% had stage 1 tumors which are
expected to have long‐term survival with or without
chemotherapy. The authors comment that the study had
12% power to detect a difference between the groups.
Most clinicians advocate chemotherapy for cats with
tumors greater than 3 cm diameter, lymphatic invasion
or lymph node metastasis.
Prognosis
Median survival time is well correlated with tumor size
and stage. Reported survival times for cats with tumors
less than 2 cm range from 12 to 54 months. The median
survival times for cats with stage 2 disease range
between 9‐24 months. Cats with tumors larger than
3 cm or more advanced disease survive a median of 4–6
months when treated with surgery only. As noted above,
the addition of chemotherapy may improve the outcome for these cats, but clear benefit has not yet been
shown.
One study showed that tumor differentiation was also
prognostic, with 100% of cats with well‐differentiated
tumors being alive at one year, 57% with moderately differentiated tumors alive at one year, and no cats with
poorly differentiated tumors surviving to one year. As
most cats have moderately differentiated tumors, the
prognostic benefit of this information is limited. Age,
breed, percent necrosis, completeness of surgical excision, proliferative indices, and hormone receptor status
may also be prognostic.

VetBooks.ir

149 Mammary Cancer

­Further Reading
Abadie J, Nguyen F, Loussouarn D, et al. Canine invasive
mammary carcinomas as models of human breast
cancer. Part 2: immunophenotypes and prognostic
significance. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2018; 167(2):
459–68.
Carvalho MI, Silva‐Carvalho R, Pires I, et al. A
comparative approach to tumor‐associated
inflammation in mammary cancer between humans and
dogs. Biomed Res Int 2016; 2016: 4917387.
Kristiansen VM, Peña L, Díez Córdova, et al. Effect of
ovariohysterectomy at the time of tumor removal in
dogs with mammary carcinomas: a randomized
controlled trial. J Vet Intern Med 2016; 30(1): 230–41.
McNeill CJ, Sorenmo KU, Shofer SF, et al. Evaluation of
adjuvant doxorubicin‐based chemotherapy for the

treatment of feline mammary carcinoma. J Vet Intern
Med 2009; 23(1): 123–9.
Nguyen F, Peña L, Ibisch C, et al. Canine invasive
mammary carcinomas as models of human breast
cancer. Part 1: natural history and prognostic factors.
Breast Cancer Res Treat 2018; 167(3): 635–48.
Rasotto R, Berlato D, Goldschmidt, Zappulli V. Prognostic
significance of canine mammary tumor histologic
subtypes: an observational cohort study of 229 cases. Vet
Pathol 2017; 54(4): 571–8.
Simon D, Schoenrock D, Baumgartner W, Nolte I. Post‐
operative adjuvant treatment of invasive malignant
mammary gland tumors in dogs with doxorubicin and
docetaxel. J Vet Intern Med 2006; 29(5): 1184–90.

1325

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1327

150
Tumors of Bone and Joint
Stephanie L. Shaver, DVM, DACVS1, William T.N. Culp, VMD, DACVS1, and
Robert B. Rebhun, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Oncology)2
1
2

School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA, USA
Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Primary tumors of bone are most commonly diagnosed
in the appendicular skeleton, with osteosarcoma (OSA)
being the most common tumor type. Other neoplasms,
such as chondrosarcoma (CSA), fibrosarcoma (FSA),
hemangiosarcoma (HSA), and histiocytic sarcoma, are
less frequently identified. The metaphyseal region of
long bones is the typical location for appendicular OSA,
with the distal radius and proximal humerus being the
two most common sites. The proximal tibia and distal
femur may also be affected, with proximal femur, distal
tibia, distal humerus, and ulna being less common sites.
While many possible contributing factors have been
suggested, the precise etiology of OSA remains unknown.
Suspected risk factors include previous radiation therapy, fracture, and metal surgical implants. There is also
some evidence that the timing of spay/neuter may affect
the incidence of OSA, but a clear causal effect has not
been demonstrated.
Osteosarcoma is characterized by proliferation of
endosteal cells, which results in the tumor arising within
the medullary canal. This is responsible for the typical
radiographic appearance of bony lysis and periosteal
reaction. Two less common OSA variants, periosteal and
parosteal, exist. Periosteal OSA arises from cortical bone
but may invade the medullary canal; in contrast, parosteal
OSA is characterized by the development of tumor
external to the cortex, which does not invade into deeper
structures. While extremely rare, parosteal OSA likely
represents a less aggressive form of OSA.
Other neoplastic processes that can affect bone include
hematopoietic tumors (such as lymphoma, histiocytic
sarcoma, or multiple myeloma) and metastasis from a
solid tumor. Primary bone tumors such as osteosarcoma

­ etastatic
often metastasize to other bony sites; however, m
bony lesions secondary to other cancers are also common. Many carcinomas, particularly those arising from
the urogenital tract, often demonstrate a propensity for
bony metastasis. While not absolute, metastases are
commonly found in the diaphysis, whereas primary bone
tumors generally occupy the metaphyseal region.
Axial skeletal neoplasia may be caused by any of the
sarcoma types that affect the appendicular skeleton.
OSA remains the most common tumor in axial locations
as well, although it only accounts for about 25% of all
cases of axial skeletal neoplasia. The mandible and maxilla are the sites most often affected, but other bones of
the skull, the scapula, ribs, sternum, vertebrae, and pelvis
may also be affected. Multilobular osteochondrosarcoma
(MLO, also known as multilobular tumor of bone) typically affects the flat bones of the skull and is a slow‐growing, locally invasive tumor. The metastatic propensity of
MLO is largely dependent upon grade. In general, mortality from axial skeletal neoplasia occurs from local disease rather than metastasis, likely due to the challenging
nature of surgical resection in these areas. Mandibular
OSA appears to have a better prognosis than OSA in
appendicular or other axial locations. Improved prognosis may result from less aggressive biologic behavior
when compared with appendicular sites and from the
relative ease of complete surgical excision compared
with other axial sites.
Synovial cell sarcoma has been reported to be the most
common canine joint tumor; however, other reports also
describe a high incidence of histiocytic sarcoma affecting synovial surfaces. These tumors most commonly
affect large joints of the appendicular skeleton (e.g., stifle, elbow), and have biologic behavior similar to these
tumor types in other locations. Suspicion of a joint tumor

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1328

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

should be high for bony lesions where more than one
articular surface is involved.

­Epidemiology
Large‐ and giant‐breed dogs are most often affected with
appendicular OSA, and a genetic component to the disease has long been suspected based on observed breed
predilections. It should be noted that while small‐breed
dogs have a lower likelihood of developing OSA, they are
more likely to develop axial OSA than their large‐breed
counterparts.
Skeletal neoplasia is much less common in the cat,
where it is infrequently reported. OSA is the most common bone tumor in cats and, while locally invasive, carries a better prognosis than canine OSA due to the
overall lower incidence of metastasis and a protracted
course of disease in cats that do develop metastases. Like
dogs, appendicular OSA in cats occurs more frequently
than axial, but axial OSA is relatively more common
compared to the distribution in dogs.

­Signalment
Tumors of bone and joints typically affect dogs and cats
that are middle aged to older. A bimodal age distribution,
however, has been documented for canine OSA, with
two specific peaks at 1–2 years and 7–9 years of age.
Although the vast majority of dogs with OSA fall within
the older group, a young age should not preclude consideration of OSA as a diagnosis.
Large‐breed dogs are overrepresented, with breeds such
as the Great Dane, Rottweiler, golden retriever, German
shepherd, greyhound, Saint Bernard, Irish w
­ olfhound,
Scottish deerhound, borzoi, and Doberman pinscher
commonly diagnosed with bone tumors. No important
sex predilection between male and female dogs exists, but
neutered animals are potentially at greater risk.

­History and Clinical Signs
Dogs with appendicular bone or joint tumors typically
present for evaluation of lameness or swelling of a limb.
In many cases, the history may be that of a chronic, progressive lameness that has only been partially responsive
to analgesics. An animal may also present with an acute
onset of severe, nonweight‐bearing lameness, sometimes
due to pathologic fracture. It is not uncommon for owners to associate the acute onset with a nontraumatic
event such as running, jumping, etc. Axial lesions may go
longer without detection, but animals are often evalu-

ated for swelling or mass lesions. Site‐specific signs can
occur depending on the tumor location and systemic
signs such as lethargy or inappetence may occur from
paraneoplastic syndromes or simply result from pain
associated with the primary or metastatic tumors.

­Diagnosis
A complete physical examination should be performed
in all cases. Variable degrees of swelling, pain, and instability may be associated with the primary tumor. Each
patient should also be carefully assessed for any evidence
of metastasis, either to bone or to local lymph nodes.
Complete orthopedic and neurologic examinations
should be performed, particularly in cases of appendicular neoplasia where amputation may be considered as
the surgical treatment of choice. The presence of orthopedic or neurologic co‐morbidities does not preclude
amputation, but knowledge of these is essential for planning and owner education.
Routine laboratory evaluation by means of complete
blood count, chemistry panel, and urinalysis should be
performed. These tests serve to evaluate the patient’s
systemic health prior to anesthesia, surgery, and chemotherapy. In addition, elevated total alkaline phosphatase
(ALP) has been shown to be associated with a worse
prognosis in canine OSA.
The first step in attaining a bone tumor diagnosis is
orthogonal view radiographs of the affected limb or
region. OSA has a characteristic mixed osteolytic and
osteoproductive appearance, which when combined
with a metaphyseal location is highly suggestive of this
disease entity (Figure 150.1). As previously mentioned,
particular sites are more common for OSA, are often
described by the phrase “away from the elbow, towards
the knee,” with the thoracic limb being more commonly
affected. OSA does not generally cross an articular surface; this trait is more characteristic of a primary joint
tumor, or fungal or bacterial osteomyelitis. Metastatic
lesions are often diaphyseal and predominantly lytic,
although a spectrum of lytic versus productive disease is
possible with OSA. When radiographs demonstrate an
uncharacteristic lesion, other diagnostics, such as culture and biopsy, can be performed to obtain a definitive
diagnosis. Radiographs may also be evaluated for the
presence or absence of pathologic fracture.
Although classic radiographic findings may be sufficient to proceed with surgical treatment, many cases may
benefit from presurgical confirmation of neoplasia and/
or tumor type, particularly in patients that live or have a
travel history to fungal endemic areas. Ultrasound‐guided
fine needle aspiration and cytologic evaluation is a relatively noninvasive means of obtaining a diagnosis of

VetBooks.ir

150 Tumors of Bone and Joint

(a)

(b)

Figure 150.1 Orthogonal view radiographs (cranial‐caudal (a),
lateral (b)) of the right radius and ulna. An expansile and lytic
lesion of the distal radial metaphysis is identified with associated
soft tissue swelling. Cytologic aspirate of this lesion was consistent
with osteosarcoma.

­neoplasia, although differentiation between types of cancer is often not possible with cytology alone. ALP ­staining
of cytologic samples may allow for more conclusive identification of OSA in some cases. When indicated or
desired, bone biopsy can be performed which typically
results in a specific tumor diagnosis in about 80% of cases.
Bone biopsy may be performed using an incisional
technique, Michele trephine, or Jamshidi needle.
Jamshidi needles yield a smaller biopsy but provide a diagnosis in the vast majority of cases. Bone biopsies should
be planned in order to minimize the size of the surgical
site and provide for appropriate tumor excision at the
time of definitive surgery. Samples should always be taken
from the center of the lesion, as a peripheral biopsy is
more likely to yield reactive bone rather than the true disease process. In addition to using the smallest sampling
tool thought likely to provide a diagnostic s­ample, it is
also recommended to avoid penetration of both cortices
to minimize the likelihood of pathologic fracture.

While micrometastatic disease is thought to be present in nearly all dogs diagnosed with appendicular OSA,
gross metastasis is only identified in about 10% of cases
at the time of initial diagnosis. Pulmonary and bony
metastases occur with approximately equal frequency at
the time of initial diagnosis, although metastasis to other
locations is possible.
Staging of patients is performed due to its relevance in
estimating survival time. Little distinction is made in
osteosarcoma regarding histologic grade due to the biologic aggressiveness of these tumors in nearly all cases;
however, the presence of gross metastasis (stage III disease) is associated with shorter survival times. Median
survival times (MST) in dogs with stage III appendicular
OSA are still highly variable, however, and are affected
by treatment provided. Grading of non‐OSA sarcomas is
generally thought to be associated with prognosis, with
grade III tumors much more likely to metastasize and
associated with a shorter survival time.
Staging in all cases should include three‐view thoracic
radiographs to evaluate for pulmonary metastasis.
Abdominal ultrasound may also be performed to check
for metastatic disease, particularly in cases with pelvic
limb neoplasia, lymphadenopathy, atypical presentation/
clinical findings, or in patients with histiocytic disease.
Similarly, lymph node aspirates should be performed
when lymphadenopathy is noted on physical examination or imaging studies or if the regional lymph node is
readily accessible.
Nuclear scintigraphy, performed with an intravenous
injection of technetium‐99m, allows for identification of
skeletal abnormalities with increased metabolic, particularly osteoblastic, activity. This diagnostic tool is highly
sensitive but lacks specificity; areas of increased uptake
may be due to neoplastic disease, infection, fracture, or
other orthopedic co‐morbidities. The input of an experienced radiologist, as well as follow‐up radiographs to
evaluate abnormal areas, can help to distinguish between
these differentials.
Computed tomography (CT) is being increasingly
used, both to evaluate for thoracic metastases and for
evaluation of the local tumor site. While traditional,
high‐quality radiography is able to detect pulmonary
metastases that are approximately 7–9 mm in size, CT
has a reported sensitivity for detection of lesions as small
as 1 mm. Despite this improved detection of disease, the
clinical relevance of smaller metastatic lesions with
regard to survival times is uncertain.
Assessment of the local tumor site in appendicular
OSA with CT is generally nonessential when the chosen
treatment is amputation. CT may help to evaluate the
extent of disease if alternative surgical treatments such
as limb‐sparing surgery are to be considered. In addition,
CT is often highly valuable for surgical planning in cases

1329

VetBooks.ir

1330

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

of proximal appendicular tumors or disease affecting the
axial skeleton. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is
generally less useful than CT for imaging bone, making
CT the imaging modality of choice in most cases. MRI
may be useful, however, in evaluating the local extent of
disease prior to limb‐sparing surgery, or to assess the
proximity of neoplasia to neurovascular structures.

­Therapy
Surgical margins around bone and joint tumors generally
fall into the categories of wide or radical excision. Wide
excision is defined as complete removal of disease with a
margin of normal tissue, and radical excision includes
the excision of a body part, such as limb amputation for
cases of appendicular neoplasia. Limb amputation followed by chemotherapy is the recommended treatment
for appendicular OSA, and amputation is often indicated
for CSA, FSA, HSA, and for excision of other appendicular tumors in which local excision with adequate margins
is not possible (Table 150.1). The decision to pursue limb
amputation is typically difficult for owners to make;
however, these dogs generally recover well from surgery
and owner satisfaction is quite high. Videos of amputee
dogs can sometimes be helpful to owners and are now
commonly posted for public viewing on numerous websites. Dogs that are obese or have concurrent musculoskeletal or neurologic disease may have a prolonged
recovery compared to the average patient and may
­benefit from physical rehabilitation after surgery.
Tumors of the thoracic limb are preferably treated by
forequarter amputation. Forequarter amputation including excision of the scapula is preferred due to the ease of
the surgical procedure, the likelihood of wide margins
around disease, and improved cosmetic appearance
when the scapula is removed, as muscle atrophy over this

bone can be unsightly. Tumors of the scapula may be
treated by partial or total scapulectomy with preservation of the limb; however, CT is recommended in these
cases to ensure adequate margins around the extent of
disease. Tumors of the ulna alone may be treated by
ulnectomy; CT is again recommended to evaluate local
disease for surgical planning.
Pelvic limb tumors are most commonly treated with
coxofemoral disarticulation; similarly, this surgical technique is generally preferred over a midshaft femoral
amputation due to ease of technique and wider surgical
margins. Tumors of the proximal femur may be treated
by en bloc excision of the acetabulum in addition to
amputation or hemipelvectomy. Pelvic tumors can also
be treated by partial or total hemipelvectomy. When performing hemipelvectomy, a detailed knowledge of
anatomy is important to avoid trauma to intrapelvic
­
structures such as the rectum and urethra. Preoperative
CT scan is indicated before hemipelvectomy, and if
incomplete or narrow surgical margins are likely, consultation with a radiation oncologist prior to surgery is
strongly recommended.
Recovery after amputation surgery is generally rapid,
with most dogs ambulating within a few days of surgery.
Perioperative analgesia is essential, and may be provided
with a wound soaker catheter or with systemically
administered medications. Recovery after hemipelvectomy surgery is similar to amputation. Complications of
these surgeries include seroma formation and, less commonly dehiscence, hemorrhage, and infection.
Limb‐sparing surgery is described for appendicular
bone tumors, but appropriate case selection and client
education are essential. Limb‐spare may be indicated for
cases in which the dog is unable to tolerate amputation
due to orthopedic or neurologic co‐morbidities, or when
owners have declined amputation. In general, limb‐­
sparing surgery is considered only for tumors of the

Table 150.1 Treatment options for canine appendicular osteosarcoma
Treatment type

Effectiveness

Other considerations

Amputation + chemotherapy

Gold standard; MST ~1 year

Amputation generally well tolerated

Limb‐spare (SRS/SBRT or surgical) +
chemotherapy

Comparably effective to amputation +
chemotherapy; infection associated with limb
spare surgery improves survival

Limited availability due to highly trained
personnel required and availability of
SRS equipment

Amputation alone

MST <6 months

Death due to progression of metastatic
disease

Palliative radiation

Pain relief for 2–3 months

>50% response rate

Aminobisphosphonates (often
recommended in conjunction with
radiation)

Four months of pain relief with pamidronate in
28% of dogs

Zoledronate more effective, may be
cost‐prohibitive

MST, median survival time; SRS, stereotactic radiosurgery.

VetBooks.ir

150 Tumors of Bone and Joint

­distal radius. The presence of a pathologic fracture is
considered a relative contraindication for limb‐sparing,
as ­fracture may predispose to spread of tumor cells and
subsequent local recurrence. Significant complications
associated with limb‐sparing surgery include infection,
implant failure, and local recurrence. Infection rates
associated with limb‐sparing surgery are high, and have
been described as ranging between 30% and 70%. This
high rate of infection is likely due to a variety of factors
such as impaired vascular supply, minimal soft tissue
coverage, implants, and subsequent delivery of chemotherapeutics. Infection, however, has been associated
with a prolonged survival time compared to dogs that do
not experience infection; dogs with surgical site infection
have been shown to have median survival times approximately twice as long (an average of 250 days longer) as
dogs that did not develop postoperative infections.
Several different limb‐sparing options are available, but a
detailed explanation of the many techniques is beyond
the scope of this chapter.
Radiation therapy can also be used to treat local disease in canine OSA cases. Full course curative intent
radiation therapy is not routinely pursued due to the
cost, side‐effects to adjacent tissue, and lack of benefit
when compared with standard surgical treatment.
Developing techniques such as stereotactic radiosurgery
(SRS) and stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT), in
which 1 to 5, high dose radiation treatments are delivered to the precise tumor location are showing promise.
SRS/SBRT have been shown to have comparable success
in some cases when compared to traditional surgical
treatment; however, they continue to have limited availability due to the need for specialized equipment and
highly trained personnel.
Palliative radiation therapy may also be pursued for
pain relief in cases where surgery is not possible or owners do not elect for aggressive therapy. Generally, palliative radiation therapy involves the delivery of several
large doses of radiation in 2–4 fractions. Decrease in
inflammation, slowing of osteolysis, and reduction in
tumor size are all benefits associated with palliative radiation therapy. Over 50% of patients respond to therapy,
with onset of pain relief in 1–2 weeks and improvement
lasting approximately 2–3 months on average.
While it is reported that only approximately 10% of
dogs will have documented metastasis at the time of
diagnosis, it should be noted that this number originates
from dogs presenting to referral hospitals. It is therefore
possible that the incidence in primary care veterinary
clinics could be higher since thoracic radiographs are
often performed at the time of diagnosis, and referrals
are probably less likely in dogs that have detectable
metastases. Even though 90% of dogs will have no
­detectable pulmonary metastasis, with rare exceptions,

appendicular OSA in the dog is assumed to be metastatic
at the time of diagnosis. The extremely high likelihood of
microscopic metastases is supported by studies evaluating survival of dogs undergoing amputation alone.
In dogs with OSA that receive amputation alone, the
one‐ and two‐year survival rates are only 11.5% and 2%
respectively. Systemic therapy to control the outgrowth
of micrometastasis is therefore recommended.
Many chemotherapy drugs and combination protocols
have been attempted, but a clear benefit of any one particular protocol has not been clearly documented; preferred protocols often vary by doctor or institution. In
general, chemotherapy with single‐agent carboplatin,
doxorubicin or alternating carboplatin and doxorubicin
seems currently most favored and generally results in
median survival times of 8–12 months. In the authors’
opinion, the literature does not provide convincing evidence that any protocol is superior to single‐agent therapy with carboplatin. Combined with the fact that
carboplatin is generally well tolerated and is not associated with cardiotoxicity, the authors routinely recommend single‐agent carboplatin. Additional prospective
studies are needed to determine whether either of these
protocols is superior and to determine the optimal number of doses. Cisplatin has shown significant efficacy and
is considered standard of care for human osteosarcoma,
but technical aspects and toxicity associated with administration coupled with the potential for renal toxicity
have made this protocol less often utilized in veterinary
patients. The administration of chemotherapy in the face
of gross metastasis is generally unrewarding, with
median survival times most often ranging from 30 to 90
days. Preliminary data support further studies to examine the potential of toceranib phosphate (Palladia™) to
slow disease progression but no definitive conclusions
can be made to date.
Multiple immunotherapy agents have shown some
efficacy either alone or in combination with chemotherapy. These include liposomal muramyl tripeptide phosphatidyl ethanolamine (LMTPPE) and various delivery
methods of interleukin (IL)‐2. However, these agents
are not commercially available and therefore are not
r­ outinely used.
Aminobisphosphonates (ABPs) are a group of synthetic analogs of organic pyrophosphate which possesses
multiple potential benefits for patients with bone tumors
or bony metastasis. Generally, this class of drugs is considered palliative in that they can induce apoptosis of
osteoclasts (inhibiting bone osteolysis), reduce pain,
improve quality of life, and may delay progression of
bony metastasis. In addition, in vitro studies have found
that this class also exhibits direct cytotoxic effects on
osteosarcoma cell lines. While oral ABP formulations are
available, this route of administration does not reach

1331

VetBooks.ir

1332

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

­levels believed to be required for the beneficial effects of
ABPs against neoplastic bony lesions. Pamidronate is the
most commonly used ABP in veterinary medicine as it is
the most reasonably priced. Infusions of pamidronate
were shown to be well tolerated in dogs and resulted in
increased tumor bone mineral density and pain reduction for four months in 28% of dogs with osteosarcoma.
When used in combination with palliative radiation
therapy, pamidronate also appeared to improve limb
function when compared with radiation therapy alone.
Another ABP, zoledronate, is much more expensive at
this time; zoledronate appears superior to pamidronate
in that 50% of dogs achieved pain alleviation for greater
than four months in one study.

­Prognosis
For dogs with appendicular osteosarcoma that are
treated with amputation alone, the MST is less than six
months. Amputation followed with chemotherapy significantly improves prognosis, with MST approximately
twice as long and between 25% and 62% of dogs alive at
one year. Longer survival times are associated with periosteal or parosteal OSA, small stature, and dogs developing surgical site infections after a limb‐sparing surgery.
Negative prognostic indicators include elevated serum
ALP, dogs developing OSA when they are less than
5 years old, metastatic disease (bone, lymph node or
lung), increased tumor necrosis, proximal humeral location, and larger tumor size. Amputation for cats with
appendicular osteosarcoma is often curative, although
metastasis can occur.
Chondrosarcoma has better survival times compared
to OSA, with histologic grade the most important prognostic factor. After amputation alone, dogs with grade I

CSA had a MST of six years, grade II MST approximately
half as long, and grade III CSA only associated with a
MST of 0.9 years. Metastatic rate was similarly dependent upon grade, with 0%, 31%, and 50% of grade I, II, and
III dogs developing pulmonary metastasis. Prognosis for
appendicular HSA is less favorable than other diseases,
due to the extremely high metastatic potential.
Variable prognoses have been described for axial OSA
based on location and type of treatment. Overall, small
dogs have a more favorable prognosis than large dogs,
irrespective of location. Mandibular OSA has a better
prognosis than other locations; when complete surgical
margins are achieved after surgical excision, a 70% one‐
year survival rate is reported. Negative prognostic indicators include incomplete surgical resection, larger dogs,
elevated ALP, and large tumors. Maxillary OSA has a
reported MST of approximately five months.
As with appendicular tumors, CSA of the axial skeleton
has a significantly better prognosis than OSA. Nasal CSA
has a low metastatic rate and reported MST of 210–580
days. Rib CSA treated with surgical excision has a MST of
1080 days. Grade, location, and completeness of surgical
excision have all been noted as possible prognostic indicators; however, only small case numbers have been evaluated. Similarly, MLO has moderate metastatic potential
but improved overall survival times when compared to
OSA. Mandibular location, low histologic grade, and
complete surgical excision were positive prognostic factors. MST after surgery ranges from 630 to 797 days, with
median time to metastasis between 420 and 542 days.
Prognosis associated with joint tumors is variable
depending on type of tumor and whether complete excision is possible. Synovial cell sarcomas treated with complete excision may have a MST of greater than two years
with surgery alone. Histiocytic disease typically exhibits
a much more aggressive clinical course.

­Further Reading
Bacon NJ, Ehrhart NP, Dernell WS, et al. Use of alternating
administration of carboplatin and doxorubicin in dogs
with microscopic metastases after amputation for
appendicular osteosarcoma: 50 cases (1999–2006). J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2008; 232(10): 1504–10.
Boerman I, Selvarajah G, Nielen M, Kirpensteijn J. Prognostic
factors in canine appendicular osteosarcoma – a ­
meta‐analysis. BMC Vet Res 2012; 8: 56–67.

Chun R. Common malignant musculoskeletal neoplasms
of dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2005; 35: 1155–67.
Coomer A, Farese J, Milner R, et al. Radiation therapy for
canine appendicular osteosarcoma. Vet Comp Oncol
2009; 7(1): 15–27.
Milner RJ, Farese J, Henry C, et al. Bisphosphonates and
cancer. J Vet Intern Med 2004; 18: 597–604.

VetBooks.ir

1333

151
Soft Tissue Sarcomas
Lauren Askin Quarterman, DVM, DACVR (Radiation Oncology)
PetCure Oncology, San Jose, California

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Soft tissue sarcomas (STS) are a group of tumors that
arise from mesenchymal tissues. Tumors within this
group tend to have different morphologic and histologic
features, but the biologic behavior is similar; therefore,
they are often treated as one. Several important biologic
features have been described:
ability to arise from any anatomic site
appear pseudoencapsulated but tend to infiltrate
through and along fascial planes
●● metastasize hematogenously in up to 20% cases, but
regional lymph node metastasis is unusual
●● local recurrence after conservative surgery is common
●● gross tumors generally have a poor response to chemotherapy and radiation therapy.
●●
●●

Not all lesions arising from the subcutaneous space are
malignant, and many are often benign or inflammatory.
Though histologic distinction is not clinically important in
the treatment of these tumors, the nomenclature is determined by the connective tissue (muscle, adipose, fascial,
fibrous, and neurovascular) from which they arise. Tumors
classified as STS include fibrosarcoma, peripheral nerve
sheath tumor, myxosarcoma, liposarcoma, undifferentiated sarcoma, and malignant fibrous histiocytoma. Soft
tissue tumors such as osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma,
hemangiosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, histiocytic sarcoma, nerve root/brachial plexus, oral sarcomas, and synovial cell sarcoma are not classified as STS as they have a
higher propensity for metastasis and/or local recurrence.

­Epidemiology
Soft tissue sarcomas comprise approximately 15% of all
skin and subcutaneous tumors in dogs and 7–9% in cats.

In dogs, sarcomas have been associated with radiation,
trauma, foreign bodies, implants, and the parasite
Spirocerca lupi. In cats, three different types of sarcomas
are seen: vaccine‐associated sarcomas (also referred to as
injection site sarcomas), viral‐induced sarcomas, and
nonviral nonvaccine sarcomas.
Vaccine‐associated sarcomas have been shown to be
linked to the administration of inactivated vaccines,
such as feline leukemia virus (FeLV) and rabies. The
development of sarcomas at sites of vaccine administration with FeLV or rabies is believed to be between 1/1000
to 1/10 000 cases. Some reports have shown an increased
risk with increasing number of vaccinations and with
repeated vaccination at the same site. The time to tumor
development at the site of vaccination has been reported
to be four weeks to 10 years but most commonly occurs
between two and 10 months post vaccination. The
majority of injection site sarcomas in cats arise from
vaccines, but it is important to keep in mind that there
have been reports of tumor development at the site of
lufenuron and microchip injections. It is hypothesized
that the formation of these tumors is related to inflammation created secondary to the injection. This is supported by the similar histologic appearance of injection
site sarcomas to tumors arising in the eyes of cats after
trauma.
Viral‐induced sarcomas are rare. Typically, these multicentric tumors are seen in young cats that are positive
for FeLV. FeLV can serve as a natural vector and transduce nonviral genetic elements from cat cellular DNA.
This can result in the formation of a recombinant virus,
termed feline sarcoma virus (FeSV), which exhibits
altered oncogenicity. FeSV has been isolated from naturally occurring fibrosarcomas of FeLV‐infected cats,
supporting the theory that FeSV can cause the transformation of cells and induce sarcoma formation in FeLV‐
positive cats.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1334

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

­Signalment
Soft tissue sarcomas tend to occur in middle‐aged to
older dogs and cats. No specific breed or sex predilection
has been identified but medium and large‐breed dogs
seem to be overrepresented.

­History and Clinical Signs
Soft tissue sarcomas present as firm, fixed, often slow‐
growing masses most commonly affecting the trunk,
extremities, or oral cavity. Many times, they are initially
noted when they are small but go untreated as they are
assumed to be benign. The skin overlying these tumors
is often moveable. When tumors are small, they are
nonpainful but as they grow, they invade into the tissues which can result in the tumor becoming fixed or
ulcerated and infected. Clinical signs manifested from
the tumor are dependent on the site from which it
­originates; for example, tumors on a limb may result
in lameness.

­Diagnosis
A fine needle aspirate (FNA) is always warranted on
detection of any new mass or lesion. Cytology can be
beneficial in helping to rule out cysts or other tumor
types (mast cell tumors), but it is always important to
keep in mind that cytology is not sufficient for a definitive diagnosis of a STS. These tumors do not readily
exfoliate and can contain areas of inflammation and
necrosis. The presence of inflammatory cells and necrosis in the absence of neoplastic cells on cytology does not
rule out a STS. A study conducted on FNAs of 40 STSs
reported that only 62.5% of the cases yielded an accurate
diagnosis, while 15% were incorrectly diagnosed.
Biopsy and histopathology are needed for a definitive
diagnosis of a STS. There are two types of tumor biopsy
commonly employed: pretreatment and posttreatment
biopsy. Pretreatment biopsy is the preferred method and
includes needle core (Tru‐Cut), wedge or incisional, and
punch biopsy. All biopsies should be positioned so that
the biopsy tract can be included in the curative intent
treatment field. Posttreatment biopsy refers to an excisional biopsy, where the diagnosis is made after removal
of the gross tumor. Often, this method is attractive to pet
owners as it allows for treatment and diagnosis in one
step but unfortunately, posttreatment biopsies are rarely
curative. An excisional biopsy should only be performed
when it is possible to take a 2–3 cm margin around the
tumor and even then it may not be necessary as lesions
may prove to be benign.

Once a diagnosis of STS has been made, it is important
to determine the clinical stage or extent of disease.
Knowledge of the clinical stage will help determine the
appropriate treatment. Diagnostic tests that should be
performed prior to beginning definitive treatment
include three‐view thoracic radiographs, as the lungs are
the most common site of metastasis. Careful palpation of
regional lymph nodes with FNA or biopsy if accessible
and/or abnormal. Careful palpation of the mass is necessary to determine tumor size and fixation to surrounding
tissues. Advanced imaging with the use of computed
tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
can be helpful to evaluate the extent and invasiveness of
larger tumors, tumors in the head or neck, or tumors
within a body cavity.

­Therapy
Dogs
Surgery

Local tumor control accomplished with wide, surgical
excision is considered the treatment of choice, and
advances in reconstructive techniques have significantly
expanded surgical options for aggressive resection with
good functional and cosmetic outcomes.
The surgical approach is classified according to the
extent of the wound margins as intracapsular (when
the tumor is surgically penetrated); marginal (when the
tumor is excised just outside, or at, the pseudocapsule);
wide (when a portion of normal tissue is left around the
tumor); and radical (when an entire anatomic segment is
removed, for example, amputation). The minimum recommended margins for gross surgical resection are 3 cm
lateral to the tumor and one fascial plane deep. However,
if the tumor is attached to the muscle or fascial layer, the
entire layer may be compromised and should not be
considered a clean margin. Additionally, adipose and
connective tissue are not tumor barriers. Biopsy tracts
and any areas of fixation to surrounding tissue require
en bloc resection with the tumor, as these areas are considered contaminated.
Soft tissue sarcomas are typically surrounded by a pseudocapsule, which allows the tumor to be “shelled out” and
submitted for histologic evaluation. Unfortunately, this
type of marginal excision commonly results in tumor cells
extending to the edges of the resected tissue. Any surgical
procedure involving margins less than 3 cm and one
­fascial plane deep must be considered an incomplete
excision even if no macroscopic tumor is evident after
removal.
Histopathology of the tumor and surrounding tissue
following surgery is important as it provides surgical

VetBooks.ir

151 Soft Tissue Sarcomas

margins and tumor grade. Both are necessary in determining whether further treatment, including additional
surgery or radiation therapy, is necessary. Following
removal of the tumor, surgical margins should be clearly
marked on the specimen and completeness of excision
should be evaluated. The resected tumor should be
pinned out to the original dimensions to prevent shrinkage during formalin fixation. The following terminology
is commonly used when evaluating surgical margins and
considering additional treatment:
incomplete margins – neoplastic cells are continuous
with at least one surgical margin in any plane
●● narrow
margins – distance between surgically
created tissue edge and neoplastic cells is less
­
than 5 mm
●● adequate margins – distance between surgically
­created tissue edge and neoplastic cells is ≥ 5 mm and
<10 mm
●● ideal margins – distance between surgically created
tissue edge and neoplastic cells is at least ≥ 10 mm.
●●

Marginal and incomplete resection is associated with a
higher risk of local recurrence (26–60%). Further, dogs
with incomplete margins are 10.5 times more likely to
develop local recurrence than dogs with complete margins. Studies have also shown that the first surgery provides the best opportunity for local tumor control.
Subsequent surgeries increase morbidity, treatment
costs, and the risk of further local recurrences, while
decreasing survival time. If a second surgery is p
­ erformed
after inadequate resection, a margin of healthy tissue of
3 cm in all directions surrounding the scar is recommended, including the removal of normal‐appearing
subcutaneous fat and underlying fascia. In a study evaluating scar reexcisions, local recurrence was reported in
15% of dogs and residual tumor was identified in 22% of
the resected scars.
Prior to the routine availability of radiation treatment,
radical and often disfiguring surgery was the mainstay of
treatment and resulted in one‐year control rates of
70–80%. Although STS have historically been considered radiation resistant compared to other tumor types,
the multimodality approach of combining surgery with
radiation has been proven to help prevent local
recurrence.
Surgery and Radiation Therapy

The sequencing of radiation and surgery is based on
multiple factors and should be determined on an individual basis. There are several advantages and disadvantages to both preoperative and postoperative radiation
therapy. The rationale for administering postoperative
radiation therapy is that the radiation kills or prevents
the multiplication of any microscopic tumor cells left

behind. Some advantages of postoperative radiation
include the following:
wound complications are rare in tissues that are irradiated after the first inflammatory phase of wound
healing
●● removal of a larger tumor with necrotic regions or
infections may make the patient and patient’s family
more comfortable
●● postoperative treatment planning may be simpler than
preoperative planning in patients in which the size or
shape of a tumor creates difficulty in achieving a uniform dose distribution.
●●

Disadvantages of postoperative radiation include
increased radiation field size, damage to vasculature,
that may lead to local tissue hypoxia which decreases the
effectiveness of radiation, and potential delays if postsurgical wound complications occur. Postoperative radiation is generally started within 7–14 days after surgery.
The rationale behind preoperative radiation therapy is
to decrease the number of tumor cells, thus reducing
contamination of the surgical site. Advantages include a
smaller radiation field, reduction in the size of the tumor,
making surgical excision with wide margins less difficult,
and undisturbed tumor bed and blood supply, which
increases the effectiveness of radiation. Disadvantages
include the possibility of poor or delayed wound healing
in the irradiated field.
Radiation therapy is commonly used as an adjunct to
surgery. Radiation seems to have the greatest efficacy
when it is used to treat remaining microscopic disease
following surgical cytoreduction and is less effective
when used to treat bulky, gross disease. Marginal surgical resection combined with radiation therapy is an
attractive alternative to limb amputation for a STS on an
extremity. It can also be used following a planned marginal resection when wide surgical resection is not possible, such as with tumors of the head or neck. In these
cases, removal of all grossly visible tumor is advised.
Radiopaque clips are often placed during surgery to
mark the lateral, proximal, and distal extent of the tumor
to aid in radiation planning.
Several studies have evaluated radiation therapy for
incompletely excised soft tissue sarcomas in dogs. They
have shown that similar local control and survival rates
are attained with a better functional and cosmetic outcome by performing marginal surgical excisions plus
adjuvant radiotherapy compared to radical surgery
alone. A prospective study evaluated 48 dogs with soft
tissue sarcomas treated with surgery to decrease tumor
size to <3 cm. This was followed by conventionally fractionated, full course radiation therapy to a total dose of
63 Gy. The result was a five‐year ­survival rate of 76% and
a recurrence rate of 16%. The median time to recurrence

1335

VetBooks.ir

1336

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

was 23.3 months. Another study evaluating 35 dogs with
soft tissue sarcomas that were excised to microscopic
disease followed by daily radiation to a total dose of
42–57 Gy reported an overall median survival of 61.7
months.
Interestingly, a recent study evaluated intentional marginal excision of canine STS of the limb followed by a
coarsely fractionated radiation protocol consisting of
four, once weekly, 8–9 Gy ­fractions. Fifty‐six dogs were
included. The results compared favorably to studies
using more fractionated “definitive” protocols, as the
one‐, two‐, and three‐year disease‐free intervals were
82%, 74%, and 70%, respectively, with a local recurrence
rate of 18%. The main disadvantages of using coarsely
fractionated protocols are reduced efficacy and the
increased risk of late radiation toxicity, which may be significant and include bone necrosis and radiation‐induced
tumors at the site. In the study, the risk of developing late
radiation side‐effects was low when the fraction size did
not exceed 8 Gy.
Radiation Therapy

If surgical excision of a soft tissue sarcoma is impossible
because of tumor location or size, radiation therapy can
be applied; however, measurable and bulky tumors tend
to have a poor long‐term response to primary radiotherapy. Tumor control with conventional doses of radiation alone (40–48 Gy) are difficult to obtain because of
their low growth fraction, relatively long doubling time,
and tendency to develop hypoxic regions within the
tumor parenchyma. Reported one‐year control rates are
30% at 35 Gy (10 × 3.5 Gy), 35% at 40 Gy (10 × 4 Gy), 48%
at 45 Gy (10 × 4.5 Gy) and 67% at 50 Gy (10 × 5 Gy). At
two years, control rates vary from 12% at 40 Gy to 33%
at 50 Gy.
As a single modality, radiation has generally been considered palliative for STS with control defined as a slowly
regressing or stable tumor mass. The goal of palliative or
coarsely fractionated radiation therapy is to alleviate
pain, swelling, and inflammation associated with the
tumor, in the hope of improving quality of life. Typical
palliative protocols involve fewer fractions of larger radiation doses (4–10 Gy), often given on a weekly basis. The
delivery of a small fraction size once per week is unlikely
to lead to a durable response because tumor cells have a
significant amount of time to repair damage and proliferate between treatments. Therefore, larger doses of radiation are often delivered to optimize killing of tumor cells,
with the increased risk of late radiation toxicity accepted
as part of the treatment. Since palliative radiation therapy
is administered to improve quality of life, not to prolong
it, patients likely will not live long enough to experience
permanent late effects. A study evaluating nonresectable
STS treated with a palliative protocol (3 × 8 Gy) reported

stable disease in 87% of the tumors treated with a median
time to progression of 8.7 months.
As an alternative to once weekly fractionation, a retrospective study evaluated a palliative radiation protocol
consisting of 4 Gy fractions given over five consecutive
days. In this study, 10 soft tissue sarcomas were treated.
A measurable overall response rate of 80% was reported,
with tumor control achieved in 100% of patients and a
median progression‐free survival of 5.7 months. With
this protocol, the risk for late side‐effects is about half
that of the traditional 8 Gy × 4 fraction protocol.
Many advancements have been made in the field of
radiation oncology, and with these advancements and
improved technology, stereotactic radiation can now be
used to treat STSs. Stereotactic radiation consists of high
doses of radiation precisely targeted at the tumor with
rapid dose fall‐off outside the tumor to help spare normal tissues and limit side‐effects. Stereotactic protocols
generally consist of 1–3 fractions of radiation given on a
consecutive‐day basis. The goal of stereotactic radiation
is to deliver an ablative dose of radiation to the tumor
and achieve long‐term control of the disease. Currently,
there are no published veterinary studies on stereotactic
radiation and STS, but it is expected that this will be a
very viable treatment option for nonresectable STS.
Chemotherapy

Adjuvant chemotherapy at times is useful in the treatment of STS. It is best utilized when combined with radiation therapy and/or surgery. Chemotherapy alone does
not seem to be effective, with the exception of providing
palliation in some cases. Doxorubicin‐based protocols,
either alone or in combination with cyclophosphamide,
have shown the most promise with an overall response
rate of 23%.
Despite the fact that STS are slow to metastasize, the
metastatic rate for cutaneous STS is grade dependent
and varies from less than 15% (grade I and II) to 41%
(grade III). Due to the higher metastatic rate of grade III
soft tissue sarcomas, postoperative chemotherapy should
be considered as it may prevent or delay metastasis.
Single‐agent doxorubicin, mitoxantrone, or combination
protocols are most commonly used.
Metronomic chemotherapy (continuous administration of chemotherapy drugs at doses that are significantly
lower than conventional maximally tolerated dose therapy) has been evaluated in canine STS. A retrospective
study evaluated 85 dogs with incompletely resected
STSs. Thirty dogs received continuous cyclophosphamide (10 mg/m2) and standard‐dose piroxicam therapy
(0.3 mg/kg). Fifty-five control dogs did not receive additional therapy. When comparing these two groups,
treated dogs had a disease‐free interval of 13.7 months
which was significantly longer compared to 7.0 months

VetBooks.ir

151 Soft Tissue Sarcomas

for untreated dogs. Another study evaluated low‐dose
cyclophosphamide and its effects on T‐regulatory cells
and tumor angiogenesis in dogs with STS. This study
found that dogs receiving 15 mg/m2/day of cyclophosphamide had significant decreases in the number and
percent of T‐regulatory cells as well as microvessel density, further supporting that metronomic therapy may
provide antitumor effects.
Cats
Surgery and Radiation Therapy

Injection‐associated sarcomas are poorly encapsulated
tumors with extension and infiltration along fascial
planes. Surgically, 3 cm margins laterally and one fascial
plane deep to tumor have been utilized for the treatment
of vaccine‐associated sarcoma. However, this is not
­adequate considering the reported high rates of local
recurrence which range from 35% to 59%. In response to
this, surgical margins of >3 cm laterally and two fascial
planes deep to the tumor, along with partial scapulectomy, osteotomy of spinous processes or hemipelvectomy when indicated, are now recommended. Despite
attempting aggressive surgical margins, complete
resection is achieved in less than 50% of cats, and overall
one‐ and two‐year disease‐free intervals are only 35%
and 9%. A retrospective study evaluated radical excision
for treatment of 91 STSs. Radical excision was defined as
5 cm of tissue beyond the palpable edges of the tumor
and two fascial planes or bone deep to the tumor. With
this approach, surgery resulted in complete margins in
97% of cases and a local recurrence rate of 14%.
Due to the high rate of local recurrence following wide
surgical resection, full‐course radiation is considered
essential in the management of cats with vaccine‐associated sarcomas. The timing of the radiation therapy is
controversial, and there are pros and cons to preoperative versus postoperative approaches. The time to recurrence when the combination of surgery and radiation
therapy is used ranges from 13.5 months to 19.5 months.
In studies investigating preoperative radiation therapy,
complete resection significantly improved time to local
recurrence with a disease‐free interval for completely
excised tumors of 33 months versus 10 months for
incompletely excised tumors. Unfortunately, even with
combination therapy, recurrence rates still range from
40% to 45%.
Chemotherapy

The most common chemotherapy drugs used to treat
vaccine‐associated sarcomas are doxorubicin, carboplatin, and cyclophosphamide. Postoperative chemotherapy has been shown to have only a minimal effect on
survival in cats treated with curative‐intent surgery and

radiation therapy. Chemotherapy, however, may have
beneficial effects on local tumor control. The effect of
doxorubicin alone was evaluated in 12 nonresectable
vaccine‐associated sarcomas. An initial reduction of
>50% in tumor volume was seen in 50% of the animals.
Unfortunately, the response was not durable, and all cats
showed progressive disease. However, the median overall survival was significantly longer for cats that did
respond. More recently, tyrosine kinase inhibitors have
been shown to block the PDGF/PDGF receptor signaling
pathway in vaccine‐associated cell lines and to inhibit
vaccine‐associated growth in a murine model. These
drugs are currently being evaluated for treatment of
these tumors.

­Prognosis
Dogs
The overall prognosis for dogs with STS is good, but the
range of biologic behavior for these tumors can be broad.
The median survival time for dogs ranges from 3.9 years
following surgery alone to 6.2 years with surgery and
adjunctive radiation. Overall, up to 33% of dogs eventually die of tumor‐related causes.
Research has identified valuable prognostic information including histologic grade, mitotic index, and completeness of surgical margins. A complete histologic
margin predicts nonrecurrence and recurrence appears
to increase with grade. The metastatic rate for dogs with
grade I or grade II is less than 15% compared to 41% for
grade III STS. High mitotic index (>9 mitotic figures per
10 high‐power fields) is prognostic for recurrence,
metastais, and survival. Other factors, including markers
of cellular proliferation, tumor dimension, tumor location, histologic type, invasiveness, and cytogenetic profile, may be useful indicators of prognosis but presently
require further investigation.
Cats
The prognosis for vaccine‐associated sarcomas treated
with surgery alone, using traditional recommendations
of 3 cm margins and one fascial plane deep to the tumor
bed, is poor. Multimodal treatment (extensive surgery,
radiotherapy, chemotherapy) is recommended and the
use of sophisticated imaging techniques can improve
diagnosis and help in surgical planning. The combination of radiation therapy either pre‐ or postoperatively
has improved the disease‐free interval and overall survival time in cats with vaccine‐associated sarcomas.
Median survival time with combination therapy is
23 months compared to 19 months with surgery alone.

1337

VetBooks.ir

1338

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Vaccine‐associated sarcomas are graded from I (least)
to III (most aggressive) depending on mitotic index, differentiation, and necrosis. Approximately 15–24% of
vaccine‐associated sarcomas will metastasize to the
lungs or other sites, and evidence has suggested that a
higher grade is associated with an increased risk of

metastasis. In cats, it appears that completeness of excision is one of the most important prognostic factors.
Hence, it is very important that everything is done to
ensure the greatest possibility of obtaining complete
margins when recommending treatment for these
tumors in cats.

­Further Reading
Dennis M, McSporran K, Bacon N, Schulman F, Foster R,
Powers B. Prognostic factors for cutaneous and
subcutaneous soft tissue sarcomas in dogs. Vet Pathol
2011; 48(1): 73–84.
Ehrhart N. Soft‐tissue sarcomas in dogs: a review. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 2005; 41(4): 241–6.
Elmslie R, Glawe P, Dow S. Metronomic therapy with
cyclophosphamide and piroxicam effectively delays
tumor recurrence in dogs with incompletely resected

soft tissue sarcomas. J Vet Intern Med 2008; 22(6):
1373–9.
Kobayashi T, Hauck M, Dodge R, et al. Preoperative
radiotherapy for vaccine associated sarcoma in 92 cats.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2002; 43(5): 473–9.
Mayer M, Treuil P, LaRue S. Radiotherapy and surgery for
feline soft tissue sarcoma. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2009;
50(6): 669–72.

VetBooks.ir

1339

152
Hemangiosarcoma
Christine B. Oakley, DVM1 and John D. Chretin, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology) 2
1
2

VCA Specialists of the Valley, Los Angeles, CA, USA
TrueCare for Pets, Los Angeles, CA, USA

­Etiology and Pathophysiology
Etiology
Hemangiosarcoma (HSA) is a malignant cancer of
­vascular endothelial cells. Although ionizing radiation
has been associated with cutaneous HSA, there is no
clear etiology for the visceral and subcutaneous forms.
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and other
growth factors such as basic fibroblast growth factor
(bFGF) and angiopoietin‐1 are found in above normal
levels in hemangiosarcoma. It is therefore hypothesized
that dysregulation of angiogenesis may play a key role.
Experimentally, it has been shown that overexpression of
VEGF can lead to malignant transformation of vascular
endothelial cells.
In humans, this disease is known as angiosarcoma and
has been related to arsenicals, vinyl chloride exposure,
and androgens as well as radiation exposure. These may
induce a mutation in the von Hippel–Lindau tumor
­suppressor gene leading to an increased synthesis of
hypoxia‐inducible factor‐1 (a transcription factor for
angiogenic proteins such as VEGF). Mutations in other
tumor suppressor genes such as p53 and PTEN have
also been found but studies are limited.
The etiology of dermal hemangiosarcoma differs from
visceral, myocardial, and other less common primary
forms. Dogs with repeated, prolonged exposure to direct
ionizing ultraviolet (UV) radiation have been documented
to have an increased risk. The predisposition for dogs to
develop dermal HSA regionally on the ventral abdomen
supports solar induction, as well as field cancerization
(a term used to describe the increased risk for regional
tumor development after exposure to carcinogens).

Pathophysiology
Location

Hemangiosarcoma as a primary tumor has been reported
to arise in the liver, kidney, bladder, prostate, perito­
neum, lung, right auricle, muscle, bone, oral c­ avity,
central nervous system (CNS) and integument, but can
arise from any vascular site in the body. In the dog, the
spleen is the most commonly affected organ (28–50%),
followed by the right atrium and auricle (3–50%) and
skin/subcutaneous tissue (13–14%). Multiple unrelated
primary tumors can occur as has been speculated in
dogs with concurrent splenic and myocardial forms.
Dermal hemangiosarcoma is a much less aggressive
disease than visceral hemangiosarcoma. It has been pro­
posed that there are two dermal forms: the solar‐induced
form, affecting thin‐coat predisposed breeds with a good
prognosis, and a nonsolar‐induced, more aggressive
form seen in nonventral locations in thicker coated, non­
predisposed breeds. Dermal hemangiosarcoma (both
solar and nonsolar) has a low metastatic rate. Common
sites of metastasis include lungs, oral or nasal tissue,
bone, heart, and CNS. The solar‐induced form histori­
cally carries the best prognosis. Hypodermal (subcuta­
neous) HSA is characterized as being aggressive with
higher local tumor invasion and a higher metastatic rate
than dermal forms.
Hemangiosarcoma is much less common in cats
than in dogs. In contrast to dogs, integumentary HSA
(subcutaneous and dermal) is more common than the
visceral or myocardial form. Seventy‐seven percent of
all reported feline cases arise from the integument.
The most common locations in decreasing order are
head/face, pinna, and ventral abdomen/inguinal region.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1340

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Metastasis

With few exceptions, hemangiosarcoma is a highly meta­
static malignancy. The multistep process involved in
metastasis is shared by all solid tumors and includes the
creation of new blood vessels (angiogenesis), mobility
and invasion into surrounding tissue, embolism into
­circulation, evasion of host immune defenses, lodging
into capillary beds, and extravasation into a new envi­
ronment. A detailed description of this cascade is beyond
the scope of this chapter.
Due to its intimate relationship with blood vessels,
HSA is readily able to mobilize and metastasize. The most
common route is via the vascular system but spread can
occur by tumor seeding onto the local organ parenchyma
and within body cavities after rupture.
Although the metastatic rate of hemangiosarcoma is
regarded as high, the rate can vary depending on site of
origin. The visceral and myocardial forms of HSA
are characterized by an extremely high metastatic rate
(80–90%) to local (liver, omentum, other intraabdominal
organs) as well as distant locations (lungs, CNS). Other
less common primary sites such as renal, retroperito­
neal, and lingual demonstrate metastatic rates of 75%,
88%, and 45% respectively. Primary integumentary forms
have a metastatic rate of 30% for dermal, 35–50% for
subcutaneous, and 75–90% for intramuscular locations.

­Epidemiology
Hemangiosarcoma accounts for 2–5% of cancers in the
dog, and between 0.5% and 2% in the cat. It is more com­
mon in the dog than in any other species, and has an
extremely high mortality. The dermal forms represents
<1% of all skin tumors in dogs and cats. Breeds such as
whippets, Italian greyhounds, greyhounds, English
pointers, Dalmations, and Staffordshire terriers are at
higher risk due to their thin coat and light complexion.
Lightly pigmented cats do not carry the same risk for
dermal HSA as dogs. However, they are prone to other
solar‐induced neoplasms such as squamous cell carci­
noma. For dermal forms, there are no other known risk
factors in the dog and cat. The strong breed association
with the visceral and myocardial forms suggests an
inherited predisposition for dogs. There is no known
predisposition for cats.

larger, middle‐aged to geriatric dogs such as golden
retrievers, Labrador retrievers, and German shepherds.
Dermal hemangiosarcoma is most common in older
dogs, median age 9 years. Dogs predisposed include
thin‐coated, lightly pigmented breeds. Hypodermal HSA
appears in 9–10‐year‐old dogs, with no sex or breed pre­
dilection. Primary renal and retroperitoneal hemangio­
sarcoma are extremely rare. The median age for both
forms is 10 years, with larger nonspecific breeds most
commonly affected. With the renal form, there appears
to be a predilection for males. Other primary sites
such as the tongue have no specific sex, breed or age
predilection.
Cat
The mean age for cats with HSA is 10 years. There is
no sex or breed predilection in this species.

­History and Clinical Signs
Dog
Visceral Nonmyocardial

Dogs with the visceral form of hemangiosarcoma can
present with a variety of symptoms, ranging from leth­
argy to acute death from hemorrhagic shock. The most
common presenting complaints are weakness, lethargy,
collapse, and gastrointestinal changes such as anorexia,
vomiting, and diarrhea.
Patients often present with pale mucous membranes,
delayed capillary refill time, tachycardia and/or arrhyth­
mias, poor pulse quality, and a palpable fluid wave in
the abdomen. If no rupture has occurred, findings
may be limited to a large cranial abdominal mass or
organomegaly.
Myocardial

Dogs with primary myocardial hemangiosarcoma
­present with symptoms of pericardial effusion such as
exercise intolerance, collapse, arrhythmias, and dyspnea.
They are at a higher risk for acute death due to the added
danger of tamponade. Physical exam findings may
include extreme weakness, tachycardia, muffled heart
sounds, and pulsus paradoxus.
Integument

­Signalment
Dog
Hemangiosarcoma can arise in any breed at any age.
The visceral and myocardial forms predominantly affect

Dogs with dermal HSA are often asymptomatic.
Symptoms of the hypodermal and intramuscular forms
vary greatly. Most patients present for lameness,
pain, bruising, swelling or a palpable mass that can
range from firm to soft and fluctuant. All forms of integ­
ument hemangiosarcoma can demonstrate ulceration.

VetBooks.ir

152 Hemangiosarcoma

Compared to dermal HSA which has a predisposition for
the ventral abdomen, subcutaneous and intramuscular
HSA have no predilection for location.
Uncommon Primary Locations

Unlike the above forms, renal hemangiosarcoma may
carry a more prolonged history of vague symptoms, with
a delay of 1–2 months between onset of clinical signs
and diagnosis. Some dogs will have hemoperitoneum.
The majority present with stage I disease (nonrupture,
localized). Presenting complaints include lethargy,
­anorexia, and abdominal pain. The left kidney is more
commonly affected.
Clinical signs of retroperitoneal HSA are similar to
patients with the renal form. However, time to diagnosis
is often shorter as acute hemorrhage is more common.
Dogs with HSA arising from the tongue may be asymp­
tomatic. Diagnosis often occurs as an incidental finding
identified during routine physical exam or dental proph­
ylaxis. One‐third of these dogs will have clinical signs
related to an oral mass, including bleeding from the
mouth, difficulty swallowing or difficulty eating. Lesions
on physical exam are small (<2 cm) and commonly
located on the ventral surface but can arise from the
­dorsal aspect as well. Up to one‐quarter of dogs can have
multiple lingual tumors.
Cat
Due to the most common location being the integument,
most symptoms include a red or bruised raised swelling
or mass. However, for visceral and myocardial forms,
similar symptoms as seen in the dog can be expected.

­Diagnosis
Complete blood count (CBC), serum biochemistry, uri­
nalysis (UA), abdominal ultrasound, echocardiogram,
three‐view thoracic radiographs, and coagulation testing
are recommended for most forms of HSA. With the
myocardial form or if an arrhythmia is present, an
­electrocardiogram (ECG) should also be pursued. The
exception to the above is with the dermal form. Because
of the lower metastatic rate, abdominal ultrasound,
echocardiogram and ECG may not be necessary.
The reader is cautioned to approach each patient on an
individual basis.
A high level of suspicion for HSA can be formulated
based on ultrasonography findings (70% of splenic
masses will be malignant and approximately 70% of those
will be HSA). Additionally, HSA often, but not always,
appears hypoechoic, cavitated, and nonhomogene­
ous. Nonetheless, caution must be exercised as other

­nonmalignant lesions such as hematoma or hemangioma
may have a similar appearance.
Effusions are typically serosanguinous to hemorrhagic
and samples characteristically lack clot formation.
Hematologic abnormalities may include anemia,
thrombocytopenia, schistocytes, acanthocytes, pro­
longed prothrombin time, prolonged activated partial
thromboplastin time, and increased fibrin degradation
products. Approximately 50% of all dogs with splenic
hemangiosarcoma meet disseminated intravascular
coagulation (DIC) criteria.
Dogs with myocardial hemangiosarcoma may demon­
strate a decreased amplitude of the QRS complex and
electrical alternans on ECG. A visible tumor can be
detected with echocardiography in 65–90% of cases.
With renal hemangiosarcoma, over half of patients
are anemic. Patients may present with hematuria,
­proteinuria, hypoproteinemia, and thrombocytopenia.
Ultrasonography often reveals a unilaterally, irregular,
enlarged kidney.
With all forms, cytologic or histologic analysis is
required for a definitive diagnosis. Ultrasound‐guided
fine needle aspiration for visceral forms can be attempted
but is associated with a significant risk of hemorrhage
and low sensitivity (38%). Therefore, most cases will
require surgical biopsy. If necessary, immunochemical
analysis for factor VIII‐related antigen (von Willebrand
factor), CD31, CD34, and vimentin can be performed.
In cats, full testing, including abdominal ultrasound,
three‐view thoracic radiographs, CBC, serum biochem­
istry and UA, is recommended regardless of primary
location. Echocardiography in cats may not be warranted
as cardiac HSA is extremely uncommon. The value of
this and other diagnostics should be determined on a
case‐by‐case basis.

­Staging System
Staging describes the severity of cancer based on its size,
local behavior, and presence of metastasis. This informa­
tion is utilized in treatment planning and in assessing
prognosis. Unfortunately, no standard staging system
has been established for the cat. For the dog, a modified
World Health Organization (WHO) tumor, node, metas­
tasis (TNM) system is commonly used (Table 152.1).
In this classification, there are three established stages.
For visceral HSA, stage I (T0 or T1, N0, M0) describes
a tumor <5 cm in diameter or microscopic with no
­evidence of nodal or distant metastasis and no evidence
of rupture. Stage II (T1 or T2, N0 or N1, M0) describes
no invasion into adjacent structures with or without
tumor capsule rupture, no measurable distant metastasis
with or without regional lymph node involvement.

1341

VetBooks.ir

1342

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Table 152.1 Modified World Health Organization TNM staging system
Stage

0

I

II

III

T = primary tumor

No evidence of tumor

Tumor less than 5 cm;
confined to primary site

Tumor 5 cm or greater
or ruptured; invading
subcutaneous tissue

Tumor invading
adjacent structures,
including muscle

N = lymph nodes

No lymph node
involvement

Regional lymph node
involvement

Distant lymph node
involvement

M = metastasis

No distant metastasis

Distant metastasis

Table 152.2 Chemotherapeutics commonly used for the treatment of hemangiosarcoma

Use

Route

Unique
side‐effects

Every 2–3 weeks (day 1
and day 14 or 21)

Single agent or combined
with cyclophosphamide
+/‐ vincristine

Intravenous

Cardiotoxicity

0.75 mg/m2

Days 8 and 15

Combined with doxorubicin

Intravenous

Cyclophosphamide

100 mg/m2

Day 1 (when with
vincristine and
doxorubicin), days 3–6
(with doxorubicin alone)

Combined with doxorubicin
alone or vincristine and
doxorubicin

Intravenous
or oral

Dacarbazine

800 mg/m2

Day 1 (same day as
doxorubicin)

With doxorubicin

Intravenous
(constant
rate infusion)

Temozolomide

100–125 mg/m2

Days 1–5

With doxorubicin

Oral

Drug

Dose

Doxorubicin

30 mg/m2

Vincristine

Frequency/days given
(every 3 weeks = 1 cycle)

Stage III (T2 or T3, N1 or N2, M1) describes a tumor
invading adjacent structures, lymph node involvement
(regional or distant), and/or distant metastasis.
When applied to the integumentary system, the
TNM classification can be utilized with the following
­additional location‐specific parameters: stage I, tumor
confined to the dermis; stage II, tumor extends into sub­
cutaneous tissue, rupture not a consideration; stage III,
muscular invasion has occurred.

­Therapy
Surgery
Regardless of species and primary location, surgery
along with adjunctive doxorubicin‐based chemotherapy
(Table 152.2) is the treatment of choice. Notable
­exceptions include small dermal lesions (stage I) and
conjunctival forms; these presentations may not require
adjunctive chemotherapy as they carry a much lower risk
of metastasis.
Surgical mass removal is vital to minimize the risk
of fatal hemorrhage with splenic hemanigosarcoma.
Intraoperatively, arrhythmias are common, so continuous

Sterile
hemorrhagic
cystitis

ECG monitoring for a minimum of 24 hours postoper­
atively is recommended. Ventricular tachycardia,
sustained tachycardia (180 beats per minute) with
­
­paroxysmal runs of ventricular premature complexes
(VPCs) or patients that are symptomatic for ventricular
arrhythmias can be treated with lidocaine boluses or
­constant rate infusions. Most arrhythmias will resolve
within 24–48 hours.
Patients with splenic hemangiosarcoma commonly
have evidence of liver metastasis at the time of diagnosis.
However, all hepatic nodules identified at surgery should
not be assumed to be malignant as benign conditions
such as nodular hyperplasia are also commonly found
in the aged animal. It is necessary to perform a biopsy
of any suspicious lesion when removing an abdominal
mass.
Surgical excision of myocardial HSA is rarely per­
formed. Tumors in this location are a significant techni­
cal challenge and are seldom completely removed. For
most patients, laparoscopic or open thorax pericardiec­
tomy may be the only surgical option. Pericardiectomy
may provide palliation and short‐term survival gains as
it minimizes risk of pericardial tamponade. Owners
should be warned about sudden death from tamponade
if removal or pericardectomy is not pursued.

VetBooks.ir

152 Hemangiosarcoma

Complete surgical excision of dermal hemangiosar­
coma is strongly recommended. If the mass is small
and no evidence of subcutaneous invasion is found,
adjunctive chemotherapy may not be warranted as the
risk of metastasis for this form is low.
Unlike dermal tumors, where surgical excision alone
may be adequate, hypodermal and intramuscular tumors
require multimodal therapy. HSA in this location is
­associated with a high local recurrence and metastatic
rate. Therefore, wide surgical excision (3 cm minimum
margin) +/‐ adjunctive radiotherapy is recommended.
To address the risk of metastasis, systemic chemother­
apy (doxorubicin based) is always recommended.
In cats, complete histopathologic excision with wide
surgical margins is likewise recommended for all dermal
forms of hemangiosarcoma. As in dogs, subcutaneous
and other nondermal hemangiosarcoma forms have a
higher risk of metastasis. Hence adjunctive chemother­
apy should be considered.
Doxorubicin‐Based Chemotherapy
Doxorubicin is the most active chemotherapeutic for
hemangiosarcoma. It can be used alone or as part of a
multiple agent protocol (see Table 152.2). Regardless of
which is utilized, chemotherapy is regarded as well
tolerated by most animals. Gastrointestinal toxicity
­
(vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia) is often self‐limiting and is
seen in up to 20% of patients, but requires hospitaliza­
tion far less often. Like most chemotherapeutics, the
most common hematologic side‐effects are neutrope­
nia and thrombocytopenia, and, less likely, anemia.
Doxorubicin‐based protocols that incorporate dacar­
bazine result in a response rate of 47% but have more
significant hematologic and gastrointestinal side‐effects.
Oral temozolomide in place of dacarbazine has recently
been evaluated. The response rate was found to be
­similar but with less hematologic toxicity.
Doxorubicin, like all anthracyclines, is cardiotoxic. An
irreversible, dilated type cardiomyopathy can occur at
cumulative doses at or above 180–240 mg/m2. A more
cardioprotective anthracycline is epirubicin. Adverse
cardiac effects can be seen with its use but at doses
more than double that of doxorubicin. In one study, it
was shown to be equally effective as doxorubicin, but
more gastrointestinal side‐effects (vomiting, diarrhea)
occurred. Other formulations of doxorubicin such as
pegylated, liposome‐encapsulated (PL‐DOX) are availa­
ble. Encapsulation into liposomes leads to decreased
­cardiotoxicity and decreased drug uptake by phagocytes,
thereby prolonging exposure to the drug. Comparison
of response and survival time between pegylated
and nonpegylated forms has revealed no differences.
Of unique concern, PL‐DOX may induce palmar‐plantar

erythrodysesthesia (PPES), a painful desquamation
dermatitis. Adjunctive therapy with pyridoxine may
­
minimize symptoms and lessen risk.
Other notable toxicities of anthracyclines include
­anaphylactic type reactions during infusion and tis­
sue necrosis if extravasated. Proper administration
requires accurate intravenous catheter placement,
patient sedation when appropriate, and avoiding
bolus administration.
In the cat, adjunctive chemotherapy with a doxoru­
bicin‐based protocol is recommended following surgical
excision for all forms of HSA except small dermal lesions.
Single‐agent doxorubicin dosed at 25 mg/m2 every three
weeks, or a combination protocol with cyclophosphamide
and vincristine, should be considered.
Immunotherapy
Immunotherapy modifies a biologic response by enhanc­
ing a preexisting immune response, inducing an immune
response or suppressing an immune response. When
given in conjunction with chemotherapy, immunomod­
ulatory agents may enhance efficacy and improve
­prognosis. One such immunomodulatory agent is mura­
myl tripeptide‐phosphatidylethanolamine (L‐MTP‐PE),
a lipophilic derivative of muramyl dipeptide (MDP), a
molecule resembling the cell wall of bacteria. L‐MTP‐
PE stimulates cells of macrophage lineage to become
­tumoricidal. When a doxorubicin‐based protocol was
used in conjunction with L‐MTP‐PE (given twice weekly
for eight weeks), the median survival time was signifi­
cantly improved (277 days versus 143 days with chemo­
therapy alone). L‐MTP‐PE is not presently available in
the United States.
Antiangiogenic Therapy
Angiogenesis is a normal process involved in fetal devel­
opment, wound healing, and the female reproductive
cycle. In health, it is controlled by inhibitory regulators.
In the cancer patient, this process becomes abnormally
activated and unregulated and is involved in tumor
growth and metastasis.
Newer cancer treatment strategies focus on the
­inhibition of angiogenesis. Growth factors monitor and
activate endothelial cell growth and development. As
examples, VEGF and bFGF act directly on endothelial
cells; Transforming growth factor (TGF) and platelet‐
derived growth factor (PDGF) attract and activate
inflammatory cells and connective tissue, which thereby
promotes angiogenesis. Antiangiogenic agents are
directed towards inhibition of one or more growth
­factors or their receptors, thereby preventing further
angiogenesis, growth and metastasis of a tumor.

1343

VetBooks.ir

1344

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Angiogenesis inhibitors are an attractive antineoplastic
treatment as they are not limited to cytotoxic therapy
and may be more acceptable and tolerable by both
the owner and the patient. Further, they do not induce
multidrug resistance as they do not target tumor cells
directly.
Metronomic Chemotherapy

Metronomic or continuous low‐dose oral chemotherapy
has been demonstrated to have antiangiogenic and
immune‐modulating effects. Its use has been shown to
improve survival in dogs undergoing splenectomy.
Cyclophosphamide, the most commonly prescribed, also
suppresses T‐regulatory cells, thereby improving host
antineoplastic immune function. In one study, cyclo­
phosphamide (12.5–25 mg/m2 PO) and etoposide
(50 mg/m2 PO) were administered daily on alternating
three‐week cycles with piroxicam (0.3 mg/kg/day PO).
Results revealed a median survival of 178 days, which
was significantly better than historical controls undergo­
ing surgery alone. Although low doses of chemotherapy
are used, owner compliance and care are required to
minimize risks for sterile hemorrhagic cystitis.
To date, very few metronomic protocols have been
evaluated in patients with hemangiosarcoma. Further
studies need to be done to determine efficacious drugs,
dosages, and timing.
Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors

Palladia™ (toceranib phosphate) is a receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitor that affects the activities of multiple
receptors, including VEGF and PDGF‐alpha. Similar to
metronomic chemotherapy, it also has immunomodula­
tory effects against myeloid‐derived suppressor cells.
Masitinib mesylate (Masivet®), another receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitor approved for use in dogs in Europe, was
shown to decrease T‐regulatory lymphocytes in the
bloodstream of dogs and was well tolerated when com­
bined with a metronomic dosage of cyclophosphamide.
However, neither Palladia nor Masivet has been shown
to lead to survival benefits for HSA. Imatinib mesylate
(Gleevec®), a human receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor,
has been shown to induce apoptosis in hemangiosar­
coma cell lines with a dose‐dependent killing effect
in vitro. It is associated with hepatotoxicity in the dog
and for most, is cost‐prohibitive.
Other Agents

Interferons are cytokines that have been used for antian­
giogenic therapy in humans; interferon‐alpha 2a inhibits
angiogenesis by suppressing bFGF and VEGF produc­
tion. Daily injections are required, making it less practi­
cal for the veterinary patient. Neutralizing antibodies

may also eventually be produced, making the use of esca­
lating doses necessary.
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are another poten­
tial target for therapy. These enzymes degrade compo­
nents of the extracellular matrix, and play an important
role in wound healing and tissue remodeling. In the can­
cer patient, MMPs are involved in tumor invasion, prolif­
eration, and fostering a local environment to enhance
tumor growth. Minocycline is a synthetic agent that
inhibits MMPs. However, its use has not been shown to
significantly prolong survival in dogs with HSA when
combined with a doxorubicin‐containing protocol.
Complementary Treatment
Nutraceuticals or homeopathic remedies have been
explored as adjuncts to standard therapy for hemangio­
sarcoma in an effort to improve quality of life. Yun‐Zhi
PSP is the active ingredient in I’m‐Yunity (an extract of
Coriolus versicolor mushroom). The median time to
develop metastasis or progression of metastasis was
delayed in dogs receiving 100 mg/kg/day. Yunnan Baiyao
is a neutraceutical/homeopathic Chinese powder that
anecdotally has been shown to promote coagulation, and
help prevent intraabdominal and myocardial hemorrhage.
The definitive benefit of its use in dogs with hemangiosar­
coma has yet to be determined.

­Prognosis
Visceral and Myocardial Forms
The long‐term prognosis is grave for dogs with the vis­
ceral form of hemangiosarcoma. The median survival
time (MST) with surgery alone is approximately 72 days.
With adjunctive chemotherapy, the median s­ urvival time
is 6 months (one-year survival 6%). Stage has been shown
to be prognostic. Dogs with a stage III presentation have
an anticipated MST of three months in spite of standard
therapy. Death is typically due to resistant metastatic
­disease or hemorrhage.
The prognosis for dogs with myocardial HSA is like­
wise grave. Although survival may be similar to those
with the visceral form, a poorer outcome is more typical
(MST 4 months) as many do not undergo cytoreductive
surgery. In one study, the MST for dogs that had pericar­
dectomy alone was one month.
Both renal and lingual forms are exceptions. With
treatment, renal hemangiosarcoma has a MST of nine
months, with an approximately 30% one‐year survival.
Dogs with lingual hemangiosarcoma (grade I and II)
have an expected MST of 553 days. Local recurrence
following therapy for the lingual form is common.

VetBooks.ir

152 Hemangiosarcoma

Integument
Dermal hemangiosarcoma is associated with the best
prognosis. A MST of 2.5–3 years (one year 79%, two year
60% MST) can be anticipated. Prognostic factors include
breed, tumor location, presence of solar actinic changes,
and invasiveness. Predisposed breeds have a decreased
risk for ­developing metastasis, and have a longer survival
time (MST 1570 vs 593 days). Sun‐exposed locations
have a better prognosis and an increased overall survival
rate (1085 days vs 539 days for tumors of other loca­
tions). Additionally, dogs with solar changes on histology
such as solar elastosis, superficial dermal fibrosis, and
epidermal dysplasia have an increased overall survival
compared to those without solar changes (MST 1549 vs
545 days respectively). Of importance to note is that over
75% of dogs with dermal HSA will develop additional
tumors in the same region of skin over time (usually pre­
disposed breeds with the solar‐induced form on their
ventral abdomen).

The prognosis for dermal hemangiosarcoma is signifi­
cantly more guarded if invasion into the subcutis or mus­
cle has occurred. With surgery alone, MST is 172 days
for stage II and 307 days for stage III disease. One study
found the prognosis for dogs with stage II tumors was
improved with the addition of chemotherapy (MST 1189
days) but the prognosis for stage III tumors remained
similar (MST 273 days). Most dogs with stage III HSA
(intramuscular) will die of metastatic disease prior to
local recurrence.
Cat
In cats, similarl to dogs, location is a good predictor of
survival. Subcutaneous tumors had a longer MST than
visceral tumors, and dermal tumors had a longer MST
than subcutaneous tumors. Higher mitotic indices
(>3/10) were linked to shorter survival.

­Further Reading
Clifford CA, Mackin A, Henry C. Treatment of canine
hemangiosarcoma: 2000 and beyond. J Vet Intern Med
2000; 14: 479–85.
Dervisis NG, Dominguez P, Newman R, et al. Treatment
with DAV for advanced‐stage hemangiosarcoma in dogs.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2011; 47(3): 170–6.
Johannes CM, Henry C, Turnquist S, et al.
Hemangiosarcoma in cats: 53 cases (1992–2002).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007; 231(12): 1851–6.

Sorenmo KU, Baez J, Clifford C, et al. Efficacy and
toxicity of a dose‐intensified doxorubicin protocol
in canine hemangiosarcoma. J Vet Intern Med 2004;
18(2): 209–13.
Szivek A, Burns R, Gericota B, et al. Clinical outcome in
94 cases of dermal haemangiosarcoma in dogs treated
with surgical excision: 1993–2007. Vet Compar Oncol
2012; 10(1): 65–73.

1345

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1347

153
Melanoma
Philip J. Bergman, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Oncology)
Katonah‐Bedford Veterinary Center, Bedford, Hills, NY, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology/
Epidemiology
Melanoma is a relatively common tumor of dogs, especially in those with significant levels of skin pigmentation. Melanomas in cats are relatively rare. The most
common location for canine melanoma is the haired
skin, where they grossly appear to be small brown to
black masses, but can also appear as large, flat, and/or
wrinkled masses. Primary melanomas also can occur in
the oral cavity, nailbed, footpad, eye, gastrointestinal
tract, or mucocutaneous junction. Ocular melanomas of
dogs and cats represent a distinct clinical syndrome and
will be discussed elsewhere. Metastatic sites for canine
malignant melanoma (CMM) can be varied, including
local draining lymph nodes, the lungs, liver, meninges,
adrenals, etc.
Melanoma arises from melanocytes, the cells which
generate pigment through the melanosome by a number
of melanosomal glycoproteins. In humans, cutaneous
melanoma can arise due to mutations induced by
repeated, intense exposure to ultraviolet light (for example, frequent tanning or working outdoors). Melanoma is
currently the most rapidly increasing incident human
cancer. Significant recent research into the etiology of
human melanoma suggests multiple causes which are
independent of the aforementioned UV‐associated
mutagenesis. Since most breeds of dogs have a hair coat,
which affords them protection from sunlight, UV‐associated melanoma is a less likely primary causative agent
in the dog. However, pigment cells divide every time
there is injury to the skin, or if there is constant
trauma (for example, areas where dogs scratch or lick).
Nevertheless, risk factors for canine melanoma are not
well established.

­Signalment
The most common oral malignancy in the dog is melanoma. Oral malignant melanoma is most commonly
diagnosed in Scottish terriers, golden retrievers, poodles, and dachshunds. Oral melanoma is primarily a disease of older dogs without gender predilection, but may
be seen in younger dogs. Additional oral tumor differentials include squamous cell carcinoma, fibrosarcoma,
epulides/odontogenic tumors, osteosarcoma, and others. Melanomas in the oral cavities of dogs are found in
the following locations in order of decreasing frequency:
gingiva, lips, tongue, and hard palate. Feline melanoma is
relatively rare, but appears to be malignant in most cases.

­Diagnosis/Pathology/Molecular
Biology
Melanomas can be difficult to diagnose pathologically in
some situations, especially anaplastic amelanotic melanomas which can masquerade as soft tissue sarcomas.
Numerous investigators have attempted to increase the
precision of identification of melanomas predominantly
through immunohistochemical (IHC) means. This may
be accomplished through the use of multiple IHC assays
on suspected melanoma tissue or through the use of an
IHC cocktail of antibodies. The use of PNL2 and tyrosinase, beyond the typical use of Melan A and S100,
appears to hold particular promise.
The molecular characterization of canine and feline
melanomas is not as well defined as it is in humans.
BRAF is a member of the MAPK signaling pathway,
which is commonly mutated in human cutaneous
­melanoma, but infrequently mutated in oral mucosal

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1348

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

melanoma. Interestingly, BRAF mutations are also
­
uncommon in canine oral malignant melanoma, suggesting that certain canine and/or feline malignancies
can have similar molecular signatures in addition to their
already well‐known clinical similarities in the context of
resistance to chemotherapy and/or radiation, prognosis,
and similar variable peculiar sites of metastatic propensity. A number of other investigators have reported a
variety of molecular abnormalities and/or associations in
canine and feline melanoma.

­Staging
The staging of dogs with melanoma is relatively straightforward. A minimum database should include a thorough history and physical exam, complete blood count
and platelet count, biochemical profile, urinalysis, three‐
view thoracic radiographs and local lymph node
­aspiration with cytology to determine whether lymphadenomegaly is present or not. Williams and Packer
reported that local nodes from dogs with oral melanoma
have ~70% metastasis when lymphadenomegaly was present, but more importantly, ~40% had metastasis when
no lymphadenomegaly was present. Abdominal ultrasound should be considered in cases with moderate to
high metastatic potential such as the oral cavity, feet or
mucosal surface of the lips, as melanoma may metastasize to the abdominal lymph nodes, liver, adrenal glands,
and other sites.
The use of sentinel lymph node mapping and lymphadenectomy is of diagnostic, prognostic and clinical
benefit in human melanoma. Relatively few investigations have been reported to date for sentinel lymph node
mapping and/or excision for dogs with malignancies and
this author strongly encourages additional investigation
in this area. Furthermore, the use of novel staging
modalities such as gallium citrate scintigraphy is also
encouraged.

­Therapy
Surgery
Surgery is the most effective local treatment modality for
melanoma. Incisional biopsy is an important part of the
diagnostic work‐up based on the clinical, therapeutic,
and prognostic heterogeneity of tumors on the differential diagnosis list. In cases for which cytology results
from draining lymph nodes are equivocal, lymph nodes
should be surgically excised and submitted for pathologic examination as this outcome holds prognostic and
therapeutic importance.

Cutaneous melanocytomas are often completely
excised with 1 cm lateral skin and one fascial plane deep
margins. In contrast, partial mandibulectomy and maxillectomy are typically required for complete removal of
oral melanomas arising from the gingiva or from other
oral mucosa in close proximity to bone. Imaging via
computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) can be helpful for delineation of tumor
extent/invasiveness and/or involvement of regional
lymph nodes. Melanomas in mucosal areas not adjacent
to bone such as tongue, lip or buccal mucosa may be
amenable to excision of the soft tissues only. Local recurrence rates vary from ~20% to 50% following mandibulectomy and maxillectomy, respectively. Quality of
life is typically very good to excellent and most dogs are
eating in the first day or two following mandibulectomy
or maxillectomy, with high owner satisfaction rates. The
combination of surgery and radiation plus adjuvant therapy should be considered in those patients with tumors
that are not amenable to clean margin resection.
Radiation Therapy
Radiation therapy can play an integral role in the treatment of a subset of canine and feline melanomas.
Radiation therapy is unfortunately ineffective at
­controlling distant metastasis and therefore should be
used for local tumor control when definitive local therapy via surgical removal is incomplete or not possible.
Melanoma has historically been believed to be a
relatively radioresistant tumor type. Therefore, most
­
radiation protocols used in dogs and cats have utilized
higher doses per fraction. Protocols with fewer treatments (“hypofractionated”) have less cost, reduced
­emotional and time commitment for owners, and fewer
anesthetic episodes with generally less severe acute side‐
effects when compared to full‐length normally fractionated protocols. A 2–3 cm ­margin around the tumor is
typical for most radiation plans with considerations for
irradiation of the local draining lymph node.
The overall response rate to radiation for canine OMM
is generally 80–90% with approximately 60% complete
response and 25% partial responses. Progression‐free
median survival times with radiation are typically 5–8
months with high recurrence rates. Median survival
times range from approximately five to 12 months. Dogs
with less advanced, incompletely resected oral melanoma (majority were stage I with some stage II) that were
treated with either carboplatin or cisplatin given once
weekly before radiation therapy had a median survival
time of approximately 12 months. The median survival
time for five cats with oral malignant melanoma treated
with radiation therapy and a variety of other adjuvant
therapies was only 146 days.

VetBooks.ir

153 Melanoma

Chemotherapy
Other modalities reported for local tumor control as
case reports and/or case series have included intralesional cisplatin implants, intralesional bleomycin with
electronic pulsing and many others, but widespread use
has not been reported to date.
In dogs with melanoma in anatomic sites predicted to
have a moderate to high metastatic rate, or dogs with
cutaneous melanoma with a high tumor score and/or
increased proliferation index through increased Ki‐67
expression, the use of systemic therapies is warranted due
to the high risk for metastasis. Rassnick and colleagues
reported an overall response rate of 28% using carboplatin
for dogs with malignant melanoma. Unfortunately, only
one dog had a minimally durable complete response (~150
days), and the rest were nondurable partial responses.
Similarly, Boria et al. reported an 18% response rate and
median survival time of 119 days with cisplatin and piroxicam in canine oral melanoma. Other reports using single‐agent dacarbazine, melphalan or doxorubicin suggest
poor or absent activity. More recently, and importantly,
three studies suggest that chemotherapy plays an insignificant role in the adjuvant treatment of canine melanoma, whereas one study suggests it may provide benefit.
While it can be argued that the studies performed to
date to evaluate the activity of chemotherapy in an adjuvant setting for canine melanoma have been suboptimal
for a variety of reasons, the extensive human literature
suggests that melanoma is an extremely chemotherapy‐
resistant tumor. It is clear that new approaches to the systemic treatment of this disease are desperately needed.
One potential therapeutic avenue which has not been
significantly reported to date in canine or feline melanoma is the use of COX‐2 inhibitors. A number of
authors have investigated the expression of COX‐2 in
canine melanoma and have found positive correlations
of COX‐2 expression to proliferation and survival.
Further studies investigating the clinical responsiveness
of canine melanoma to COX‐2 inhibitors (and potential
correlation to COX‐2 expression) are encouraged.
Immunotherapy
Immunotherapy represents one potential logical systemic
therapeutic strategy for melanoma. A variety of immunotherapeutic strategies for the treatment of human melanoma have been reported, with typically poor outcomes
due to a lack of breaking innate or acquired immune tolerance to the tumor. Immunotherapy targets and strategies to date in canine melanoma have used autologous
tumor cell vaccines (with or without transfection with
immunostimulatory cytokines and/or melanosomal
­differentiation antigens), allogeneic tumor cell vaccines

transfected with interleukin (IL)‐2 or granulocyte
­macrophage‐colony stimulating factor (GM‐CSF), liposomal‐encapsulated nonspecific immunostimulators (e.g.,
L‐MTP‐PE), topical imiquimod, intralesional Fas ligand
DNA, siRNA (small interfering) against the survivin and/
or Bcl‐2 genes, bacterial superantigen approaches with
GM‐CSF or IL‐2 as immune adjuvants, pegylated tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)‐alpha, suicide gene therapy, adenovector CD40 ligand and, lastly, canine dendritic cell vaccines loaded with melanosomal differentiation antigens.
Although these approaches have produced some clinical
antitumor responses, the methodologies for the generation of these products can be expensive, time consuming,
sometimes dependent on patient tumor samples being
established into cell lines, and fraught with the difficulties
of consistency, reproducibility, and other quality control
issues. Furthermore, we are just beginning to more fully
understand the native immune dysregulation potentially
induced by the malignancy through increased T‐regulatory (Treg) cells, which suppress antitumor responses.
The advent of DNA vaccination circumvents many of
the previously encountered hurdles in vaccine development. DNA is relatively inexpensive and simple to purify
in large quantities. The antigen of interest is cloned into a
bacterial expression plasmid with a constitutively active
promoter. The plasmid is introduced into the skin or
muscle with an intradermal or intramuscular injection.
Once in the skin or muscle, professional antigen‐presenting cells, particularly dendritic cells, are able to present
the transcribed and translated antigen in the proper context of major histocompatibility complex and co‐stimulatory molecules. Although DNA vaccines have induced
immune responses to viral proteins, vaccinating against
tissue specific self‐proteins on cancer cells is clearly a
more difficult problem. One way to induce immunity
against a tissue‐specific differentiation antigen on cancer
cells is to vaccinate with xenogeneic (­different species)
antigen or DNA that is homologous to the cancer antigen. As outlined in cartoon form in Figure 153.1, vaccina­ ifferentiation antigens
tion with DNA encoding cancer d
is ineffective when self‐DNA is used, but tumor immunity can be induced by DNA from another species.
Tyrosinase is a melanosomal glycoprotein, essential
in melanin synthesis and routinely found to be
­overexpressed in a wide variety of melanomas across
species. Immunization with xenogeneic human DNA
encoding tyrosinase family proteins induced antibodies
and cytotoxic T cells against syngeneic B16 melanoma
cells in C57BL/6 mice, but immunization with mouse
tyrosinase‐related DNA did not induce detectable
­
immunity. In particular, xenogeneic DNA vaccination
induced tumor protection from syngeneic melanoma
challenge and autoimmune hypopigmentation. Thus,
xenogeneic DNA vaccination could break tolerance

1349

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

VetBooks.ir

1350

Canine
Differentiation
Antigen

Human
Differentiation
Antigen

Immunity

Figure 153.1 Xenogeneic DNA immunization concept.

against a self‐tumor differentiation antigen, inducing
antibody, T cell, and antitumor responses.
Dogs with stage I–III locoregionally controlled malignant melanoma receiving the xenogeneic melanoma vaccine have a Kaplan–Meier (KM) median survival time
(MST) of >1075 days (median not yet reached) whereas
those dogs with stage I–III CMM without local tumor
control given the same vaccination have a KM MST of
553 days. Dogs which received the xenogeneic melanoma vaccine with stage I, II, III, and IV CMM had KM
MSTs of >939 days (median not reached with 92.8% survival), >908 days (median not reached, 79% alive at one
year, 63% alive at two years), >1646 days (median not
reached, 77%, 65%, 57% alive at one, two, and three
years), and 239 days (40.5% and 18.8% alive at one and
two years), respectively.
The results of these trials demonstrate that xenogeneic
DNA vaccination in CMM:
is safe
induces a specific antityrosinase immune response in
some dogs
●● potentially therapeutic in stage II–III locoregional
controlled disease
●● is an attractive candidate for further evaluation in an
adjunct, minimal residual disease Phase II setting.
●●
●●

Based on these studies, a multiinstitutional safety and
efficacy trial for USDA licensure in dogs with locally
controlled stage II–III oral melanoma was initiated in
2006 with granting of conditional licensure in 2007,
which represented the first US governmental regulatory
agency approval of a vaccine to treat cancer across species. Results of this licensure trial documented a statistically significant improvement in ­survival for vaccinates
versus controls and full licensure for the HuTyr‐based
canine melanoma vaccine from USDA‐CVB was received
in 2009 (OnceptTM, Merial, Inc.).
We have also investigated the efficacy of local tumor
control and use of xenogeneic DNA vaccination in dogs
with digit malignant melanoma. These investigations
led to the development of a canine digit melanoma staging scheme and found an improvement in survival compared to historical outcomes with digit amputation
only. We also documented a decreased prognosis for
dogs with advanced stage disease and/or increased time
from digit amputation to the start of vaccination.
Phillips and co‐investigators have also recently reported
the use of Oncept in horses and determined the safety
and optimal use of the needle‐free delivery device into
the pectoral region in addition to documenting antigen‐
specific humoral responses after vaccination in all
horses.

VetBooks.ir

153 Melanoma

Human Melanoma Immunotherapy
A similar approach has been used in human patients
with metastatic melanoma in the minimal residual disease setting. Although no clinical response data are
available since these patients did not have measurable
disease, several Phase I trials of xenogeneic DNA vaccines have been completed. Across studies of tyrosinase
and gp100 DNA immunization, approximately 40% of
patients develop quantifiable CD8+ T cell responses to
the target antigen.
Two exciting new approaches which appear to confer a
survival benefit in human metastatic melanoma are the
use of the anti‐CTLA‐4 antibody ipilimumab (YervoyTM,
Bristol‐Myers Squibb) and the selective BRAF inhibitors
vemurafenib (ZelborafTM, Genetech) and dabrafenib
(GSK2118436, GlaxoSmithKline), in patients who are
BRAF V600 mutation positive. As a small subset of dogs
with malignant melanoma have exon 11 KIT gene mutations, the more routine use of KIT testing by polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) of CMM and subsequent use of c‐
kit small molecule inhibitors (particularly in dogs with
advanced stage disease and/or lack of response to
Oncept) should be considered.
Canine malignant melanoma strongly appears to be a
more clinically faithful therapeutic model for human
melanoma when compared to more traditional mouse
systems, as both human and canine diseases are
­chemoresistant, radioresistant, share similar peculiar
metastatic phenotypes/site selectivity, and occur spontaneously in an outbred, immunocompetent scenario. It is
hoped that in the future, this same vaccine may also play
a role in the treatment of melanoma in other species
(e.g., horses, cats, humans, etc.) due to its xenogeneic
origins, and in melanoma prevention once the genetic
determinants of melanoma risk in dogs are further
defined.

­Prognosis
Melanomas in dogs have extremely diverse biologic
behaviors, depending on a large variety of factors. A
thorough understanding of these factors helps the clinician to delineate in advance the appropriate staging,
prognosis, and treatment options. The primary factors
which determine the biologic behavior of an oral melanoma in a dog are site, size, stage, and histologic
­parameters. Unfortunately, even with a comprehensive
understanding of all these factors, there are melanomas
which have an unreliable biologic behavior; hence the
need for additional research into this relatively common,
heterogeneous, but frequently extremely malignant

tumor. On divergent ends of the spectrum would be a
0.5 cm haired‐skin melanocytoma, which is highly likely
to be cured with simple surgical extirpation, in comparison to a 5 cm high‐grade malignant oral melanoma with
a poor to grave prognosis.
Similar to the development of a rational staging, prognostic and therapeutic plan for any tumor, two primary
questions must be answered: what is the local invasiveness of the tumor and what is the metastatic propensity?
The answers to these questions will ultimately determine
the prognosis and appropriate therapies.
Anatomic Site
The anatomic site of melanoma is highly, though not
completely, predictive of local invasiveness and metastatic propensity. Melanomas involving the haired skin
which are not in proximity to mucosal margins often
behave in a benign manner. Surgical extirpation through
a lumpectomy is often curative, but histopathologic
examination is imperative for delineation of margins as
well as a description of cytologic features. The use of
Ki67 IHC has been reported to more reliably predict
potential malignant behavior compared to classic histology for cutaneous melanoma.
Oral and/or mucosal melanoma has been considered
an extremely malignant tumor with a high degree of local
invasiveness and high metastatic propensity. This biologic behavior is similar to the typically grave prognosis
associated with human oral and/or mucosal melanoma.
Two recent studies have called the veterinary portion of
this dogma into question and suggest benign oral
­melanomas can occur more frequently than previously
published. Caution is necessary when assessing histopathologic descriptions suggesting a benign course for
oral melanoma as this author has seen approximately 25
dogs over the last 10 years presenting with florid systemic metastases with an original histopathologic report
suggesting an expectation for a benign clinical course
based on a high degree of differentiation. Similar to cutaneous melanoma, Ki67 appears to have prognostic
import in canine oral melanoma.
Anatomic sites of intermediate prognostic significance
between generally benign‐acting haired‐skin melanomas
compared to often malignant and metastatic oral/
mucosal melanomas in dogs include melanomas of the
digit and footpad. Dogs with melanoma of the digits
without lymph node or further metastasis treated with
digit amputation are reported to have median survival
times of ~12 months, with 42–57% alive at one year and
11‐13% alive at two years. Unfortunately, metastasis
from digit melanoma at presentation is reported to
be ~30–40%, and the aforementioned outcomes with

1351

VetBooks.ir

1352

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

­surgery alone suggest that subsequent distant metastasis
is common even when no metastasis is found at presentation or digit amputation. The prognosis for dogs with
melanoma of the footpad has not been thoroughly established; this author has found this anatomic site to be
anecdotally similar in metastatic propensity and prognosis to digit melanoma. Interestingly, human acral lentiginous melanoma (plantar surface of the foot, palms of the
hand and digit) has an increased propensity for metastasis, suggesting further similarities between human and
canine melanoma.
The most thorough review of prognostic factors in
canine melanocytic neoplasms was published by Smedley
et al. This review took a regimented, systematic approach
to analyze published reports to date in order to identify
those factors which appear to be repeatable and statistically defendable, while also identifying areas where additional work is necessary due to incomplete data.
Size and Stage
For dogs with oral melanoma, primary tumor size has
been found to be extremely prognostic. The WHO staging scheme for dogs with oral melanoma is based on size
and metastasis and is summarized in Box 153.1.
MacEwen and colleagues reported MST for dogs with
oral melanoma treated with surgery to be approximately
17–18, 5–6, and three months with stage I, II, and III disease, respectively. More recent reports suggest that stage
I oral melanoma treated with standardized therapies

including surgery, radiation and/or chemotherapy has a
MST of approximately 12–14 months, with most dogs
dying of distant metastatic disease, not local recurrence.
Other investigators have found dogs with stage I oral
melanoma to have median progression‐free survival
times of 19 months, similar to the original MacEwen
et al. report.
Box 153.1 TNM staging system
T = Primary tumor
T1 Tumor <2 cm in diameter
T2 Tumor 2–4 cm in diameter
T3 Tumor > 4 cm in diameter
N = Regional lymph nodes
N0 No evidence of regional node involvement
N1 Histologic/cytologic evidence of regional node
involvement
N2 Fixed nodes
M = Metastasis
M0
No evidence of distant metastasis
M1
Evidence of distant metastasis
Stage I T1 N0 M0
Stage II T2 N0 M0
Stage III T2 N1 M0 or T3 N0 M0
Stage IV Any T, Any N and M1

­Further Reading
Grosenbaugh DA, Leard AT, Bergman PJ, et al. Safety and
efficacy of a xenogeneic DNA vaccine encoding for
human tyrosinase as adjunctive treatment for oral
malignant melanoma in dogs following surgical excision
of the primary tumor. Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(12): 1631–8.
MacEwen EG, Patnaik AK, Harvey HJ, Hayes AA, Matus R.
Canine oral melanoma: comparison of surgery versus
surgery plus Corynebacterium parvum. Cancer Invest
1986; 4(5): 397–402.
Proulx DR, Ruslander DM, Dodge RK, et al. A
retrospective analysis of 140 dogs with oral melanoma

treated with external beam radiation. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 2003; 44(3): 352–9.
Ramos‐Vara JA, Beissenherz ME, Miller MA, et al.
Retrospective study of 338 canine oral melanomas with
clinical, histologic, and immunohistochemical review of
129 cases. Vet Pathol 2000; 37(6): 597–608.
Smedley RC, Spangler WL, Esplin DG, et al. Prognostic
markers for canine melanocytic neoplasms: a
comparative review of the literature and goals for future
investigation. Vet Pathol 2011; 48(1): 54–72.

VetBooks.ir

1353

154
Nonmelanoma Skin Cancers
Barbara E. Kitchell, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Oncology)
VCA Veterinary Care Animal Hospital and Referral Center, Albuquerque, NM, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
The skin is the largest organ in the body, and has a
­complex tissue structure made up of many cell types.
Any of these cell types could give rise to a tumor. Some
cells are more commonly affected by malignant transfor­
mation than others.
The skin is composed of layers, referred to as the epi­
dermis and dermis. The epidermis contains stratified
epithelium, while the dermis is largely composed of con­
nective tissue, including collagen, extracellular matrix,
fibrocytes, and fibroblasts. Within the dermis also reside
adnexal structures such as sebaceous or eccrine glands,
and the various cells that make up the hair follicles.
Below the dermis, subcutaneous tissues largely contain
adipocytes. Interspersed throughout the complex organ
we call skin are cells of the immune system, which
are present as either transient or permanent residents
(­lymphoid cells, macrophages, mast cells, Langerhans
dendritic cells). Panniculus skeletal muscle, neurons
and associated peripheral nerve sheath cells, vascular
epithelium and hemangiopericytes, and the specialized
neuroendocrine cells we know as melanocytes are all
important to normal skin structure.
Thus, the number of potential histopathologic diagno­
ses for tumors of the skin is quite expansive. Skin tumors
are generally classified as being of epithelial, mesenchymal,
melanotic, or round cell type. Mesenchymal, m
­ elanotic,
mast cell tumors, and cutaneous lymphoma will be dis­
cussed in other chapters.
The functions of this complex organ are also varied, and
include prevention of water and electrolyte loss, ther­
moregulation, respiration, and sensory perception. A crit­
ical skin function is to provide a physical barrier to
environmental insults, whether mechanical, chemical,
osmotic, thermal, or microbiologic. As the front line of
defense against environmental insults, the skin’s most

important defensive mechanism is its self‐renewal and
repair functions, which are dependent on the presence of
both lineage‐committed replicating cells and pluripotent
stem cells. These replicating cells are subject to mutation
as a consequence of repeated noxious environmental
exposures, which may ultimately result in carcinogenesis.

­Epidemiology
All cancers arise as a consequence of genetic predisposi­
tions and environmental exposures to carcinogens. The
skin is at particular risk for environmental injury. As a
tissue with cells that continuously replicate or that can be
recruited to replicate, mutagenic induction followed by
tumor cell promotion through repeated rounds of cell
replication result in skin tumors of various kinds. Thus,
cutaneous tumors are the most common type of neopla­
sia in both humans and dogs, although fortunately not all
skin tumors are malignant.
Genetic contributions to skin carcinogenesis are evi­
denced by human familial hereditary syndromes, as well
as by canine breed predispositions to specific tumor
types. The skin is the most prevalent location for tumors
in dogs, with an estimated 20–30% of these lesions being
malignant. It is estimated that 25% of tumors of cats arise
in the skin, and that 50–65% of these lesions are malig­
nant. Excluding the common basal cell tumor of cats,
which is generally benign, the incidence of malignancy in
feline cutaneous tumors is estimated to be 70–80%.
The estimated annual incidence of skin tumors in dogs
and cats is 90.4 and 34.7 per 100 000 animals at risk,
respectively, while for humans the annual incidence is
reportedly 5.2/100 000 people at risk. Nonmelanoma
cutaneous tumors are the most common malignant
­neoplasms affecting people in the United States, but
­fortunately are not the most fatal types of malignancy.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1354

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

In dogs and cats, basal cell tumors (also called tricho­
blastomas), epitheliomas, sebaceous adenomas, epidermal
inclusion and other cysts, lipomas, and papillomas are
the most prevalent benign tumors noted. Mast cell tumor
is the most common malignant skin tumor in the dog,
and is discussed in Chapter 155.
Trichoblastomas, which are more commonly still
termed basal cell tumors, are the most common skin
tumors of cats; approximately 15–26% of all skin tumors
in cats are of this histology. Less than 10% of basal cell
tumors in cats are malignant in behavior. When malig­
nant, these lesions display a striking tendency toward
lymphatic metastasis, which can result in a “chain of
pearls” nodular progression up the draining lymphatics to
the local lymph node. In dogs, poodles and setters are pre­
disposed to basal cell lesions, which may be described by
their histologic subtypes of ribbon, medusoid, ­trabecular,
spindle, granular cell, and clear cell types. These lesions
are now believed to arise from the ­germinal cells of the
hair follicles, and are generally benign in behavior.
Dogs are commonly affected by benign tumors of glan­
dular origin in the skin, although this is a rare occurrence
in cats. Sebaceous hyperplasia, sebaceous adenoma, and
sebaceous epitheliomas are very common in dogs. These
lesions are most commonly benign and are rarely diag­
nosed as sebaceous gland carcinomas, which are gener­
ally locally aggressive and rarely metastatic. Benign
lesions are often seen in female dogs (especially hyper­
plasia), with peak incidence in dogs 7–13 years of
age. Miniature schnauzers, beagles, poodles, and cocker
spaniels are breeds at increased risk, as are Nordic
breeds, coonhounds, and terriers.
Apocrine gland adenomas and carcinomas arise from
sweat glands in both dogs and cats. These lesions are
rarely malignant but can be aggressive when transformed
to carcinomas. Feline apocrine gland carcinoma lesions
are seen primarily on the head, while benign lesions may
be present on the head, limbs or abdomen of older cats.
The front legs are the most common sites for canine
­apocrine gland carcinomas, with golden retrievers and
coonhounds being predisposed breeds. Lesions are
locally invasive with a predisposition to lymphatic
spreading. Apocrine gland adenocarcinomas of the
anal sac are ­discussed elsewhere.
Eccrine gland adenomas and carcinomas arise from
specialized sweat glands of the footpads in dogs and cats
and are exceedingly rare lesions.
Squamous cell carcinoma is common in both dogs and
cats. This tumor of the skin is frequently caused by chronic
ultraviolet light exposure in animals with white or fair
skin and scant hair or fur covering. As sunlight is most
damaging close to the equator and at high altitudes, these
geographic regions of the globe have the highest incidence
rates of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma in both

­people and animals. Lifestyle and behavior ­contribute to
sun exposure in all species of animals. Thus, white cats
living largely outdoors are particularly vulnerable to cuta­
neous squamous cell carcinoma in sun‐exposed areas of
their head, including ear tips, nasal planum, lower eyelids,
and the scantly furred preauricular area of the skin located
between the ears and eyes on the lateral forehead. Siamese
and other color‐point breeds of cats are protected from
cutaneous squamous cell formation by the pigment that is
present in the exact facial areas that put white cats at risk.
Similarly, dogs are most affected in areas of glabrous
(nonhaired) skin that receive excessive sunlight exposure.
This can occur when dogs “sunbathe” by lying on their
back or sides in full sun. Outdoor dogs with no pigment in
glabrous skin regions are most at risk. Thus, Dalmatians,
pointers, pit bulls, bull terriers, and other dogs with white
or pale skin on the ventral abdomen, prepuce, and medial
thighs may suffer actinic dermal injury that can ultimately
transition to squamous cell carcinoma. Dermal hemangi­
oma and hemangiosarcoma lesions may similarly arise in
areas of excessive ultraviolet light exposure.
In addition to physical carcinogenesis from ultraviolet
light exposure, there is also a viral etiopathogenesis
­associated with causation of cutaneous squamous cell
carcinoma. Papillomavirus infection in cats may cause
the feline equivalent of a human syndrome called Bowen
disease, which is a term used to identify multicentric
cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma in situ. This form of
squamous cell carcinoma occurs most frequently in
haired skin and has no predilection to arise in nonpig­
mented areas of the body. These lesions can be seen as
crusty, scabbed dermal lesions of the head, neck or trunk
of affected cats. Papillomavirus is also associated with
the development of feline fibropapillomas called feline
sarcoids. Interestingly, cats have been found to be sus­
ceptible to human papillomaviruses 5, 21, and 38, which
were discovered by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
analysis of papilloma lesions in several cats.
Dogs also harbor papillomaviruses, which may be
involved in the causation of oral, footpad, and cutaneous
papillomas, and potentially even in squamous cell carci­
nomas. These lesions are particularly observed in dogs
that are immunocompromised.
Breed association is noted in dogs affected by tumors
of adnexal skin structures. Infundibular keratinizing
acanthomas are common benign tumors of dogs.
Synonyms for these tumors include intracutaneous
keratinizing epitheliomas, keratoacanthomas, and intra­
cutaneous cornifying epitheliomas. Breeds at risk for
these benign lesions include Norwegian elkhounds and
other Nordic breeds, German and Belgian shepherd
dogs, various terriers, and the Lhasa apso. These lesions
are benign and generally cured by local excision, although
they are frequently seen as multiple lesions.

VetBooks.ir

154 Nonmelanoma Skin Cancers

Trichoepitheliomas are tumors that demonstrate
­differentiation into elements of the hair follicle, and are
seen on the limbs, neck, and back of bassett hounds,
coonhounds, setters, and English springer spaniels.
These are rarely malignant, and are referred to as
malignant trichoepitheliomas or metrical carcinomas
­
in those rare cases.
Pilomatricomas are tumors of hair matrix cells, and are
also benign in general. Kerry blue, soft‐coated wheaten,
and Airedale terriers are the most affected, as are
­standard poodles, bichon frise, old English sheepdogs,
and bouviers des Flandres. These lesions may ulcerate
and ossify. While these lesions are rarely malignant, they
are reported to be highly metastatic when malignant
t­ ransformation occurs.
Neuroendocrine tumors of the skin are referred to as
Merkel cell tumors. They are thought to arise from
mechanoreceptors in the skin, and are also rare in dogs
and cats. While these tend to be highly malignant in
humans, they are more benign in dogs.
Ear canal tumors can be classed with skin tumors as
a continuous cutaneous organ. Most commonly seen
are ceruminous gland adenomas and carcinomas.
Ceruminous glands are modified apocrine glands local­
ized to the ear canal. Other tumors of the ear canal
include squamous cell carcinomas, basal cell carcino­
mas, mast cell tumors, histiocytomas, sebaceous gland
tumors, plasma cell tumors, melanomas, and various
sarcomas. Benign polyps arising in the ear canal are also
noted, particularly in young cats.

­Signalment
Most cutaneous tumors arise in aged animals, as it can
take a lifetime of exposure to environmental carcino­
gens, coupled with geriatric waning of immune surveil­
lance, to allow tumors to manifest. Occasionally skin
tumors will arise in younger animals, particularly in cats
affected by retroviruses or feline papillomavirus. There
is generally no sex predisposition in the development
of skin cancer. Many specific histologic types of skin
cancer, particularly those arising in adnexal structures,
are breed associated, as described in the section on
epidemiology.

­History and Clinical Signs
In most cases, the first sign of skin tumor development is
the presence of a mass. Masses may be indolent in their
growth pattern or may be rapidly progressive. Skin
tumors are generally nonpainful, unless infection or
inflammation occurs. Basal cell tumors tend to be slowly

growing or static in growth pattern, and may be alopecic,
ulcerated, and of blue‐black or pink color. Cysts and seba­
ceous adenoma lesions may rupture or become infected,
and thus may wax and wane in size. In many cases, own­
ers assume that squamous cell carcinoma on the nose of
a cat is a result of an infected fight wound. In these cases,
there is a wound that fails to heal properly, and is inter­
mittently scabbed or open and bleeding. Similarly, der­
mal hemangiosarcomas arise in areas of actinic injury,
with a clinical appearance of small red spots or “blood
blister” lesions that may bleed or become invasive.

­Diagnosis
Diagnosis of skin tumors is by cytology or biopsy.
Because these patients are often older, a minimum
database (complete blood count, serum chemistry
­
panel, and urinalysis) is helpful in anesthetic planning.
However, skin tumors are not typically associated with
paraneoplastic syndromes that could be detected on
bloodwork. Interestingly, humans affected by squamous
cell carcinoma may have hyperglobulinemia that is of
polyclonal nature and directed against specific cytokerat­
ins. Hyperglobulinemia may be noted in cats with sun­
light‐induced squamous cell carcinoma as well, although
it is clinically insignificant.
The method of biopsy is determined by size and
­location of the lesion. Small superficial lesions may be
best managed by excisional biopsy, which can be both
diagnostic and therapeutic. Larger lesions may require
incisional biopsy to allow for surgical or radiation treat­
ment planning. Advanced local imaging with computed
tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
may be helpful in determining the full extent of the lesion
to be addressed.
Carcinomas of the skin may merit clinical staging with
lymph node aspiration cytology or lymph node biopsy
and thoracic radiographs. Abdominal staging may be
considered in cases with malignant lesions on the cau­
dal portion of the body, where lymphatic spread to
intrapelvic or intraabdominal node sites may occur.
Lymphadenomegaly should be investigated with ­cytology
or biopsy. Pulmonary metastasis is rarely seen in dogs
with skin cancer, although squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC), malignant pilomatricomas, sebaceous gland car­
cinomas, apocrine gland carcinomas, and ­neuroendocrine
carcinomas have the potential to metastasize.
Ear canal tumors often cause pain, malodorous
­discharge, difficulty opening the mouth and neuro­
logic signs such as facial palsy and vestibular signs.
These signs may lead to delayed diagnosis of tumor, as
patients may undergo protracted periods of treatment of
suspected otitis before biopsy diagnosis is obtained.

1355

VetBooks.ir

1356

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Ear canal tumors often require advanced imaging
studies to determine operability and extent of surgery
necessary, or to plan for radiotherapy adjunctively
or as primary treatment of nonresectable, invasive
lesions.

­Therapy
Most skin tumors are best addressed by local surgical
excision. Benign lesions of the skin can be excised with
modest margins to affect a cure in most cases. Surgical
excision allows for accurate diagnosis, histologic grad­
ing, and surgical margin assessment, which can guide
further adjunctive therapy if necessary. However, surgery
can be disfiguring, particularly when the lesion arises on
the head and face. Squamous cell carcinoma of the ear
tips can be managed by pinna amputation in cats. Nasal
planum resection can also be curative in cats, although
surgery of SCC of the nasal planum in dogs is often
unsuccessful in controlling local disease. Surgery is
always the best primary modality for treatment of
any cancer, but owners may balk at the degree of disfig­
urement the dog or cat experiences with nasal planum
resection.
Serial resection of squamous cell carcinoma or
­hemangiosarcoma, while still small, dermal and arising
on glabrous skin, is recommended for dogs with field
carcinogenesis from sunlight exposure. Highly invasive
or large field lesions of the ventral abdomen, prepuce,
and medial thighs of such dogs may be less amenable to
surgical excision. In these cases, radiation therapy deliv­
ered to the local tumor site, or tumor site plus regional
nodes, may be curative. Radiation therapy for skin
tumors may involve traditional fractionated megavolt­
age irradiation with curative intent, or may be delivered
as palliative fractionated therapy. Superficial radiation,
such as delivered through topical plesiotherapy using a
strontium‐90 probe, is highly effective for small, nonin­
vasive lesions. Photodynamic therapy utilizing laser
light to activate photosensitizing agents is a common
treatment for human skin cancer patients, although
the technology is less readily available to veterinary
medicine.
Ear canal tumors generally require surgical excision,
which may entail vertical canal ablation in the case of
superficial benign tumors, but more likely requires a
more aggressive surgical approach with total ear canal
ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy. Extensive surgery
was associated with long median survivals in both dogs
and cats (>36 months and 50.3 months, respectively).
Mitotic rate was prognostic for a series of ear canal
tumors, with a mitotic index of 2 or less being more
favorable. Radiation therapy may be required for patients

with incompletely resected tumors of the ear canal,
regardless of histologic type of tumor.
Topical 5% fluorouracil cream may be applied to super­
ficial squamous or basal cell lesions in dogs, as is the
common practice in human dermatologic oncology. This
agent is applied topically twice daily by gloved finger or
cotton swab applicator for 3–6 weeks. Significant local
irritation and inflammation are seen as part of the thera­
peutic response. Dogs should be prevented access to the
treated site, as licking the topical cream can be harmful
to oral mucosa and may be toxic systemically. Critically,
fluorouracil should never be applied to cats, as even
­topical application can result in lethal neurotoxicity in
this species.
Topical immunotherapy for superficial squamous
cell carcinomas may be attempted. Imiquimod 5% cream
is a nonspecific active immunotherapeutic agent that
induces a strong macrophagic response when topically
applied. This immunostimulant causes inflamed, crusted
and scabbed lesions to arise in the treated area, which is
the basis of the therapeutic effect. Imiquimod is applied
topically to superficial lesions once daily, or in sensitive
cases three times weekly, for 3–6 weeks.
Intralesional therapy with chemotherapy in sesame oil
or purified bovine collagen matrix for depot delivery has
also been described in the literature. Agents such as
­carboplatin, cisplatin, bleomycin, and fluorouracil have
all been introduced intratumorally with sometimes
­striking results.
Systemic therapy with retinoic acid derivatives such as
13‐cis‐retinoic acid or isotretinoin has been attempted
as a cellular differentiation or cytotoxic strategy in
canine and feline skin tumors, particularly squamous
cell and infundibular keratinizing acanthoma (keratoa­
canthoma). Retinoid therapy has been reported in the
literature to have mixed success.
The use of COX‐2 inhibitors has shown modest effi­
cacy in treatment of squamous cell carcinomas of the
oral cavity, and thus may be helpful in cutaneous SCC
treatment as well. The COX‐2 inhibitor nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have both antiangio­
genic and immunomodulatory effects, and are generally
helpful in pain control for veterinary patients. Similarly,
the newer class of agents called receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (toceranib, masitinib, imatinib) are inhibitors
of cell signaling. These agents are promiscuous receptor
signaling blockers and may modulate tumor regression
through inhibition of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) and platelet‐derived growth factor (PDGF)
receptors, thus acting as antiangiogenic agents. The
therapeutic concept referred to as metronomic chemo­
therapy employs smaller daily or alternate‐day dosing of
NSAIDs, low‐dose cytotoxic agents such as cyclophos­
phamide, chlorambucil, or lomustine, often combined

VetBooks.ir

154 Nonmelanoma Skin Cancers

with receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors, to inhibit nor­
mal stromal cells that support neoplastic growth. Little
information is currently available about the use of daily,
low‐dose combination metronomic chemotherapy in
canine and feline skin or ear canal tumors.
Papilloma lesions may be addressed through the crea­
tion of an autologous vaccine. This approach is best used
in dogs with multicentric papillomas, as is sometimes
seen in dogs that have been heavily immunosuppressed
in the transplant or autoimmune disease setting, or in
dogs with immunosuppression from T‐zone lymphoma.
In this approach, 1–3 g of papilloma tissue are harvested
from the dog and macerated in a tissue grinder or mortar
and pestle along with 10 mL of sterile 0.9% saline. To this
mixture is added 1 mL of neutral buffered formalin,
which inactivates live virus as well as altering the struc­
ture of viral oncoproteins to facilitate immune recogni­
tion. The mixture is refrigerated for three days, and then
sieved through sterile cheesecloth or a large‐gauge filter
to remove residual particulate material. The resultant
autologous vaccine can be stored in the refrigerator in
1 mL sterile aliquots for future treatment. An immune
adjuvant such as Immunocidin® (Corynebacterium
­parvum derivative), squalene, or BCG is added before
injection into the residual papilloma lesions. This treat­
ment can be repeated at weekly intervals until lesion
regression is noted. There is no literature regarding use
of commercial papillomavirus‐preventive vaccines in the
therapeutic setting.
Systemic chemotherapy or local electrochemotherapy
has been attempted for aggressive or metastatic dermal
carcinomas. Relatively few agents have been used in this

setting, and results are generally anecdotal and not
well documented. Cisplatin, carboplatin, bleomycin,
actinomycin D, and mitoxantrone have all been used
sporadically, with modest response rates noted in the
literature. Local drug delivery enhanced by electro­
­
chemotherapy may increase the local efficacy of these
­cytotoxic agents.

­Prognosis
The prognosis for patients with localized tumors of the
skin, adnexal structures, or ear canals is generally highly
favorable. Many lesions are benign and early detection is
possible because of the superficial location of the tumors,
and ear canal tumors are frequently localized to within
the cartilaginous structures of the ear canal, which facili­
tates complete resection. Thus, most dogs and cats
affected by skin or ear canal tumors are cured by surgical
excision alone. Exceptions are noted in cases of malig­
nant skin neoplasia, particularly when metastasis to
nodes or distant sites is observed. Radiation therapy
can be helpful for large or nodally involved lesions,
as described earlier.
The most common aggressive skin tumors discussed
here are squamous cell carcinomas, which have median
survivals of 1–2 years with aggressive surgery and/or
radiation therapy in both dogs and cats. The exception to
this observed survival rate is in the case of nasal planum
squamous cell carcinomas in dogs, which are both locally
aggressive and metastatic to regional nodes, and have a
poorer overall outcome despite aggressive therapy.

­Further Reading
Gross TL, Ihrke PJ, Walder EJ, Affolter VK. Section Two:
Neoplasms and Other Tumors. In: Skin Diseases of the
Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis,
2nd edn. Ames, IA: Blackwell Science, 2005, pp.
561–689.
Hauck ML. Tumors of the skin and subcutanous tissues.
In: Withrow SJ, Vail DM, Page R, eds. Withrow and
MacEwen’s Small Animal Clinical Oncology, 5th edn.
St Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2012, pp. 305–20.
Lascelles BD, Parry AT, Stidworthy MF, Dobson JM, White
RA. Squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal planum in
17 dogs. Vet Rec 2000; 147(17): 473–6.

Munday JS, Kiupel M. Papillomavirus‐associated
cutaneous neoplasia in mammals. Vet Pathol 2010;
47(2): 254–64.
Vilar‐Saavedra P, Kitchell BE. Sunlight‐induced skin cancer
in companion animals. In: Baldi A, Pasquali P, Spugnini
E, eds. Skin Cancer: A Practical Approach. New York:
Humana Press, Springer Science+Business Media, 2013,
pp. 499–513.
Villamil JA, Henry CJ, Bryan JN, et al. Identification of the
most common cutaneous neoplasms in dogs and
evaluation of breed and age distributions for selected
neoplasms. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011; 239(7): 960–5.

1357

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1359

155
Mast Cell Neoplasia
Zachary M. Wright, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)
VCA Animal Diagnostic Clinic, Dallas, TX, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Mast cells are part of the normal canine, feline, and
human immune system. They primarily exist throughout
the skin, lungs, and intestinal tract but are rarely found
within peripheral blood.
Mast cells arise from pluripotent hematopoietic stem
cells of the bone marrow. Once mature, their cytoplasm
contains a large amount of metachromatic granules.
These granules contain a variety of substances including
histamine, serotonin, platelet activating factor, eosinophilic chemotactic factor, and heparin, among others.
In addition, mast cells produce a variety of cytokines that
include interleukin (IL)‐1, IL‐3, IL‐4, IL‐5, IL‐6, and
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)‐alpha.
The etiology for canine mast cell tumor development
is unknown partially because there is no clear human
model to provide key predictors.

­Canine Mast Cell Neoplasia
Epidemiology
Canine mast cell tumor (MCT) is the most common skin
tumor in dogs, representing upwards of 15–20% of all
skin tumors. They are one of the most common tumors
seen in practice.
Signalment
Mast cell tumor development has clear breed predispositions that include most brachycephalic breeds (boxer,
Boston terrier, and pug), Labrador and golden retrievers,
pit bull terriers, and shar‐peis. There is no reported sex
predilection and the mean age of diagnosis is 8.2 years.
Clinically, all breeds are capable of developing MCT.
While tumors are more often noted in middle‐aged to

older dogs, the author has seen numerous cases of MCT
in juveniles less than 1 year of age.
History and Clinical Signs
Most dogs with a MCT present with a single dermal lesion.
Twenty percent of all dogs, and specifically breeds that are
predisposed, may present with multiple tumors. The history may include a nonpainful mass that increases and
decreases in size. Physical manipulation of the tumor can
result in a rapid increase in size due to traumatic local
release of histamine (degranulation). Darier’s sign is the
dermatologic description of wheal formation, local erythema, and/or bruising secondary to manipulation of the
tumor. Most MCTs are clinically quiescent and are discovered on routine physical exam by the veterinarian or owner.
Mast cell tumors occur predominantly in the dermis
and are most commonly noted on the trunk and limbs.
A less commonly noted form, at mucocutaneous sites
(mouth, nasal planum, perirectal region), tends to have
a more aggressive clinical behavior (Figure 155.1).
Additionally, a lesser percentage of MCTs occur in the
subcutaneous tissue and many have a clinical appearance consistent with a lipoma.
Primary visceral mastocytosis is a very rare condition
in dogs. The disease has a predisposition for the intestinal
tract in older (>8 years) miniature‐breed dogs. Two independent studies have identified the Maltese breed as having a predisposition to the intestinal form. Clinical signs
are typical of most primary gastrointestinal pathology.
Diagnosis
Cytology of the lesion is diagnostic for a MCT. Because
of the clinical inefficiency and additional cost, premedication with an antihistamine prior to fine needle
aspiration of a simple dermal mass less than 5 cm in

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

VetBooks.ir

1360

Figure 155.1 A MCT at the mucocutaneous junction of the nasal
planum. Tumors in this location often are biologically more
aggressive with increased metastatic potential.

Figure 155.2 Mast cells seen at 40× with varying amounts of
metachromatic granules throughout the cytoplasm.

diameter is not indicated. While Darier’s sign may
develop, significant systemic histamine effects are
highly unlikely with simple dermal lesions. Cytology
of larger masses, or more vascular organs like lymph
node and spleen, does justify systemic protection with
antihistamines.
Mast cells are mononuclear round cells with a significant amount of cytoplasm containing metachromatic
granules. For comparison, mast cells range in size between
a neutrophil and macrophage. Diff‐Quik staining techniques are usually adequate in accentuating the diagnostic granules (Figure 155.2). When collecting samples, it is
important to save an unstained slide for alternative staining techniques (i.e., Wright’s) if mast cells are suspected
but granules are not identified with Diff‐Quik stain.
Without appropriate staining, these poorly granulated

Figure 155.3 A population of Diff‐Quik stained round cells at 40×.
Notice the lack of consistent granules and cellular atypia (multiple
nucleoli, varying N:C ratio, etc.). Alternative cytologic staining
techniques (Wright’s) are more adept at identifying the granules
in high‐grade MCT.

tumors may result in a cytologic diagnosis of “round cell
tumor” (Figure 155.3). It is important to remember that
cytology is ineffective in grading a MCT but the level of
cellular pleomorphism may provide clues to the biologic
behavior of a tumor.
Staging is important as both prognosis and treatment
options are intimately dependent on it (Box 155.1). Initial
staging of a MCT is dependent on physical exam findings.
Close attention should be paid to the regional draining
lymph nodes and organomegaly (hepatic and/or splenic).
Regional lymph nodes, regardless of size, should be
cytologically evaluated for metastasis. The determination of lymph node metastasis via cytology is very sensitive but has a low specificity due to the inability to
distinguish normal, responsive mast cells from malignant cells. Metastasis can be accurately confirmed
if mast cells are the predominant cell type. Additionally,
most pathologists will declare a node metastatic if
the mast cells are noted in clumps or sheets and/or have
marked cellular atypia. Biopsy or removal of the lymph
node is recommended if there is an increase in the numbers of well‐granulated mast cells but no other signs supportive of metastasis. Recent evidence supports that
dogs with no metastasis to regional nodes had a 0%
chance of distant metastasis.
Abdominal ultrasound is recommended for dogs
with a high‐grade MCT or proven lymph node metastasis. While a full abdominal ultrasound is encouraged,
focus should rest on the liver, spleen, and lymph nodes
(mesenteric, medial iliac, and sublumbar nodes). All
abnormal lesions of the liver and spleen should be
cytologically evaluated. Two independent studies confirmed that cytology of ultrasonographically normal

VetBooks.ir

155 Mast Cell Neoplasia

Box 155.1 Staging for mast cell tumors
WHO clinical staging system for canine mast cell tumors
Stage 0: Microscopic incomplete excision of any dermal MCT
with no evidence of regional nodal or distant metastasis
Stage 1: A single MCT confined to the dermis with no evidence of regional nodal or distant metastasis
a) no clinical signs
b) clinical signs
Stage 2: A single MCT confined to the dermis with regional
lymph node metastasis
a) no clinical signs
b) clinical signs
Stage 3: Multiple dermal MCT, any tumor invading local tissue with or without regional nodal metastasis

Stage 4: Any MCT with confirmed distant metastasis
Modified WHO clinical staging criteria for canine mast
cell tumors
Stage –1: Single MCT completely removed and no evidence
of regional nodal metastasis
Stage 0: Microscopic incomplete excision of a single MCT
with no evidence of regional nodal metastasis
Stage 1: A single MCT completely removed
Stage 2: Microscopic incomplete excision of a single MCT
Stage 3: A single MCT completely removed with positive
regional node metastasis in situ
Stage 4: Microscopic incomplete excision of a single MCT
with positive regional node metastasis in situ
Stage 5: MCT recurrence or positive distant metastasis

a) no clinical signs
b) clinical signs

liver and spleen does not influence treatment or survival
estimates.
While historically pursued, bone marrow aspiration
for staging may no longer be indicated for a patient diagnosed with their first MCT or with no clinical evidence
of lymph node metastasis. For these dogs, the incidence
of bone marrow involvement is low (2.8%). This low
yield, combined with cost, invasiveness of the procedure,
and ability to prove distant metastasis on more routine
testing (abdominal ultrasound), suggests that bone marrow aspiration may not be necessary for every patient.
However, bone marrow metastasis/distant metastasis is
a significant prognostic indicator and dogs with a recurrent MCT or which develop subsequent MCTs may have
a higher incidence (18.7%).
Pulmonary metastasis is rare and sporadically reported
for MCT. Consequently, thoracic radiography is not considered part of routine staging but may be helpful in
assessing concomitant disease processes (cardiovascular,
respiratory, etc.).
The most important prognostic indicator is the grading scheme. Tumor grade is determined by histopathologic features. Incisional biopsy is rarely recommended
for a MCT due to the diagnostic capability of cytology
and the increased potential for wound dehiscence secondary to both histamine and heparin release from the
remaining tumor cells. If cytology is nondiagnostic, incisional biopsy should be minimal in size and in an area of
minimal inflammation or necrosis. The incisional site
should be easily excised in its entirety when the mass is
removed. Overall, excisional biopsy is superior for both
diagnostic and therapeutic purposes.

The Patnaik grading scheme is the most well known
and used in pathology reports. Tumors are divided into
three grades (I, II, and III). Grade I tumors have an indolent behavior with a metastatic potential of near 10%.
Grade III MCTs are exceptionally aggressive with a metastatic rate of 80%. Grade II MCTs are by far the most
common diagnosis. These tumors can behave similarly
to both grade I and III and have a metastatic potential
near 20%. Clinically, this grading scheme is very helpful
for grade I and III lesions, but less predictive for grade II
tumors.
As the vast majority of MCTs are in the grade II
­category, many clinicians struggle with interpretation
and prognosis. Consequently, a recent collaboration of
pathologists and oncologists proposed a new grading
scheme. Kiupel et al. offered a two‐tiered system composed of a low‐grade and high‐grade MCT. First, this
study found an improved interpathologist agreement
compared to the Patnaik scheme. Second, distinction
between the two grades is based on a scoring system that
evaluates mitotic index, karyomegaly, multinucleated
cells, and bizarre nuclei. It is imperative to always request
a microscopic description with mast cell histopathology
as these characteristics are evaluated by that grading
scheme. Low‐grade MCTs (the majority of previously
diagnosed grade I and IIs) have minimal metastatic
potential and a median survival time of greater than two
years. High‐grade MCTs have a median survival time of
less than four months due to the metastatic behavior of
these tumors. To further aid clinical decisions, many
diagnostic labs have started to report both grading systems in their histopathology reports.

1361

VetBooks.ir

1362

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Attempts have been made to link histologically determined cellular proliferation markers to MCT prognosis
and clinical behavior. Proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA), argyrophilic nucleolar organizing region‐
associated proteins (AgNORs), and the proliferation
protein Ki‐67 have all been evaluated with mixed
results. Mitotic index has been repeatedly shown to
have the most prognostic value and is required as part
of the initial histopathology report. Tumors with a
mitotic index of >5/10 hpf should be treated prognostically as high‐grade MCTs.
Evaluation of c‐kit mutation has prognostic utility but
only when closely linked to histopathologic grade. More
importantly, the presence of c‐kit overexpression or mutation indicates a tumor that is more likely to be responsive
to the new tyrosine kinase inhibitor class of drugs.
Therapy
The systemic toxicity of a MCT often requires treatment.
Histamine is the compound found in mast cell granules
that results in the most significant clinical changes.
Activation of histamine receptors (H1 and H2) can lead
to toxicity. Severe anaphylactic reactions are a result of
systemic H1 receptor activation and can be treated with
diphenhydramine and corticosteroids. In times of crisis,
intravenous use of steroids is recommended. As a vasoactive molecule, histamine may also lead to marked
hypotension which could require both colloidal and
crystalloid support. H2 is more responsible for stimulation of gastric acid. Excessive H2 activation can lead to
gastric ulceration and clinical side‐effects that include
anorexia, nausea, hematemesis, and melena. Routine H2
receptor antagonists such as famotidine and ranitidine
can be effective but proton pump inhibitors (omeprazole) appear to be more potent at reducing gastric acid
production and aiding healing of ulcers.
Currently, the author only recommends oral preventive diphenhydramine and famotidine (at routine dosing)
for patients with documented MCT metastasis or tumor
volumes greater than 5 cm in diameter.
Various components within mast cell granules are also
responsible for delays in wound healing. This phenomenon is most commonly appreciated during incisional
biopsy techniques. Wound failure is often noted within
the first 3–5 days postoperatively.
Heparin is also released from mast cell granules.
Coagulopathies are rare with MCTs as evidence suggests
there is less heparin in malignant MCTs than in normal
mast cells. Clinically, increased bleeding at the surgical
site of a MCT is the most common coagulopathy noted.
Surgical removal of all MCTs is considered standard of
care. Surgical removal of the lesion should include at
least 2 cm of healthy tissue lateral to the lesion and one

fascial plane deep to the tumor. Prior to pathology submission, it is recommended to mark margins with either
suture or ink. Histopathology reports should comment
on the surgical margins.
Many tumors are large or in too difficult of a location for
a reasonable expectation of complete removal. A short
trial (10–14 days) of antiinflammatory prednisone
(1 mg/kg/day) can often result in significant tumor reduction. A recent study found that 70% of all MCTs treated
with presurgical prednisone responded to therapy. The
median reduction in tumor diameter was 45% with a
median total tumor volume reduction of 80%. Tyrosine
kinase inhibitors are also used to reduce tumor volume for
surgery in situations where prednisone does not result in a
significant response. When surgically amendable, these
medications are not selected as the primary treatment
due to their possible toxicities and cost (Figure 155.4).
For low‐grade (both Kiupel grade I and the majority of
Patnaik grade II) MCTs with no evidence of metastasis,
complete surgical removal is considered curative and no
adjuvant therapy is indicated.
Often, clinicians must determine treatment plans
based on narrow tumor‐free margins of 1–5 mm. Tissue
specimens will constrict during processing. Adjuvant
treatment is indicated if surgery is incomplete and tumor
cells extend to the surgical margins. There are no clear
guidelines for “narrow” surgical margins (1–5 mm) and
each case should be evaluated uniquely. The author is
usually more aggressive in adjuvant treatment recommendations for tumors with ≤1 mm clean margins as
they have a higher potential to reoccur.
Numerous studies have suggested that there is a subset
population (20–70%) of cutaneous MCTs that do not
reoccur when tumor cells extend to the surgical margins.
Theories include the lack of tumor volume resulting in a
decrease in progrowth cancer signaling. The small tumor
volume may also be amenable to self immune defense.
Additionally, there is some belief that the peripheral
mast cells in a tumor are normal mast cells that respond
to chemotactic factors released by the tumor. When the
tumor is removed and the signals are interrupted, the
normal mast cells vacate the area.
Currently, there is no way to determine which low‐
grade MCT will reoccur. Thus, all incomplete excisions
should be treated the same. An additional surgery is the
ideal treatment and should be considered if there is
adequate local skin for wound closure. For incompletely
removed low‐grade tumors that cannot be excised,
radiation offers a 90% curative outcome. Radiation
­protocols usually entail a total of 45–55 Gy dispersed
evenly over 18–22 total fractions or treatments.
Although not evaluated in this adjuvant setting, hypofractionated radiation may also offer added benefit over
monitoring alone.

VetBooks.ir

155 Mast Cell Neoplasia

(a)

(b)

Figure 155.4 (a) A female mixed‐breed dog at initial presentation with a MCT of the medial aspect of the upper eyelid. Enucleation of
the eye was initially recommended. (b) The same patient after one month of tyrosine kinase therapy. Surgical margins were achieved
with aggressive local excision without enucleation.

Either surgical removal or radiation of the draining
lymph nodes should be considered for cases where
regional node metastasis is confirmed (stage III).
There are a variety of chemotherapy treatment
options for a MCT. The European consensus statement on MCTs indicates that chemotherapy is used to
treat metastatic disease to either regional lymph nodes
or distantly; when radiation or surgery are not available
or possible; and as a neoadjuvant to reduce tumor burden prior to more traditional surgery or radiation. It is
important to understand that chemotherapy does not
offer the same curative results as radiation or surgery
and should not be used as a convenient alternative to
these modalities.
Prednisone has the longest history of use against
MCTs. It is unclear if the effects of prednisone are truly
cytotoxic or simply aid in reducing peritumoral edema
and inflammation secondary to histamine release. A
popular theory suggests that glucocorticoids block stem
cell factor release from regional epithelial cells and fibroblasts. Stem cell factor is a known activating protein of
the KIT pathway which is often mutated in MCTs.
Antiinflammatory dosing of prednisone at 1 mg/kg/day
is considered sufficient for MCTs. Immunosuppressive
doses have not been found to be more effective and only
increase the risk and severity of prednisone‐induced
side‐effects.
Traditional chemotherapy options include the vinca
alkaloids vinblastine and vinorelbine, the alkylating
agent lomustine, and a taxane, paclitaxel. Both lomustine
and vinblastine have an overall response rate of 40–50%.
Recently, the drugs were combined with prednisone
(Tables 155.1 and 155.2) and achieved an overall response

Table 155.1 CVP combination protocol as initially noted
in Rassnick et al.
Week

Protocol

Week 1

Prednisone 2 mg/kg/day Lomustine 70 mg/m2 PO

Week 3

Prednisone 1 mg/kg/day
Vinblastine 3.5 mg/m2 IV†

Week 5

Prednisone 1 mg/kg every other day until week 24
Lomustine 70 mg/m2 PO

Week 7

Vinblastine 3.5 mg/m2 IV

Week 9

Lomustine 70 mg/m2 PO

Week 12

Vinblastine 3.5 mg/m2 IV

Week 15

Lomustine 70 mg/m2 PO

Week 18

Vinblastine 3.5 mg/m2 IV

Week 21

Lomustine 70 mg/m2 PO

Week 24

Vinblastine 3.5 mg/m2 IV
Taper off prednisone over 4 weeks

IV, intravenous; PO, by mouth (per os).

Table 155.2 Alternating lomustine and vinblastine protocol
as initially noted in Cooper et al.
Week

Protocol

Week 1

Lomustine 60 mg/m2 PO

Week 3

Vinblastine 2.0 mg/m2 IV

Repeat for 4‐6 cycles
pending response
IV, intravenous; PO, by mouth (per os).

1363

VetBooks.ir

1364

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

(a)

(b)

Figure 155.5 (a) A female boxer at presentation with over 300 dermal MCTs. (b) The same patient after two weeks of tyrosine
kinase therapy.

of 65%. The micellar prepared paclitaxel has shown
promise against MCTs but is not yet commercially available. The current formulation of paclitaxel (suspended in
cremophor) has a marked increased risk of anaphylaxis
during administration.
The tyrosine kinase receptor KIT is mutated and/or
overexpressed in up to 40% of MCTs. These tandem duplication mutations at the juxtamembrane coding region
result in the malignant behavior of cellular proliferation,
adhesion, migration, and maturation. Consequently, KIT
mutations have been found more commonly in higher
grade MCTs.
Recent advancements in MCT treatments have led to
the development of tyrosine kinase inhibitors. These
drugs block the effects of mutated KIT receptors
through competitive inhibition. Toceranib phosphate
(Palladia™, Zoetis) is the first FDA‐approved treatment
for canine MCTs. It is labeled for the treatment of
­recurrent or nonsurgical high‐grade mast cell tumors.
Additionally, masitinib (Kinavet®, AB Science) achieved
European regulatory approval under similar label guidelines but recently lost licensure by the FDA and is no
longer available for use in the United States.

The reported efficacy of Palladia is near 40%
(Figure 155.5). Palladia may be used for all grades of
MCT but is more effective against MCTs with the
known KIT mutation. The labeled dose of 3.25 mg/kg
every other day results in significant gastrointestinal
toxicity, myalgias, and neutropenia. Most clinical oncologists now prefer a lower dose of 2.5–2.75 mg/kg on a
Monday‐Wednesday‐Friday treatment schedule. Oral
famotidine and sucralfate may eliminate low‐grade nausea or anorexia. Diarrhea is routinely treated with standard doses of loperamide. Protracted or severe clinical
signs require a temporary discontinuation (drug holiday)
of the medication until clinical improvement. Routine
complete blood counts are recommended over the first
six weeks of therapy. Therafter, a complete blood count
chemistry panel and urinalysis are recommended
approximately once every six weeks for patients that
remain on tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Mild (grade I and
II) neutropenias are commonly noted and do not require
additional therapy or dosing alterations. However,
patients should be monitored for progression.
Idiosyncratic elevations in liver enzymes, hypertension
and protein‐losing nephropathies are also reported.

VetBooks.ir

155 Mast Cell Neoplasia

Adjuvant therapy with vinblastine/lomustine or
Palladia for high‐grade MCT is recommended even if
the mass has been completely excised. Most adjuvant
treatment protocols strive for 3–6 months of therapy,
depending on tumor response and the patient’s tolerance. In the adjuvant setting, chemotherapy results in
median overall survival times of 11–16 months.
Prognosis
Multiple factors have prognostic value for canine
MCTs. A subset of tumors have a more aggressive
behavior based on their anatomic location. MCTs
of the inguinal region (groin, perivulvar, scrotal,
­p erianal) have historically been regarded as having
greater metastatic potential. Newer information has
revealed that survival is dependent on histologic
grade. However, dogs with MCTs in these locations,
specifically preputial and scrotal, have a decreased
disease‐free interval as both local recurrence and the
development of subsequent MCTs are common. The
biologic behavior of tumors in these areas is still
debated so it is reasonable to use caution and proceed
with routine MCT staging and more routine follow‐up
regardless of grade.
Mucocutaneous MCT (muzzle, vulva, sclera, etc.) and
oral locations (tongue, palate) have a greater metastatic
potential regardless of grade and should be aggressively
staged at the time of cytologic diagnosis.
Mast cell tumors are the third most common tumor of
the canine nailbed and have a more aggressive behavior
compared to a traditional cutaneous MCT. Finally, primary visceral mastocytosis should be considered a highly
aggressive neoplasm which is a terminal condition for
most dogs.
As previously stated, histopathologic grading offers
the most accurate prognosis. The majority of grade I
(Patnaik) or low‐grade (Kiupel) tumors are cured with
complete excision. Less than 10% of grade I MCTs are
reported to metastasize, with a median survival time of
greater than two years. Alternatively, over 80% of grade
III MCTs will metastasize and the median survival for
high‐grade MCT is less than four months.
Various proliferation markers may be used for additional prognostic information. Dogs with a Ki‐67 index
of <1.8 had a median survival time that was not reached
within the time frame of the study and suggested a curative outcome. Those with a Ki‐67 >1.8 had a median survival time of 9.7 months. While increases in both
AgNORs and PCNA repeatedly support more aggressive
tumors, they appear to only be prognostically valuable in
conjunction with tumor grade. When evaluated independently of grade, both indices are ineffective in determining prognosis.

­Feline Mast Cell Tumors
Epidemiology
Feline MCTs represent the second most common skin
tumor in the cat. A genetic correlation has been linked to
young Siamese cats. In addition, cats may develop both a
visceral form of MCT that primarily originates in the
spleen and a primary intestinal form.
Signalment
Cutaneous forms of feline MCTs are most commonly
found in cats 10 years of age, with no reported gender
predilection. Siamese less than 4 years of age are reported
to be predisposed to the less common histiocytic form of
cutaneous MCT. Visceral (both spleen and intestinal
involvement) forms more commonly occur in older cats.
History and Clinical Signs
The majority of cutaneous lesions occur on the head and
neck but can occur throughout the body. The most common presentation is a red, raised dermal lesion. As in the
canine form, MCTs can appear with many other cutaneous manifestations including ulcerations, plaques, etc.
(Figure 155.6).
Both abdominal forms of MCT result in a systemically ill
patient. Vomiting, lethargy, and weight loss are most commonly noted. Splenomegaly can be severe on abdominal
palpation while an intestinal mass is not always detected.
Diagnosis
Cytology is an appropriate diagnostic tool for both cutaneous and visceral lesions. Because of the incidence of

Figure 155.6 A clinically aggressive feline MCT. Note the change
in coloration and ulceration throughout the lesion as well as the
bruising at the base of the mass.

1365

VetBooks.ir

1366

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

visceral mastocytosis associated with splenomegaly, the
author strongly suggests the use of systemic antihistamines prior to cytology of an enlarged spleen. It is equally
important to have corticosteroids readily available in
case the cytology procedure results in an acute anaphylactic reaction. It is not necessary to premedicate all
cats prior to cytology of an intestinal lesion. However,
evidence of mast cells on the cytology sample justifies
administration of antihistamines at that time.
An abdominal ultrasound is recommended for visceral
mastocytosis. Additionally, mastocytemia is often noted
on routine complete blood counts and can be isolated
within the buffy coat.
Due to the low risk of metastasis, routine presurgical
staging for skin tumors may not be indicated unless the
patient has a clinical presentation (rapidly growing
tumor) that supports a more aggressive phenotype.
However, visceral and intestinal MCT should undergo
complete staging with abdominal ultrasound, cytology
of the liver and spleen, thoracic radiographs, minimum
database bloodwork, buffy coat and potentially bone
marrow aspiration.
Therapy
Cutaneous lesions that are <1 cm in diameter can be
removed with routine excision. As their behavior is different from that of canine MCT, surgical margins of
2 cm are not indicated in cats. Routine “lumpectomy”
or excisional biopsy margins are appropriate. If a minimal surgery is attempted, it is important to allow room
for a second, wider surgery, should histopathology indicate a more aggressive lesion. For the clinically low‐
grade (dermal, <1 cm) tumors, local plesiotherapy with
strontium‐90 radiation probes offers the same curative
outcome and can be used in areas where routine
removal is unattainable.
Both intestinal and splenic (or true visceral) mastocytosis require abdominal exploratory surgery. Systemic
therapy with antihistamines and corticosteroids is
rarely effective at resolving clinical signs. Splenectomy
is the treatment of choice for cats with the splenic form.
Within reason, this procedure is still clinically applicable in the face of mild to moderate distant metastasis as
splenectomy results in significant reduction in tumor
burden and histamine release. However, splenectomy
itself can be a life‐threatening procedure due to the
massive histamine release caused during splenic manipulation. It is recommended to premedicate all cats with
appropriate dosing of diphenhydramine, famotidine,
and dexamethasone preoperatively. Additionally, the
spleen should be handled gently during vascular ligation and gently lifted out of the abdomen via a generous
abdominal incision.

The visceral form is rarely cured with splenectomy so
adjuvant treatment is recommended. Currently, there is
no one accepted standard chemotherapy protocol for
use in cats. Single‐agent lomustine has been evaluated
at a dose of 50–60 mg/m2 (author’s note: 10 mg/cat
is considered an acceptable lomustine dose) with a
reported overall response rate of 50%, with neutropenia
and thrombocytopenia the most common and significant toxicities. Due to the variation in clinical picture,
accurate survival times have not yet been determined.
Sixty‐seven percent of feline MCTs are noted to have a
c‐kit mutation. At the time of publication, there are no
published clinical data on the efficacy of tyrosine kinase
inhibitors against feline MCTs. Masitinib has been evaluated in cats in a Phase I trial. The results indicate the
drug is well tolerated at 12.5 mg/kg once a day with proteinuria noted as the most significant side‐effect. Based
on the tolerability of the medication and the proven c‐kit
mutation, use of tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy in
felines, in similar clinical situations as described in
canines, appears reasonable.
If possible, intestinal resection with 5–10 cm margins
should be considered for patients with the intestinal
form. Unlike the splenic form, the presence of metastasis
is much more clinically relevant as it will alter the prognosis significantly.
Prognosis
Neither the Patnaik nor Kiupel grading scheme is appropriate for feline cutaneous tumors. MCTs are labeled as
either the more common mastocytic form or the histiocytic form. The latter type is often found in juvenile
Siamese cats. The mastocytic form is then subtyped into
either compact or diffuse. Compact mastocytic (more
commonly referred to as well‐differentiated) MCT represents 50–90% of all cutaneous MCTs in cats. The
behavior of these lesions is benign and excisional biopsy
may be all that is required for the majority of patients.
The diffuse mastocytic form has a behavior similar to
canine MCT. Thus, additional wide surgical margins and
routine staging are indicated.
Splenectomy as a single treatment modality for the visceral form will result in a median survival time of 12–18
months. As previously stated, evidence of ­metastasis in
other organs (lungs, liver, etc.) does not eliminate splenectomy as a surgical option due to the significant reduction
in tumor burden and resulting improved clinical outcome.
However, in the face of severe multifocal disease, splenectomy alone should not be considered.
The primary intestinal form historically caried the
most guarded prognosis (4–6 weeks survival). However,
more recent studies indicate that the prognosis may be
far better (median survival time 531 days).

VetBooks.ir

155 Mast Cell Neoplasia

­Further Reading
Blackwood L, Murphy S, Buracco P, et al. European
consensus document on mast cell tumors in dogs and
cats. Vet Compar Oncol 2012; 10(3): e1–e29.
Cooper M, Tsai X, Bennett P. Combination CCNU and
vinblastine chemotherapy for canine mast cell tumors:
57 cases. Vet Compar Oncol 2009; 7(3): 196–206.
Kiupel M, Webster J, Bailey K, et al. Proposal of a 2‐tier
histologic grading system for canine cutaneous mast cell
tumors to more accurately predict biological behavior.
Vet Pathol 2011; 48(1): 147–55.
London C, Malpas P, Wood‐Follis S, et al. Multi‐center,
placebo controlled, double‐blind, randomized study of
oral toceranib phosphate (SU11654), a receptor tyrosine

kinase inhibitor, for the treatment of dogs with
recurrent (either local or distant) mast cell tumor
following surgical excision. Clin Cancer Res 2009; 15:
3856–65.
Rassnick KM, Bailey D, Russell D, et al. A phase II study to
evaluate the toxicity and efficacy of alternating CCNU
and high‐dose vinblastine and prednisone (CVP) for
treatment of dogs with high‐grade, metastatic or
nonresectable mast cell tumors. Vet Compar Oncol
2010; 8(2): 138–52.
Warland J, Amores‐Fuster I, Newbury W, et al. The utility
of staging canine mast cell tumours. Vet Compar Oncol
2014; 12(4): 287–98.

1367

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1369

156
Apheresis in Companion Animals
Steven Suter, VMD, MS, PhD, DACVIM (Oncology)
Canine Bone Marrow Transplant Unit, NC State University College of Veterinary Medicine, Raleigh, NC, USA

Apheresis, which in Greek means “a taking away,” is an
extracorporeal therapy that has been an important part of
physician‐based medicine since the early 1970s. With the
development of sophisticated cell separator machines
and the commercial availability of human cytokines, centrifugal apheresis is an essential component in the treatment of a wide variety of human diseases, including
cancer. Fortunately, with the availability of used, human
cell s­eparator machines to veterinarians employed at
both academic institutions and high‐end specialty practices, centrifugal apheresis is beginning to be recognized
as a valuable tool in the treatment of a variety of canine
diseases. This review will discuss how cell separators
(also called apheresis machines) work, briefly d
­ iscuss
physician‐based applications of apheresis, and review the
current state of companion animal apheresis.

blood back into the patient. Because an anticoagulant,
such as ACD‐A, is added to the blood after it leaves the
patient and before it enters the machine, apheresis
patients actually experience very little loss of blood
­volume during the procedure.
The most popular cell collectors for physician‐based
medicine are the COBE® Spectra and Spectra Optia®
apheresis systems manufactured by TerumoBCT (­formerly
CaridianBCT) and CS‐3000 Plus and AmicusTM apheresis
systems manufactured by Fresenius Kabi (formerly
Fenwal, Inc). Other popular machines, due to their small
size and portability, are the Haemonetics® MCS®+8150
Multicomponent Collection System (red blood cells and
plasma only) and the MCS®+9000 Mobile Platelet
Collection System.

­Cell Separator Machines

­Physician‐Based Applications
of Apheresis

All cell separator machines, regardless of the manufacturer, are designed to separate specific blood components, most often based on cell density centrifugation.
Therefore, an integral component of all machines is a
large‐scale centrifuge that is able to continuously separate blood into various fractions, including white blood
cells (WBCs), platelets, and serum using continuous
flow centrifugation (CFC). This means the blood can be
collected into the machine, centrifuged, and returned to
the patient simultaneously. The component of interest is
typically pumped into a separate collection bag while the
rest of the unused blood components are returned to the
patient. Therefore, patients undergoing apheresis typically have a catheter placed in each leg or a dual‐lumen
catheter placed in one leg that allows blood to enter into
the machine and pump the uncollected portions of the

The most widely used application of cell separator
machines in physician‐based medicine is the collection
of platelets (plateletpheresis) for use in cancer patients
receiving chemotherapy, radiation treatments, or bone
marrow transplants, as well as patients with aplastic
anemia and blood coagulation disorders. It takes
­
­approximately five whole units of blood to harvest
the amount of platelets that can obtained from one
90‐minute plateletpheresis. Therefore, one unit of platelets harvested using plateletpheresis can be used to treat
2–3 patients (www.redcrossblood.org/donating‐blood/
types‐donations/platelet‐donation). Plateletpheresis is
considered absolutely safe with the most common side‐
effect being a tingling sensation in the lips due to transient hypocalcemia that is treated with calcium‐containing
antacid tablets.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1370

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE), a form of plasmapheresis, is a procedure where the cell separator machine
separates and removes the patient’s plasma which is then
replaced with either donated plasma or a protein solution such as 5% human albumin. TPE is ­typically used to
remove disease‐causing antibodies that cause a variety of
immune‐mediated diseases, including Guillain–Barré
syndrome, chronic inflammatory ­
demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP), and myasthenia gravis. It can also be
used to treat thrombotic thrombocytopenia purpura
(TTP) patients in an effort to reduce the thickness of the
blood. TPE can also be used to remove large amounts of
medication if the need arises.
Low‐density lipoprotein (LDL) apheresis removes
LDL cholesterol from the blood of patients with hypercholesterolemia using two specific types of apheresis machines approved by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA). The Liposorber uses a filter covered with dextran that binds LDL cholesterol and
removes it from the circulation. Another machine, called
HELP, uses heparin to bind and remove LDL cholesterol.
Since hypercholesterolemia is usually caused by the
combination of mutations in a variety of genes (especially LDLRAP1) and lifestyle choices, treatment using
LDL apheresis is usually life‐long.
Photopheresis is a very specialized type of apheresis
where the harvested white blood cells are exposed to a
photoactive drug called methoxsalen which renders
them sensitive to ultraviolet (UV) light. The cells are
then exposed to UV light inside the machine and
returned to the patient. This procedure can improve the
symptoms of certain conditions such as graft versus host
disease (GVHD), cutaneous T cell lymphoma, or organ
transplant rejection, although it is currently not known
exactly how photophoresis works. The length and number of procedures needed to provide benefit are highly
variable.
Leukapheresis is used to remove extra white blood
cells from the blood in patients with diseases that can
cause very high white blood cell counts, including
acute lymphoblastic and acute myeloblastic leukemias.
Leukapheresis in these patients can significantly
decrease blood viscosity and also decrease the chance
of acute tumor lysis syndrome in patients starting
­induction chemotherapy.
Peripheral blood stem cell collections are used to
harvest monocytes from patients after some type of
­
blood cell mobilization, such as G‐CSF (Neupogen)
administration. A small percentage of the harvested
monocytes (~1–4%) are CD34+ progenitor cells that can
lead to complete hematologic reconstitution after some
type of myeloablative therapy (such as total body irradiation or high‐dose chemotherapy). This procedure is used

to collect CD34+ progenitor cells for their use in both
autologous and allogeneic bone marrow transplants
when treating patients with lymphoma, leukemia, and
multiple myeloma. The cells can also be used to treat
other conditions including myelodysplastic syndromes
and childhood neuroblastoma.

­Companion Animal Apheresis
Plasmapheresis (the separation of plasma from blood to
be used in primary and supportive disease management)
is the most commonly reported apheresis procedure in
the veterinary literature. In horses, plasmapheresis has
been explored using continuous‐flow cell separator
machines based on data showing that plasma harvested
from equine blood using fast erythrocyte sedimentation
contains a high number of erythrocytes that could cause
recipient sensitization and evidence that bacterial contamination can occur using an open collection system.
In two studies, Feige et al. found that automated
­plasmapheresis using a Blutz separator AS 104 (Fresenius,
Stans, Switzerland) was the method of choice when
­compared to whole‐blood collection followed by either
centrifugation or gravity sedimentation and that the
plasmapheresis procedure itself was very well tolerated
by the donor horses. To this author’s knowledge, the use
of TPE to treat equine patients with immune‐mediated
diseases has not been reported.
Canine plasmapheresis has also been reported
using both membrane filtration and continuous‐flow
centrifugation. Bartges et al. used discontinuous membrane filtration plasmapheresis (Therapore, Therapeutic
Apheresis Systems, Sarns/3M, Ann Arbor, MI) twice, in
conjunction with corticosteroids, to treat a dog with
acquired myasthenia gravis, which dropped the AchR
antibody titer by ~70%. Crump and Seshadri used
continuous membrane filtration (Prisma CRRT and
­
TPE Control Unit, Gambro Inc., Lakewood, CO) to
treat a dog with immune‐mediated hemolytic anemia.
In both reports, plasmapheresis was performed safely
minimal side‐effects and the dogs responded
with ­
clinically.
Canine TPE has also been reported, although the
majority of studies were performed in the 1980s. Matus
et al. used a cell separator (IBM 2997 cell separator, IBM
Corp., Princetown, NJ) to treat three dogs with an IgA
monoclonal gammopathy and secondary hyperviscosity. In all three dogs, one total plasma volume was
removed and replaced with lactated Ringer’s solution
(LRS) and all three dogs responded clinically within
24 hourrs of t­reatment. This same group also treated
one dog with systemic lupus erythematosus using a

VetBooks.ir

156 Apheresis in Companion Animals

combination of plasmapheresis and immunoabsorption.
Plasmapheresis was performed eight times over a period
of 45 days using the same cell separator and the harvested product was then passed over a column loaded
with Staphylococcus purified protein A/SSPA, which
binds canine IgG classes of antibodies. This dog also
responded well clinically. Based on this case report,
Matus et al. then treated five dogs with systemic lupus
and two dogs with immune‐mediated hemolytic anemia
using plasmapheresis alone, using the same IBM cell
separator. One total plasma volume was removed and
replaced with LRS and all dogs responded clinically
within 24 hourrs of the procedure.
Dogs have been undergoing leukapheresis in a research
setting since 1967, although the collection of large
amounts of cells needed for routine clinical use using
CFC was not possible until the cloning and large‐scale
production of recombinant hematopoietic cytokines in
the 1990s and the development of highly automated
computer‐controlled cell separators soon thereafter.
Although there is a large body of research literature
­utilizing dogs as a preclinical model to develop leukapheresis techniques to collect a sufficient number of
peripheral blood CD34+ cells to allow complete hematologic reconstitution following myeloablative therapy, the
use of leukapheresis in the veterinary clinical setting is
still in its infancy.
In 2006, Lupu et al. reported the use of a COBE Spectra
cell separator to harvest enough peripheral blood CD34+
progenitor cells (>5 × 106/kg) for use in an allogeneic
bone marrow transplant setting. Their choice of cell separator was based on the experience of the group at the
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center which showed
that automated apheresis using a COBE Spectra machine
developed for humans could also be used in dogs. Our
group at North Carolina State University also found that
an adequate number of peripheral blood progenitor cells
could be safely harvested from dogs using a Fresenius
Kabi CS‐3000 Plus cell separator. We also showed that
the CD34+ component of the harvest product was adequate to achieve complete hematopoietic reconstitution
following lethal total body irradiation.
Finally, since all cell separator machines are designed
for adult humans and their use in small children and
dogs can be challenging, our group showed, similar to
human pediatric data, that apheresis using a COBE
Spectra cell separator can be safely performed in dogs
weighing <14 kg if appropriate machine priming techniques are utilized. The smallest dog on which our group
has performed apheresis on weighed 4.6 kg (unpublished
data). This combination of older and more recent data
clearly shows that canine leukapheresis is safe in a clinical setting and the procedure can harvest an adequate

amount of hematopoietic progenitor cells for use in the
canine bone marrow transplant setting.
Leukapheresis Followed by Bone Marrow
Transplantation
Early research, performed mainly at the Fred Hutchinson
Research Center, proved that canine peripheral blood
CD34+ progenitor cells harvested using human cell separators could lead to complete hematologic reconstitution following lethal myeloablative therapy. Further work
showed that dogs with lymphoma could be successfully
treated in both an autologous and allogeneic bone marrow transplant setting with long‐term survivals longer
than chemotherapy alone.
More recently, our group at North Carolina State
University used a combination of total body irradiation
and autologous peripheral blood CD34+ progenitor
cells, harvested using either a CS‐3000 Plus or COBE
Spectra cell separator, to treat dogs with high‐grade B
and T cell lymphoma. Five of 15 (33%) dogs with B cell
lymphoma transplanted while in remission for their
­disease remained alive >2 years (median overall survival
524 days), while two of 13 (15%) dogs with T cell lymphoma transplanted while in remission for their disease
remained alive >2 years (median overall survival 240
days). Importantly, when we transplanted dogs with B
cell lymphoma who were not in clinical remission, their
median disease‐free intervals were significantly shorter
than those who were in remission (52 days vs 456 days).
In dogs with T cell lymphoma, although a smaller percentage of dogs were alive >2 years compared with
the B cell lymphoma dogs, the median overall survival
from the time of diagnosis to death was 602 days (range
246–928 days), which is significantly longer than when
dogs are treated with chemotherapy alone.
Our group has also performed two allogeneic bone
marrow transplants using DLA‐matched donor peripheral blood CD34+ cells to treat one dog with B cell and
one dog with T cell lymphoma (unpublished data). Both
dogs underwent complete hematologic reconstitution
and achieved full donor engraftment within six weeks of
transplant. The dog with B cell lymphoma died of unexplained causes ~6 months post transplant, while the dog
with T cell lymphoma remains alive ~22 months post
transplant. We also treated a dog with acute large granular
lymphocytic leukemia using DLA‐matched donor peripheral blood CD34+ cells and this dog remains d
­ isease free
at ~30 months post transplant. Both autologous and allogeneic bone marrow transplantation as treatments of
canine lymphoproliferative disorders are currently offered
at North Carolina State University and three private
­practices in the United States (CA, WA, and OH).

1371

VetBooks.ir

1372

Section 11 Oncologic Disease

Plateletpheresis
Although, as stated previously, one of the primary uses of
cell separator machines in physician‐based medicine is
plateletpheresis, canine plateletpheresis has been rarely
reported and remains an underutilized resource in the
clinical veterinary setting. Callan et al. used a Terumo
COBE Spectra machine to assess the safety and feasibility of plateletpheresis using 14 normal adult dogs. In all
cases, a high‐quality, leukoreduced (<1 × 106 WBCs)
platelet concentrate (mean total yield of 3.3 × 1011
­platelets) was collected in a mean procedure time of only
105 min. Since citrate‐induced hypocalcemia was noted
in some dogs, prophylactic IV Ca supplementation was
recommended. Appleman et al. then extended this work
by examining the effects of platelet in vitro function and
in vivo survival using two different methods of cryopreservation (6% DMSO or Thrombosol). Although
­cryopreserved platelets using either method were not
able to mimic fresh platelets in terms of in vivo platelet
recovery, the authors concluded that both cryopreserved

products could be considered for dogs with acute, life‐
threatening bleeding when fresh platelet products are
not available.

­Conclusion
Although cell separator machines are used daily in physician‐based medicine to treat a wide variety of diseases,
their use in veterinary‐based medicine remains largely
unexplored. Recent studies show that dogs can tolerate
apheresis using human cell separator machines and that
specific blood components can be harvested in a clinical
veterinary setting. Moreover, it is clear that animals with
a variety of diseases, including cancer, can achieve positive clinical outcomes when treated with cell separator
harvest products. As such, apheresis in veterinary medicine remains a largely untapped resource that should
expand in the future as more veterinarians become aware
of the technology and more machines become available
to our profession.

­Further Reading
Appleman EH, Sachais BS, Patel R, et al. Cryopreservation
of canine platelets. J Vet Intern Med 2009; 23: 138–45.
Bartges JW, Klausner JS, Bostwick EF, et al. Clinical
remission following plasmapheresis and corticosteroid
treatment in a dog with acquired myasthenia gravis.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1990; 196: 1276–8.
Callan MB, Appleman EH, Shofer FS, et al. Clinical and
clinicopathologic effects of platelepheresis on healthy
donor dogs. Transfusion 2008; 48: 2214–21.
Crump KL, Seshadri R. Use of therapeutic plasmapheresis
in a case of canine immune‐mediated hemolytic anemia.
J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2009; 19: 375–80.
Feige K, Ehrat FB, Kastner SBR, et al. Automated
plasmapoheresis compared with other plasma collection
methods in the horse. J Vet Med A 2003; 50: 185–9.
Feige K, Ehrat FB, Kastner SBR, et al. The effects of
automated plasmapheresis on clinical, haematilogical,
biochemical and coagulation variables in horses. Vet J
2005; 169: 102–7.

Lupu M, Sullivan EW, Westfall TE, et al. Use of
multigeneration‐family molecular dog leukocyte antigen
typing to select a hematopoietic cell transplant donor
for a dog with T‐cell lymphoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2006; 5: 728–32.
Matus RE, Leifer CE, Gordon BR, et al. Plasmapheresis and
chemotherapy of hyperviscosity syndrome associated
with monoclonal gammopathy in the dog. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 1983; 183: 215–18.
Matus RE, Scott RC, Saal C, et al. Plasmapheresis‐
immunoabsorption for treatment of systemic lupus
erythematosus in a dog. 1983. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983;
182: 499–502.
Matus RE, Gordon BR, Leifer CE, et al. Plasmapheresis in
five dogs with systemic immune‐mediated disease. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 1985; 187: 595–9.
Matus RE, Schrader LA, Leifer CE, et al. Plasmapheresis as
adjuvant therapy for autoimmune hemolytic anemia in
two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1985; 186: 691–3.

VetBooks.ir

1373

Section 12
Skin and Ear Diseases

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1375

157
Approach to the Patient with Dermatologic Disease
Lisa V. Reiter, DVM, DACVD
McKeever Dermatology Clinics, Eden Prairie, and Inver Grove Heights, MN, USA

Skin and ear diseases are among the most common reasons why clients seek veterinary consultation. Not only
are diseases such as hypersensitivity disorders and skin
and otic infections very common, the skin is the most
accessible organ of the body, making it readily visible to
owners. Thus, owners can easily detect abnormalities in
the appearance, odor, and feel of the skin and haircoat,
as well as appreciate how the disease is impacting their
pet’s quality of life along with their own. Because dermatologic problems are usually multifactorial, chronic,
recurrent and noncurable, and often involve several dermatoses occurring simultaneously, owners and veterinarians alike can easily become overwhelmed.
It is the goal of this chapter to make the diagnosis and
management of dermatologic disease more rewarding by
guiding veterinarians toward a more methodical and
efficient approach to the dermatologic patient. This will
be accomplished by emphasizing the recognition of crucial lesions and their distribution, and assimilating these
findings and other physical exam abnormalities with the
history such that a comprehensive list of systematized
differential diagnoses will be formulated and the most
appropriate diagnostic tests selected. Finally, the chapter
will end with a discussion of the common diagnostic
tests utilized in the dermatologic patient, including indications, techniques, and interpretation.

­History
Despite its complexity, the skin has limited means by
which it “reacts” to indicate the presence of an underlying disease process, and because numerous skin diseases
will manifest clinically in a similar way, the patient history is vital. Not uncommonly, obtaining a thorough and
complete history will take longer than the examination
itself. This process can be expedited by having a history

form or questionnaire made available to the client to be
completed either in the reception area or, ideally, emailed
or mailed to the client prior to the consultation. There
are several examples of dermatologic history forms available from multiple textbooks (included in the Further
Reading section at the end of this chapter), online
through the Veterinary Information Network (www.vin.
com), and through various veterinary pharmaceutical
companies. These forms can be adapted and modified to
the clinician’s own preferences.
The previously completed dermatology history form
can be quickly reviewed with the client before or during
the consultation, which decreases the time needed to
extract a good history, and should begin with the client’s
primary complaint. Neglecting this can quickly result in
a dissatisfied, “unheard” client, especially when the
­veterinarian’s concerns do not immediately reflect the
primary concerns of the client. Addressing the chief
complaint will often result in an immediate list of differential diagnoses aimed at identifying the etiology of the
underlying disease process. During review of the dermatologic history form, additional questions can be asked
or posed in different ways to help extract pertinent information that pertains to specific problems. This is an art
and takes practice!
The patient’s signalment can further assist with formulating and ranking differential diagnoses, as there
are some skin diseases that are more likely to occur in
specific age ranges, sexes (including neuter status), and
in certain breeds. The age of onset of the dermatologic
disease can be particularly helpful in the very young
and very old patient. For instance, younger animals
are more commonly afflicted with diseases such as
demodicosis, otodectes, and dermatophytosis, as well
as ­congenital and hereditary diseases, whereas middle‐
aged to older animals are more commonly diagnosed
with autoimmune dermatoses, neoplastic conditions,

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1376

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

and endocrinopathies. However, most diseases manifest between approximately 1 year and 6–8 years of age
where no clear relationship between age and disease
exists. The breed of the patient may help with the development of an initial differential diagnosis list. There are
some breeds, including those with a specific coat color,
that seem to be predisposed to specific dermatologic
conditions. In addition, certain diseases are congenital
or have an identified heritable basis while others simply
occur more frequently in some breeds than in others
(Table 157.1).
Occasionally, sex predilections for various diseases
exist and can help in formulating and ranking the
differentials. For instance, females are anecdotally
­
reported to be more prone to systemic lupus erythematosus. Neuter status should also be taken into consideration. Estrus has been known to exacerbate pruritus
in females, and intact males are at increased risk for
male feminization syndrome.
The disease history can be further clarified by addressing some key questions including the date of onset (in
addition to the age of onset, discussed above), location
and appearance of the initial lesions, duration and progression of the disease. The approximate date of onset
may help to track seasonality or possibly create a timeline for assessment of a drug‐ or vaccine‐induced cutaneous reaction. Depending on geographic location,
disorders such as insect bite hypersensitivities and flea
allergy dermatitis tend to occur in the summer. In temperate climates, atopic dermatitis often begins as a seasonal disease, typically worsening in the spring, summer,
and/or fall. However, some patients with house dust
mite hypersensitivity may worsen in the winter in addition to having year‐round pruritus. Canine flank alopecia, also known as seasonal or cyclical flank alopecia,
tends to result in cyclical episodes of noninflammatory,
nonpruritic alopecia in the winter where a shorter photoperiod induces follicular arrest with resolution occurring in the spring.
Specifying the initial lesion location and pattern of distribution can be extremely helpful in developing a differential diagnosis list, as many diseases have distinct
areas of involvement. For instance, pemphigus foliaceus
affects the pinnae, dorsal aspect of the muzzle, and the
pawpads. Sarcoptic mange tends to affect the pinnal
margins, elbows, and tibiotarsal areas. The importance
of lesional distribution will be further discussed in the
physical exam (PE) section. Questions pertaining to disease duration and progression should include if and how
location, appearance, and distribution have changed,
whether the onset was acute or slow and insidious, and if
the disease is continuous or intermittent (seasonal or
nonseasonal). An acute onset of severe pruritus often
occurs with sarcoptic mange, and diseases such as

pemphigus foliaceus and contact dermatitis tend to
erupt rapidly. Cutaneous adverse food reaction may also
have a rapid onset, whereas endocrinopathies tend to
have a slow onset. A patient with seasonal pruritus would
not require a food elimination trial, as adverse food
­reactions cause year‐round signs.
One of the most important historical questions to
address is whether or not the disease was precipitated by
or associated with pruritus, as this information can rapidly help to generate and shorten the list of differentials.
If pruritus preceded the lesions, then allergic or parasitic
diseases are most likely. If lesions, such as alopecia, precede the pruritus, endocrinopathies, follicular dysplasias
and follicular demodicosis must be explored. If papules,
pustules, epidermal collarettes or crusts precede the
pruritus, the so‐called “rash that itches,” pursue bacterial, any nonpruritic dermatoses prone to developing
secondary bacterial infection such as endocrinopathies,
and sterile pustular diseases (e.g., pemphigus foliaceus).
Diseases that are typically or always pruritic include
atopic dermatitis, cutaneous adverse food reaction,
flea bite allergy, contact hypersensitivity, sarcoptic and
notoedric mange, and demodicosis caused by Demodex
gatoi in cats and Demodex cornei in dogs. Variably
­pruritic conditions include cheyletiellosis, demodicosis
caused by Demodex injai, Malassezia dermatitis, superficial pyoderma, feline dermatophytosis, autoimmune
diseases such as pemphigus foliaceus, and epitheliotropic lymphoma. Diseases that are nonpruritic include
endocrinopathies, follicular dysplasias, canine dermatophytosis, and demodicosis caused by Demodex canis and
Demodex cati. However, these conditions can be pruritic
if accompanied by secondary infection.
Identifying patterns of pruritus is also important for
identifying underlying disease triggers. A patient whose
pruritus always improves with a change in environment
likely has atopic or contact dermatitis. In a patient with
nonseasonal pruritus that also has seasonal “flares,”
adverse food reaction should be explored in addition to
atopic dermatitis. A patient that suddenly becomes pruritic after residing at a boarding kennel should be evaluated for sarcoptic mange.
Owners often do not recognize the various manifestations of pruritus, such as licking, biting, chewing, rubbing, rolling, and scooting, and the clinician needs to ask
about these variable signs. Therefore, evaluation of pruritus should not stop at asking if the patient “itches.”
Also, determining the level of pruritus is important in
the development of an adequate treatment plan and evaluating the patient’s response to treatment. Commonly,
owners are asked to rank their pet’s level of pruritus on a
scale of 0 to 10, with 0 representing no itch at all and 10
being so itchy that the pet cannot sleep at night (and
­neither can the poor owner!).

VetBooks.ir

157 Approach to the Patient with Dermatologic Disease

Table 157.1 Common skin diseases in various breeds
Breed

Disease

Breed

Disease

Abyssinian cat

Follicular dysplasia
Psychogenic alopecia

Bouvier des
Flandres

Canine flank alopecia

Afghan hound

Hypothyroidism

Boxer

Airedale
terrier

Atopic dermatitis
Canine flank alopecia
Hypothyroidism

Akita

Postclipping alopecia
Pemphigus foliaceus
Sebaceous adenitis
Uveodermatologic syndrome

Alaskan
malamute

Alopecia of plush‐coated breeds (alopecia X,
follicular dysplasia, follicular arrest syndrome)
Postclipping alopecia
Zinc‐responsive dermatosis

American
bulldog

Atopic dermatitis
Ichthyosis
Solar dermatitis

Atopic dermatitis
Canine acne
Canine flank alopecia
Demodicosis
Dermoid cyst
Food hypersensitivity
Hyperadrenocorticism
Hypothyroidism
Histiocytoma
Mast cell tumor
Solar dermatitis (white boxers)
Sterile granuloma pyogranuloma
syndrome
Superficial bacterial folliculitis
Urticaria

American
Staffordshire
terrier

Atopic dermatitis
Canine flank alopecia
Demodicosis
Solar dermatitis

Brittany
spaniel

Complement deficiency
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Hypothyroidism
Lip fold intertrigo

American
water spaniel

Pattern alopecia

Bullmastiff
and mastiff

Bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis
Vitiligo

Bull terrier

Basset hound

Atopic dermatitis
Intertrigo
Malassezia dermatitis

Beagle

Atopic dermatitis
Alopecia areata
Demodicosis
Hypothyroidism
Immunoglobulin (Ig)A deficiency
Sebaceous adenitis

Atopic dermatitis
Lethal acrodermatitis
Nasal folliculitis and furunculosis
Pedal folliculitis and furunculosis
Solar dermatitis
Zinc‐responsive dermatitis

Cairn terrier

Atopic dermatitis
Ichthyosis

Cavalier King
Charles
spaniel

Black hair follicular dysplasia
Caudal occipital malformation
syndrome
Eosinophilic granuloma (oral)
Ichthyosis
Primary secretory otitis media

Chesapeake
Bay retriever

Atopic dermatitis
Follicular dysplasia
Superficial bacterial folliculitis

Chihuahua

Color dilution alopecia
Pattern alopecia
Pinnal thrombovascular necrosis

Chow chow

Alopecia of plush‐coated dogs (alopecia X,
follicular dysplasia, follicular arrest
syndrome)
Atopic dermatitis
Color dilution alopecia
Demodicosis
Hypothyroidism
Pemphigus foliaceus
Postclipping alopecia
Tyrosinase deficiency
Uveodermatologic syndrome

Bearded collie

Black hair follicular dysplasia
Pemphigus foliaceus
Symmetric lupoid onychitis

Beauceron

Epidermolysis bullosa
Dermatomyositis

Belgian
shepherd dog,
Belgian
tervuren

Dermatomyositis
Sebaceous adenitis
Vitiligo

Bengal cat

Ulcerative nasal dermatitis

Bernese
mountain dog

Color dilution alopecia
Histiocytic sarcoma
Systemic histiocytosis

Border collie

ABCB1 genetic mutation
Black hair follicular dysplasia

Borzoi

Hypothyroidism

Boston terrier

Atopic dermatitis
Demodicosis
Pattern alopecia
Hyperadrenocorticism
Tail and facial fold intertrigo

(Continued)

1377

VetBooks.ir

1378

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

Table 157.1 (Continued)
Breed

Disease

Breed

Disease

Cocker
spaniel

Atopic dermatitis
Hypothyroidism
Lip fold intertrigo
Otitis externa (proliferative)
Pemphigus foliaceus
Sebaceous nodular hyperplasia and/or
adenomas
Seborrhea, primary
Vitamin A‐responsive dermatosis

Dogue de
Bordeaux

Hereditary footpad hyperkeratosis
Sterile granuloma pyogranuloma
syndrome

English
bulldog

Atopic dermatitis
Canine acne
Canine flank alopecia
Demodicosis
Facial and tail fold intertrigo
Hypothyroidism
Pattern alopecia
Pedal folliculitis and furunculosis
Sterile granuloma pyogranuloma
syndrome
Superficial bacterial folliculitis

English
springer
spaniel

Acral mutilation syndrome
Cutaneous asthenia
Food hypersensitivity
Hypothyroidism
Ichthyosis
Lip fold intertrigo
Otitis externa
Psoriasiform‐lichenoid dermatitis
Sebaceous adenitis
Seborrhea, primary

Flat‐coated
retriever

Histiocytic sarcoma

German
shepherd dog

Atopic dermatitis
Calcinosis circumscripta
Collagen disorder of footpads
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Erythema multiforme
Familial vasculopathy
Flea bite hypersensitivity
Fly bite dermatitis
Food hypersensitivity
German shepherd dog pyoderma
Insect‐ or arachnid‐related eosinophilic
furunculosis (face)
Metatarsal fistulae
Mucocutaneous pyoderma
Mucous membrane pemphigoid
Nasal folliculitis and furunculosis
Nodular dermatofibrosis with renal
cystadenocarcinoma
Otitis externa
Pemphigus foliaceus
Perianal fistulae
Pituitary dwarfism
Pythiosis
Symmetric lupoid onychitis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Vitiligo

German
shorthaired
pointer

Acral mutilation syndrome
Epidermolysis bullosa
Exfoliative cutaneous lupus
erythematosus

Collie

ABCB1 gene mutation
Cyclic neutropenia (gray collie syndrome)
Cutaneous histiocytosis
Dermatomyositis
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Nasal furunculosis, bacterial
Pemphigus erythematosus
Sertoli cell tumor (male feminization
syndrome)
Sterile granuloma pyogranuloma syndrome
Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus

Curly‐coated
retriever

Canine flank alopecia
Follicular dysplasia
Hypothyroidism
Pattern alopecia

Dachshund

Acanthosis nigricans
Alopecia areata
Color dilution alopecia
Ear margin dermatosis
Hyperadrenocorticism
Hypothyroidism
Idiopathic onychodystrophy
Juvenile cellulitis
Nodular panniculitis (sterile)
Pattern alopecia
Pemphigus foliaceus
Pinnal vasculitis
Sterile granuloma pyogranuloma syndrome
Sternal callus
Vasculitis

Dalmatian

Atopic dermatitis
Solar dermatitis
Superficial bacterial folliculitis
Waardenburg–Klein syndrome

Devon rex cat

Familial hypotrichosis

Doberman
pinscher

Acral lick dermatitis
Canine acne
Color dilution alopecia
Drug reaction (especially sulfonamides)
Flank sucking
Follicular dysplasia
Hypothyroidism
Pedal folliculitis and furunculosis
Sterile granuloma pyogranuloma syndrome
Superficial bacterial folliculitis
Vitiligo

VetBooks.ir

157 Approach to the Patient with Dermatologic Disease

Table 157.1 (Continued)
Breed

Disease

Breed

Disease

Golden
retriever

Acral lick dermatitis
Acute moist dermatitis
Atopic dermatitis
Cutaneous lymphosarcoma
Footpad hyperkeratosis
Histiocytic sarcoma
Hypothyroidism
Ichthyosis
Juvenile cellulitis
Nasal hypopigmentation (“Dudley nose”)
Pyotraumatic folliculitis and furunculosis
Sterile granuloma pyogranuloma
syndrome
Superficial bacterial folliculitis
Systemic histiocytosis

Keeshond

Alopecia of plush‐coated breeds (alopecia X,
follicular dysplasia, follicular arrest syndrome)
Hypothyroidism
Infundibular keratinizing acanthoma
Melanoma
Postclipping alopecia

Kerry blue
terrier

Dermoid cyst
Footpad keratosis (corns)
Hair follicle tumors
Otitis externa
Spiculosis

Labrador
retriever

Acral lick dermatitis
Acute moist dermatitis
Atopic dermatitis
Color dilution alopecia
Familial nasal hyperkeratosis
Food hypersensitivity
Malassezia dermatitis
Mast cell tumor
Superficial bacterial folliculitis
Symmetric lupoid onychitis
Systemic histiocytosis
Vitamin A‐responsive dermatosis
Vitiligo
Wells syndrome (eosinophilic dermatitis
and edema)

Lhasa apso

Atopic dermatitis
Vaccine‐induced alopecia (rabies)

Malamute

Demodicosis
Follicular dysplasia
Hypothyroidism
Zinc‐responsive dermatosis

Maltese
terrier

Traction alopecia
Vaccine‐induced alopecia (rabies)

Manchester
terrier

Follicular dysplasia
Pattern alopecia

Miniature
pinscher

Pattern alopecia
Vitiligo

Newfoundland

Acute moist dermatitis
Atopic dermatitis
Hypothyroidism
Pemphigus foliaceus
Superficial bacterial folliculitis

Norfolk
terrier

Ichthyosis

Norwegian
elkhound

Alopecia of plush‐coated breeds (alopecia
X, follicular dysplasia, follicular arrest
syndrome)
Infundibular keratinizing acanthoma
Keratinization disorders
Postclipping alopecia

Norwich
terrier

Atopic dermatitis
Keratinization disorders

Gordon setter

Atopic dermatitis
Black hair follicular dysplasia
Hypothyroidism
Juvenile cellulitis
Symmetric lupoid onychitis
Vitamin A‐responsive dermatosis

Great Dane

Acral lick dermatitis
Calcinosis circumscripta
Canine acne
Color dilution alopecia
Demodicosis
Dermoid cyst
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
Hygromas
Hypothyroidism
Pedal folliculitis and furunculosis
Solar dermatosis
Sterile granuloma pyogranuloma syndrome
Superficial bacterial folliculitis

Great
Pyrenees

Acute moist dermatitis

Greyhound

Footpad keratosis (corns)
Cutaneous and renal glomerular
vasculopathy
Drug reactions
Pattern alopecia

Himalayan

See Persian cat

Irish setter

Acral lick dermatitis
Atopic dermatitis
Color dilution alopecia
Granulocytopathy
Hereditary footpad hyperkeratosis
Hypothyroidism
Seborrhea, primary
Superficial bacterial folliculitis

Irish water
spaniel

Follicular dysplasia

Irish
wolfhound

Hygromas
Hypothyroidism
Systemic histiocytosis

(Continued)

1379

VetBooks.ir

1380

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

Table 157.1 (Continued)
Breed

Disease

Breed

Disease

Old English
sheepdog

ABCB1 gene mutation
Atopic dermatitis
Drug reactions
Pedal folliculitis and furunculosis
Vitiligo

Rottweiler

Papillon

Black hair follicular dysplasia

Parson Russell
terrier
(Jack Russell
terrier)

Atopic dermatitis
Black hair follicular dysplasia
Dermatophytosis
Familial vasculitis
Ichthyosis

Follicular lipidosis
Follicular parakeratosis
Histiocytic sarcoma
Superficial bacterial folliculitis
Symmetric lupoid onychitis
Systemic histiocytosis
Vasculitis
Vitiligo

Saint Bernard

Pekinese

Facial fold intertrigo
Vaccine‐induced alopecia (rabies)

Persian cat

Dermatophytosis
Facial fold intertrigo
Idiopathic facial dermatitis
Seborrhea, primary

Acral lick dermatitis
Acute moist dermatitis
Hygroma, elbow
Lip fold intertrigo
Nasal arteritis
Superficial bacterial folliculitis
Uveodermatologic syndrome

Samoyed

Pointer

Acral mutilation syndrome
Black hair follicular dysplasia
Calcinosis circumscripta
Canine flank alopecia
Epidermolysis bullosa
Exfoliative cutaneous lupus
erythematosus
Nasal folliculitis and furunculosis

Alopecia of plush‐coated breeds (alopecia
X, follicular dysplasia, follicular arrest
syndrome)
Sebaceous adenitis
Uveodermatologic syndrome

Schipperke

Hypothyroidism
Pemphigus foliaceus

Schnauzer

Atopic dermatitis
Aurotrichia
Canine flank alopecia
Drug reactions
Hyperadrenocorticism
Hypothyroidism
Schnauzer comedo syndrome
Symmetric lupoid onychitis
Subcorneal pustular dermatosis
Sterile pustular erythroderma of miniature
schnauzers
Vitamin A‐responsive dermatosis (giant
schnauzer)

Scottish
terrier

Atopic dermatitis
Canine flank alopecia
Familial nasal pyogranuloma and vasculitis
Hyperadrenocorticism
Melanoma
Superficial bacterial folliculitis

Shar‐pei

Atopic dermatitis
Demodicosis
Food hypersensitivity
Intertrigo
Hypothyroidism
Idiopathic cutaneous mucinosis
IgA deficiency
Superficial bacterial folliculitis

Shetland
sheepdog

ABCB1 gene mutation
Cutaneous histiocytosis
Dermatomyositis
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Drug reactions
Hypothyroidism
Superficial spreading pyoderma
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus

Pomeranians

Alopecia of plush‐coated breeds (alopecia
X, follicular dysplasia, follicular arrest
syndrome)
Vaccine‐induced alopecia (rabies)

Poodle

Atopic dermatitis
Congenital hypotrichosis
Ectodermal defect
Epidermolysis bullosa
Follicular dysplasia (miniature poodle)
Hyperadrenocorticism (miniature
poodle)
Hypothyroidism (standard poodle)
Otitis externa
Pattern alopecia
Sebaceous adenitis (standard poodle)
Vaccine‐induced alopecia (rabies)

Portuguese
water dog

Dermatomyositis
Follicular dysplasia
Pattern alopecia

Pug

Atopic dermatitis
Demodicosis
Facial fold and tail fold intertrigo
Hypothyroidism
Mast cell tumor
Pigmented viral plaque

Rex cat

Hypotrichosis
Malassezia dermatitis

Rhodesian
ridgeback

Dermoid cyst
Dermoid sinus
Hypothyroidism
Pattern alopecia

VetBooks.ir

157 Approach to the Patient with Dermatologic Disease

Table 157.1 (Continued)
Breed

Disease

Shih tzu

Atopic dermatitis
Demodicosis
Traction alopecia

Siamese cat

Epidermolysis bullosa
Food hypersensitivity
Hypotrichosis
Periocular leukotrichia
Psychogenic alopecia
Vitiligo

Siberian husky

Atopic dermatitis
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Eosinophilic furunculosis
Eosinophilic granuloma
Follicular dysplasia
Idiopathic onychodystrophy
Postclipping alopecia
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Zinc‐responsive dermatosis

Silky terrier

Color dilution alopecia
Follicular dysplasia
Vaccine‐induced vasculitis

Sphynx cat

Urticaria pigmentosa

Staffordshire
bull terrier

Atopic dermatitis
Canine flank alopecia
Demodicosis
Pedal folliculitis and furunculosis
Pattern alopecia

Vizsla

Sebaceous adenitis

Weimaraner

Canine acne
Color dilution alopecia
Immunodeficiency (commonly IgG)
Mast cell tumor
Melanoma
Pattern alopecia
Sterile granuloma pyogranuloma syndrome

West
Highland
white terrier

Atopic dermatitis
Demodicosis
Epidermal dysplasia
Food hypersensitivity
Ichthyosis
Malassezia dermatitis
Seborrhea, primary

Wheaten
terrier

Atopic dermatitis
Cutaneous asthenia
Ichthyosis

Whippet

ABCB1 gene mutation
Color dilution alopecia
Pattern alopecia
Solar dermatitis

Yorkshire
terrier

Color dilution alopecia
Demodicosis
Dermatophytosis
Follicular dysplasia
Melanoderma and alopecia
Pinnal alopecia
Traction alopecia
Vaccine‐induced alopecia (rabies)

The presence of systemic signs and the pet’s general
health should be addressed, such as water intake, appetite, vomiting, diarrhea, frequency/number of bowel
movements, changes in urination, respiratory changes,
lethargy, and body condition changes. General information about the patient’s environment and geographic
location needs to be considered. Certain diseases are
endemic in various regions such as blastomycosis in the
Mississippi, Missouri and Ohio river valleys or coccidioidomycosis in the southwestern portion of the United
States. For the same reason, travel history should also be
obtained. It is pertinent to ask if other animals in the
home or the owners themselves are affected. If so, contagious and zoonotic diseases need to be considered.
Other medical problems, vaccine history, lists of previous and current treatments and medications, including
topical therapy, flea control products and frequency of
administration, need to be addressed, including the
responses to these therapies. Reviewing previous medical records can be particularly helpful regarding medication history, as often owners find it difficult to remember
all the previous medications, including the ones the
patient may be currently taking. Asking owners to bring
these medications to the initial consultation can also be
helpful in this regard. Any previous medical records
should be reviewed to help track episodes of recurrence
(is there a seasonality?) and progression of the skin disease, verify client observations, and identify past and
current medications, including dose and duration. The
response to various treatments can also be extremely
helpful in the identification of underlying disease processes. For example, a patient that presents on high doses
of glucocorticoids for suspected allergic dermatitis that
is still markedly pruritic needs to be evaluated for sarcoptic mange and/or undergo a treatment trial for this
disease if the mites cannot be found, as allergic patients
tend to be glucocorticoid responsive. When presented
with a patient that is on an appropriate dose and duration of antibiotic therapy for superficial pyoderma and is
not responding, a skin culture needs to be performed.
Finally, a complete dietary history including vitamins,
herbs, and other supplements should be taken. This will
be useful if a food elimination trial needs to be performed
as well as to assess if the diet is complete and balanced.
Poor diets can lead to keratinization disorders, poor
haircoat quality, and zinc‐responsive dermatosis.

­Physical Examination
The patient’s weight, rectal temperature, and pulse
should be obtained by the veterinary technician or assistant before or during review of the patient history. Every
patient examination should be approached in a systematic fashion to ensure a thorough PE. Avoid focusing

1381

VetBooks.ir

1382

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

solely on the area(s) that the owner mentions or you may
miss hidden, subtle lesions that can offer important diagnostic clues pertaining to the underlying disease process.
A well‐lit room is essential and a hand‐held magnifying
lens may be useful for close examination of lesions. In
some instances, the hair may need to be clipped to
allow for proper visualization. Painful or “uncooperative” patients may require sedation.
Many dermatologists prefer to start with the nose and
head region and work caudally, including all accompanying mucosal and mucocutaneous surfaces. The interdigital spaces, claws, ungual folds, and pawpads must always
be evaluated with the patient either standing or in lateral
recumbency. Part the hair or roll the skin into individual
folds to separate the hair and allow for easier evaluation
of the cutaneous surface and follicular ostia while also
noting the haircoat quality, color, and luster. Throughout
the evaluation, look for evidence of pruritus, such as
excoriations and salivary staining, the latter of which
commonly manifests as a brownish‐red discoloration of
the haircoat. An otoscopic examination should be performed in all patients. Examination findings can be documented using topography maps available at www.vin.
com or in the texts listed in the Further Reading section.
These maps allow for quick illustration of lesion distribution and character during the initial consultation and subsequent rechecks which assist the clinician in making
comparisons regarding disease progression between
­
appointments. The patient should be auscultated, and
the lymph nodes and abdomen palpated. These aspects of
a general examination are important as they can reveal
an underlying systemic disease which may be giving rise
to the dermatologic changes. Also, findings on a general
PE may dictate or change the choice of drug therapy. For
instance, the discovery of a cardiac murmur in a feline
patient may prompt the clinician to be more cautious
with the administration of injectable glucocorticoids,
given that cats are at increased risk of developing congestive heart failure when receiving them, especially
methylprednisolone acetate.
During the course of the PE, the clinician must learn to
identify the major features of the skin lesions. This will
allow the disease to be placed in diagnostic categories
that facilitate diagnosis. Most important are the type of
lesions (primary or secondary) and lesion distribution
(body sites involved). Proper identification of lesions is
crucial, as they can be correlated with specific diseases.
Morphology of Lesions
Lesion morphology refers to the categorization of cutaneous lesions as primary, secondary, or either primary or
secondary. The ability to accurately identify these lesions
as well as having an understanding of their development

is critical in refining the list of differentials. Also, knowing how primary lesions typically evolve into secondary
lesions gives the clinician a better understanding of disease progression. A primary lesion develops spontaneously and is a reflection of the underlying disease process;
thus these lesions are the most important to identify.
Secondary lesions evolve from primary lesions or are
created by the patient scratching or external forces such
as trauma, medications, and infection of primary lesions.
Some lesions can be considered primary or secondary.
Table 157.2 provides a list and description of basic cutaneous lesion morphology. An accompanying figure is
provided for most of these lesions which elaborates on
their significance/pathomechanism and provides examples of differentials (Figures 157.1–157.18).
Table 157.2 Terminology used to describe lesion morphology
Lesion

Definition

Primary lesions
Macule/patch
(see Figure 157.1)

Circumscribed, flat, nonpalpable
change in skin color <1 cm. If larger,
termed a patch

Papule/plaque
(see Figure 157.2)

Solid elevation of skin ≤1 cm in
diameter. Plaque formed by confluence
of papules >1 cm in diameter. Can be
follicular or nonfollicular

Vesicle/bulla
(see Figure 157.3)

Circumscribed, elevated skin lesion
containing fluid ≤1 cm in diameter. If
greater than 1 cm, termed a bulla. Can
be intraepidermal or subepidermal

Pustule
(see Figure 157.4)

A vesicle containing purulent exudate.
Can be follicular or nonfollicular

Wheals
(see Figure 157.5)

Flat‐topped sharply circumscribed
elevation of the skin caused by edema.
If regionalized or generalized, referred
to as angioedema

Nodule/tumor
(see Figure 157.6)

Solid or cystic elevation of skin >1 cm
in diameter. Tumor if >2 cm in diameter

Secondary lesions
Epidermal collarette
(see Figure 157.7)

Circular lesion with a rim of loosely
adhered scale or peeling keratin. Often
described as the "footprint" of a
pustule or vesicle

Excoriation
(see Figure 157.8)

Superficial excavations of the epidermis
that may be linear or punctate

Erosion/ulceration
(see Figure 157.9)

Superficial epidermal defect that heals
without scarring due to trauma or
inflammation. If deep enough to affect
the dermis, an ulcer occurs and heals
with scarring

Scar

Formation of fibrous tissue in place of
damaged dermis or subcutaneous
tissue

VetBooks.ir

157 Approach to the Patient with Dermatologic Disease

Table 157.2 (Continued)
Lesion

Definition

Fissure
(see Figure 157.10)

Linear cleavage in the skin

Lichenification
(see Figure 157.11)

Thickening and hardening of the skin
characterized by an exaggeration of
the superficial skin markings.
Commonly hyperpigmented

Callus

Alopecic, thickened, rough, often
lichenified plaque

Primary or secondary lesions
Alopecia
(see Figure 157.12)

Partial to complete loss of hair

Scale
(see Figure 157.13)

Accumulation of loose fragments of
stratum corneum

Crust
(see Figure 157.14)

Dried exudates of purulent material,
serum or blood on surface of skin

Follicular casts
(see Figure 157.15)

Accumulation of follicular and
keratinaceous debris that adheres to
multiple hair shafts at the level of the
follicular ostia

Comedones
(see Figure 157.16)

Dilated hair follicles filled with
cornified epithelium and debris

Pigmentary
abnormalities
(see Figures 157.17
and 157.18)

Changes in skin coloration caused by a
variety of pigments (typically
increased or decreased melanin)
including black, blue, gray, tan, brown,
as well as red/purple (hemorrhage
within skin) and yellow‐green (bile
pigment)

Figure 157.1 Macule – pigment changes occur due to increased
or decreased melanin (inflammatory and noninflammatory
causes), erythema or local hemorrhage. Other types of macules
include purpura, petechiae, and ecchymoses. Differential
diagnoses (DDx) – hyperpigmentation (noninflammatory): lentigo,
pigmented nevi, endocrinopathies, hormonal diseases, color
dilution alopecia and other follicular dysplastic diseases, such as
canine flank alopecia. Hyperpigmentation (inflammatory):
bacterial or yeast infections, dermatophytosis, parasitic disease,
and any disease resulting in pruritus. Depigmentation: vitiligo,
uveodermatologic syndrome, mucocutaneous pyoderma, discoid
lupus erythematosus. Erythema: inflammation secondary to a
variety of underlying causes such as bacterial or yeast infections,
dermatophytosis, demodicosis, Sarcoptes, vasculitis, erythema
multiforme, toxic epidermal necrolysis, pemphigus, cutaneous
T cell lymphoma, superficial necrolytic dermatitis (SND),
hypersensitivity disorders and solar dermatitis or hemorrhage due
to trauma, vasculopathies or coagulopathies. Photograph
illustrates lentigo.

Distribution of Lesions
In addition to recognizing lesion morphology, the location
and distribution must be identified. Lesion distribution
refers to whether the lesions are localized, multifocal,
regionalized or generalized, bilaterally symmetric versus
asymmetric, and identifying the general regions of the
patient that are involved. Bilaterally symmetric lesions
tend to occur in endocrinopathies, immune‐mediated and
autoimmune diseases, and can also occur in allergic skin
diseases. Asymmetric lesions are often the result of infectious and parasitic disease processes. Certain diseases have
predilection sites for various areas of the body and familiarity with these regional characteristics is advantageous in
honing the list of differential diagnoses (Table 157.3).

­Dermatologic Diagnostic Tests
and Techniques
After a list of differential diagnoses has been generated
based on a thorough history and PE, diagnostic tests can
be employed to further narrow the list of differentials

Figure 157.2 Papule – these palpably solid elevations are usually
pink to red in coloration and are caused by a localized
inflammatory cellular infiltrate within the dermis, epidermal
hyperplasia, and early tissue infiltration of neoplastic cells.
DDx – superficial bacterial folliculitis, dermatophytosis,
demodicosis, Sarcoptes, Cheyletiella, insect/arachnid
hypersensitivity, contact hypersensitivity, flea allergy dermatitis,
atopic dermatitis, immune‐mediated disease, and drug reactions.
Photograph illustrates papules associated with sarcoptic mange.

1383

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

VetBooks.ir

1384

Figure 157.3 Vesicle – lesions are fragile, transient, and difficult to
find given that they develop secondary to inflammation and loss
of cutaneous cellular and structural cohesion. DDx – viral
infections, irritants, drug reactions, and autoimmune diseases
including pemphigus vulgaris, lupus, and subepidermal blistering
diseases such as mucous membrane pemphigoid, and
epidermolysis bullosa acquisita. Photograph illustrates vesicles on
the lower lip margin in a dog with epidermolysis bullosa acquisita.
Source: Courtesy of Sandra Koch.

Figure 157.4 Pustule – lesions arise due to neutrophilic
inflammation, occasionally eosinophilic. DDx – superficial
bacterial folliculitis, impetigo, dermatophytosis, demodicosis,
pemphigus foliaceus, lupus, and subcorneal pustular dermatosis.
If eosinophils predominate, consider sterile eosinophilic
pustulosis, insect or contact hypersensitivity and ectoparasites.
Photograph illustrates pustules associated with superficial
bacterial folliculitis.

and/or confirm a specific diagnosis. There are four
basic screening tests that every clinician should be
adept at and perform often, as they are easy, rapid, and
inexpensive to conduct and yield immediate results.
This minimum database generally includes cytology,
including various techniques of cutaneous cytology
and otic cytology, as well as trichography, skin scrapes,
and cultures. Other diagnostic tests of importance to
the dermatologic patient that will be discussed include

Figure 157.5 Wheal (hive) – these edematous lesions typically
disappear within minutes to hours. When larger regional areas are
involved such as the muzzle or eyelids, this is called angioedema.
DDx – vaccine, drug and insect bite reactions, and hypersensitivity
disorders. Photograph illustrates urticaria on the abdomen of a
dog.

Figure 157.6 Nodule – these lesions develop due to an
inflammatory or neoplastic cellular infiltrate, or from deposition of
metabolic products such as fibrin and crystalline material
extending to the dermis and subcutis. There are numerous
neoplastic and nonneoplastic causes. Nonneoplastic causes
include infectious and noninfectious etiologies. DDx – infectious
causes: bacterial infections such as actinomycosis, nocardiosis,
feline leprosy, canine leproid granuloma, atypical mycobacteriosis,
and bacterial furunculosis. Fungal causes include blastomycosis,
cryptococcosis, coccidioidomycosis, sporotrichosis,
histoplasmosis, dermatophytic kerion, aspergillosis,
phaeohyphomycosis, hyalohyphomycosis, pythiosis, and
lagenidiosis. Algal causes include protothecosis. Parasitic and
protozoal causes include leishmaniasis, dracunculiasis, Cuterebra,
and Neospora. Noninfectious causes: calcinosis cutis, xanthomas,
sterile nodular panniculitis, sterile granulomatous
pyogranulomatous syndrome, cutaneous reactive histiocytosis,
juvenile cellulitis, foreign body reaction, and eosinophilic
granuloma. Photograph illustrates multiple nodules on the muzzle
of a dog with sterile granulomatous pyogranulomatous syndrome.

VetBooks.ir

157 Approach to the Patient with Dermatologic Disease

Figure 157.7 Epidermal collarette – these are formed from the
remnants of a pustule or vesicle after the roof has been lost, or
caused by a point source of inflammation, as seen with papules.
DDx – superficial bacterial folliculitis most commonly. Fungal
infection, immune‐mediated dermatoses, contact hypersensitivity,
and insect bite reaction are less common causes. Photograph
illustrates an epidermal collarette associated with superficial
bacterial folliculitis.
Figure 157.9 Erosion/ulceration – develop due to rapid death
and/or loss of keratinocytes as a consequence of self‐inflicted
trauma or inflammation. An ulcer denotes a deep pathologic
process. DDx – autoimmune dermatoses, erythema multiforme,
toxic epidermal necrolysis, drug reaction, SND, feline indolent
ulcer, deep pyoderma, deep mycoses, vasculitis, neoplasia,
chemical/thermal burn. Photograph illustrates an ulcer on the
lateral aspect of the thorax of a dog with a cutaneous adverse
drug reaction secondary to itraconazole therapy.

Figure 157.8 Excoriation – these lesions are self‐induced and
occur secondary to scratching, biting, and/or rubbing. Usually
result from pruritus. Photograph illustrates excoriations and
erosions due to scratching and licking on the lateral aspect of the
thorax of a cat with adverse food reaction.

therapeutic trials, biopsy and histopathology, and tests
of noncutaneous organs.
Screening Tests
Cytology

Cytology is a powerful tool, allowing one to quickly determine whether a lesion is sterile or if infectious organisms
and inflammation are present. It allows the clinician to presumptively diagnose a patient with autoimmune diseases,
such as pemphigus, when acantholytic cells are observed.
Neoplastic processes may also be identified, such as

Figure 157.10 Fissure – lesions may be caused by underlying
disease or injury when the skin is thick and then subjected to
sudden swelling. DDx – SND, canine distemper, zinc‐responsive
dermatosis, chronic skin diseases, and keratinization disorders.
Photograph illustrates fissures on the metacarpal pawpad of a
dog with SND.

­cutaneous lymphoma and mast cell tumors. Cytology can
be performed in a number of ways depending on the area
and the condition of the skin being sampled.

1385

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

VetBooks.ir

1386

Figure 157.11 Lichenification – results from chronic trauma, often
due to friction. Lichenification is often accompanied by superficial
bacterial folliculitis and/or Malassezia dermatitis. DDx – chronic
and pruritic dermatopathies, intertrigo, and keratinization
disorders. Photograph illustrates the abdomen and inguinal area
of a dog with chronic atopic dermatitis.

Figure 157.13 Scale – results from increased production of
keratinocytes, such as occurs with abnormalities of keratinization,
inflammatory disorders or from increased retention of
corneocytes. DDx – primary: ichthyosis, primary idiopathic
seborrhea, various follicular dysplasias. Secondary: chronic
inflammation or any direct insult to the epidermis such as
epidermal infiltration of neoplastic lymphocytes in cutaneous
T cell lymphoma. Photograph illustrates large, whitish‐gray sheets
of scale in a golden retriever with ichthyosis.

Figure 157.12 Alopecia – may arise from several causes that lead
to damage to hairs and/or hair follicles, or result from abnormal
hair growth. DDx – primary: endocrinopathies, follicular dysplasia,
telogen effluvium, and anagen defluxion. Secondary: pruritus,
superficial bacterial folliculitis, dermatophytosis, and demodicosis.
Photograph illustrates multiple annular to coalescing areas of
alopecia in a beagle with alopecia areata.

Figure 157.14 Crust – forms when purulent exudate, serum,
blood, other dried exudates, or cells and/or scales adhere to the
skin surface. DDx – primary: SND, vitamin A‐responsive dermatitis,
zinc‐responsive dermatosis, primary idiopathic seborrhea.
Secondary: pyoderma, dermatophytosis, pemphigus, and lupus.
The coloration, thickness, and adherence of crusts can provide
insight as to the underlying disease process. Pyoderma can result
in brown‐dark red (indicating hemorrhage) or yellow‐green crusts.
Dark crusts indicate deeper tissue damage or hemorrhage as
occurs with traumatic wounds, furunculosis, and vasculitis.
Honey‐colored crusts usually indicate an infection but also occur
with some autoimmune diseases, particularly pemphigus
foliaceus. Thick, dry yellowish crusts are more common with
scabies and zinc‐responsive dermatosis. Tightly adhered crusts are
more common in zinc‐responsive dermatosis, SND, pemphigus,
and some cases of seborrhea. Photograph illustrates the typical
honey‐colored crusts associated with pemphigus foliaceus.

VetBooks.ir

157 Approach to the Patient with Dermatologic Disease

Figure 157.17 Pigmentary abnormalities – hypopigmentation‐
hypomelanosis occurs due to a loss of epidermal melanin.
DDx – primary: vitiligo. Secondary: common postinflammatory
change. Photograph illustrates depigmentation of the nasal
planum, rostral muzzle, and lips of a dog with vitiligo.
Figure 157.15 Follicular casts – these lesions are composed of a
combination of keratin and follicular material that adheres to the
hair shaft(s), extending above the surface of the follicular ostia.
DDx – primary: sebaceous adenitis, vitamin A‐responsive
dermatosis, idiopathic seborrhea. Secondary: dermatophytosis
and demodicosis. Photograph illustrates clumps of
keratosebaceous material adhered to the base of multiple hairs
from a dog with sebaceous adenitis.

Figure 157.18 Pigmentary abnormalities – hyperpigmentation‐
hypermelanosis occurs with increased epidermal and/or dermal
melanin. DDx – primary: endocrinopathies. Secondary: commonly
seen in chronic inflammation and as a postinflammatory change
associated with a variety of dermatopathies. Photograph
illustrates postinflammatory hyperpigmentation in a dog with
rabies vaccine‐induced alopecia.

Impression Smear

Figure 157.16 Comedones – in general, these lesions may form as
a result of primary keratinization disorders or hyperkeratosis due
to endocrine abnormalities or inflammation. DDx – primary:
endocrinopathies, feline acne, some primary idiopathic
seborrheas, congenital hypotrichosis (e.g., Chinese crested dogs),
schnauzer comedo syndrome, and vitamin A‐responsive
dermatosis. Secondary: seborrheic skin disease, application of
occlusive greasy medications and administration of systemic or
topical corticosteroids, demodicosis and, less commonly,
dermatophytosis. Photograph illustrates comedones on the
caudolateral aspect of the dorsum of a dog.

A routine impression smear is one of the most commonly employed dermatologic tests, and an excellent
technique to use when pustules, crusts, epidermal collarettes, and draining nodules are present and for moist
or greasy areas of the skin. When a pustule is present,
gently “open” the pustule by using a 25 gauge needle and
pass it in a parallel fashion through the tip of the pustule. Avoid directly “poking” or “sticking” the pustule, as
this will artefactually contaminate the specimen with
blood and blood‐associated leukocytes. When crusts
are present, gently remove the crust and sample the contents underneath by pressing the slide gently onto the
affected skin. This helps to avoid surface contaminants.
When epidermal collarettes are present, rather than

1387

VetBooks.ir

1388

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

Table 157.3 Regional predilections of skin diseases
Region

Common diseases

Less common diseases

Head

Demodicosis
Dermatophytosis
Facial fold intertrigo
Folliculitis, bacterial
Food hypersensitivity, feline
Herpes dermatitis
Mosquito bite hypersensitivity,
feline
Notoedres

Blastomycosis
Cryptococcosis
Dermatomyositis
Feline leprosy
Furunculosis, eosinophilic
Idiopathic facial dermatitis of Persian and Himalayan cats
Juvenile cellulitis
Leishmaniasis
Pemphigus erythematosus
Pemphigus foliaceus
Sporotrichosis
Sterile granuloma pyogranuloma syndrome
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Vasculitis
Zinc‐responsive dermatosis

Ear

Atopic dermatitis
Demodicosis
Dermatomyositis
Dermatophytosis
Ear margin dermatosis
Fly bite dermatitis
Food hypersensitivity
Otitis externa
Otodectic mange
Notoedres
Sarcoptes

Auricular chondritis
Bullous pemphigoid
Canine leproid granuloma syndrome
Canine proliferative eosinophilic otitis externa
Ceruminous cystomatosis
Cold agglutinin disease
Drug reaction
Feline proliferative and necrotizing otitis externa
Frostbite
Juvenile cellulitis
Melanoderma and alopecia of Yorkshire terriers
Pattern alopecia
Pemphigus erythematosus
Pemphigus foliaceus
Pinnal thrombovascular necrosis
Solar dermatitis, feline
Sterile eosinophilic pinnal folliculitis
Sterile granuloma pyogranuloma syndrome
Trombiculosis
Vasculitis

Eyelid

Allergic blepharitis
Bacterial blepharitis
Chalazion
Demodicosis
Dermatophytosis
Distichiasis
Entropion
Herpetic blepharitis
Meibomitis

Dermatomyositis
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Immune‐mediated blepharitis
Juvenile cellulitis
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Vitiligo

Nasal planum

Discoid lupus erythematosus
Drug eruption
Erythema multiforme
Nasodigital hyperkeratosis
Pemphigus erythematosus
Pemphigus foliaceus

Aspergillosis
Blastomycosis
Canine distemper
Contact dermatitis
Cutaneous histiocytosis
Dermatophytosis (Microsporum persicolor)
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Familial nasal pyogranuloma and vasculitis (Scottish terriers)
Hereditary nasal parakeratosis of Labrador retrievers
Leishmaniasis
Mucous membrane pemphigoid
Nasal arteritis
Protothecosis
Sterile granuloma pyogranuloma syndrome
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Vitiligo

VetBooks.ir

157 Approach to the Patient with Dermatologic Disease

Table 157.3 (Continued)
Region

Common diseases

Less common diseases

Lip

Demodicosis
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Indolent ulcer
Lentigo
Lip fold intertrigo
Mucocutaneous pyoderma
Muzzle folliculitis and furunculosis
Oral papillomatosis, canine
Vitiligo

Candidiasis
Contact dermatitis
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Juvenile cellulitis
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Vasculitis

Oral cavity (mucosal
lesions)

Eosinophilic granuloma, canine and feline
Eosinophilic plaque, feline
Erosions, chemical
Erosions, viral, feline
Erythema multiforme
Gingival hyperplasia
Plasma cell stomatitis
Vegetative glossitis (foreign body)

Bullous pemphigoid
Candidiasis
Chronic ulcerative paradental stomatitis
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Mucous membrane pemphigoid
Pemphigus vulgaris
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Vasculitis

Mucocutaneous
junctions

Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Erythema multiforme
Mucocutaneous pyoderma
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Vitiligo

Bullous pemphigoid
Candidiasis
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
Mucous membrane pemphigoid
Pemphigus vulgaris
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus (collie and
Shetland sheepdog)

Chin

Canine acne
Demodicosis
Eosinophilic granuloma, feline
Feline chin acne
Folliculitis and furunculosis, bacterial
Juvenile cellulitis

Dermatophytosis
Malassezia dermatitis

Neck

Atopic dermatitis, feline
Dermoid sinus
Flea bite hypersensitivity, feline
Food hypersensitivity, feline
Injection reactions
Malassezia dermatitis

Contact dermatitis (collars)
Ulcerative dermatitis with linear subepidermal fibrosis,
feline

Axilla

Acanthosis nigricans
Atopic dermatitis
Food hypersensitivity
Malassezia dermatitis
Superficial bacterial folliculitis

Bullous pemphigoid
Contact dermatitis
Erythema multiforme
Pemphigus vulgaris
Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus (collie and
Shetland sheepdog)

Dorsum

Atopic dermatitis
Flea bite hypersensitivity
Psychogenic alopecia, feline
Seborrhea
Schnauzer comedo syndrome
Superficial bacterial folliculitis

Calcinosis cutis
Cheyletiellosis
Pediculosis

Trunk

Demodicosis, generalized
Hyperadrenocorticism
Hypothyroidism
Sebaceous adenitis
Superficial bacterial folliculitis

Cutaneous histiocytosis
Hyperestrogenism, female
Hyposomatotropism
Nodular panniculitis, sterile
Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis
Subcorneal pustular dermatosis
Vitamin A‐responsive dermatosis
(Continued)

1389

VetBooks.ir

1390

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

Table 157.3 (Continued)
Region

Common diseases

Less common diseases

Abdomen

Atopic dermatitis
Eosinophilic plaque, feline
Feline symmetric alopecia
Food hypersensitivity
Hyperadrenocorticism
Impetigo
Linear preputial erythema
Nodular panniculitis, sterile
Psychogenic alopecia, feline
Solar dermatitis, dog
Superficial bacterial folliculitis
Trombiculosis

Bullous pemphigoid
Calcinosis cutis
Contact dermatitis
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
Erythema multiforme
Hookworm dermatitis
Mycobacteriosis, atypical, feline
Pelodera dermatitis
Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus (collie and
Shetland sheepdog)

Tail

Feline symmetric alopecia
Flea bite hypersensitivity
Hyperplasia of tail gland
Hypothyroidism
Mechanical irritation (tail biting)
Psychogenic alopecia, feline
Pyotraumatic dermatitis
Trauma (tip of tail)

Cold agglutinin disease
Dermatomyositis
Frostbite
Tail dock neuroma
Vasculitis

Anus

Anal sac disease
Atopic dermatitis
Food hypersensitivity
Perianal fistulae
Perianal staphylococcal and/or Malassezia
dermatitis

Bullous pemphigoid
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis
Pemphigus vulgaris
Perianal gland hyperplasia

Legs

Acral lick dermatitis
Contact dermatitis
Demodicosis
Dermatophytosis
Elbow callus pyoderma
Eosinophilic granuloma, feline
Hygroma
Metatarsal fistulae
Scabies

Arteriovenous fistula
Decubital ulcers
Feline leprosy
Lymphangitis, bacterial, fungal
Lymphedema
Pelodera dermatitis

Paws

Atopic dermatitis
Demodicosis
Dermatophytosis
Digital pad hyperkeratosis
Food hypersensitivity
Interdigital foreign bodies
Malassezia dermatitis
Pedal folliculitis and furunculosis
Pemphigus foliaceus
Plasma cell pododermatitis
Sterile granuloma pyogranuloma syndrome
Trauma
Trombiculosis

Acral mutilation syndrome
Arteriovenous fistula
Contact dermatitis
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Hookworm dermatitis
Leishmaniasis
Mosquito bite hypersensitivity, feline
Mycetoma
Pelodera dermatitis
Pemphigus vulgaris
Phaeohyphomycosis
Protothecosis
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis
Systemic mycoses
Vasculitis (footpads)
Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus (collie and
Shetland sheepdog)
Vitiligo (footpads)
Zinc‐responsive dermatosis

VetBooks.ir

157 Approach to the Patient with Dermatologic Disease

Table 157.3 (Continued)
Region

Common diseases

Less common diseases

Claws

Hyperthyroidism, feline
Paronychia secondary to:
bacteria,fungi
feline leukemia virus
trauma
Pemphigus foliaceus
Physical trauma
Symmetric lupoid onychitis

Bullous pemphigoid
Leishmaniasis
Onychomycosis
Pemphigus vulgaris
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Vasculitis
Vitiligo

sampling the center of the lesion, a more diagnostic
sample can be obtained by lifting the scales and crusts
from the perimeter and sampling the edge of the lesion
as described for crusts.
Once the lesion is prepared for an impression, a glass
slide should be gently pressed against the site, heat fixed
(either by using a lighter passed under the slide until a
light smoky black residue is observed or by using a slide
warmer for 20 seconds) or allowed to air‐dry, and stained
with a modified Wright’s stain (e.g., Diff‐Quik). Gram
stain or new methylene blue can also be used. When
using Diff‐Quik (which the author prefers), allow the
slide to sit in each reagent for approximately 20 seconds.
Rinse the slide gently with water after the third solution.
The slide should then be air‐ or blow‐dried.
The sample should first be evaluated under the microscope using low‐power magnification (×10) to peruse for
an infectious versus inflammatory versus neoplastic process. The author finds it easiest to look for acantholytic
cells and certain fungal organisms, such as blastomycosis,
under the low‐power objective, whereas immediate use of
the oil immersion objective (×100) may result in the missing of rare organisms or cells. The oil immersion objective
is then used (after a drop or two of immersion oil is placed
on the slide) to look for organisms and for closer observation and confirmation of inflammatory , neoplastic , and/
or acantholytic cells. Draining nodules can also be evaluated by directly pressing the slide to the draining contents
and staining as previously described.
Acetate Tape Preparation

This technique is helpful for sampling intertriginous
areas, nailfolds, interdigital areas, and dry, scaly, hyperplastic or lichenified skin surfaces. This is the author’s
preferred technique when Malassezia overcolonization
or infection is suspected. This test is performed by
pressing an approximately 2 cm piece of clear tape sticky
side down firmly against the skin several times. The tape
is then held at either end and immersed in the No. 3
Diff‐Quik stain for 15–20 seconds and then gently
rinsed with water to remove excess stain. The tape is

allowed to completely air‐dry or is blow‐dried. A strip of
immersion oil is placed on the slide and the tape is
placed sticky side down on the strip of oil. Another drop
of immersion oil is placed on top of the tape and microscopic evaluation is performed at ×10 and ×100 magnification. A cover slip is not needed.
Surface Skin Scrape

This technique is very useful when evaluating the skin
for bacteria and yeast and for sampling areas where an
impression smear may be difficult to obtain. However, it
is best reserved for sampling affected areas that are
greasy, otherwise the sample will not adhere well to the
scalpel blade. A No. 10 scalpel blade is used to gently
scrape just the surface of the affected area in the direction of the hair growth. It is not necessary to obtain capillary bleeding. Mineral oil is not utilized. The collected
material is smeared onto a glass slide and heat fixed,
stained, and microscopically evaluated according to the
guidelines indicated above for impression smears.
Cotton‐Tipped Applicator Smears

Cotton‐tipped applicators or swabs are useful for sampling moist lesions and intertriginous areas. The swab is
gently rubbed on the surface of the skin and the sample
is then rolled onto a glass slide. This technique can also
be utilized for hard‐to‐reach areas where the skin is dry,
except that the cotton swab is moistened with saline
prior to sampling in order to minimize cell damage during sample collection and preparation. Once the sample
is applied to the slide, it is heat fixed, stained, and evaluated as described above for impression smears.
Otic Cytology Otic cytology is also performed using
cotton‐tipped applicators. Samples are obtained from
each external ear canal using a separate cotton swab.
A standard system should be used for making slides
(i.e., the left ear sample is prepped next to the frosted
side of the glass slide and the right ear sample on
the other half of the slide). The slide is heat fixed and
stained as described above for impression smears. Begin

1391

VetBooks.ir

1392

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

microscopic evaluation at ×10 and then ×100 magnification. The evaluation of otic cytology is discussed in more
detail in Chapter 167.

magnification. When aberrant hairs are identified, they
can be examined more closely with ×40 magnification.

Fine Needle Aspirate

In general, surface‐dwelling mites such as Sarcoptes,
Notoedres, Cheyletiella, D. cornei, and D. gatoi are best
procured via superficial skin scrapes, whereas follicular
mites, including D. canis, D. cati, and D. injai, require
deep skin scrapes for diagnosis.
The superficial skin scrape is performed by applying
several drops of mineral oil onto the area to be scraped
or onto the chosen skin scraping tool. If necessary, the
overlying hair can be shortened with a No. 40 clipper
blade to facilitate the scraping procedure, but the clipper
blade should not touch the skin surface or any lesions, if
present. A No. 10 scalpel blade is used to scrape a large,
broad area approximately 10–15 times. Alternatively, a
skin scraping spatula (Jorgensen Laboratories, Loveland,
CO) can be used. Obtaining capillary bleeding is not
necessary, as it is more important to scrape broad, large
areas to increase the chances of procuring these difficult‐
to‐find surface‐dwelling mites. For scabies, preferred
sampling sites include the margins of the pinnae, elbows,
and tibiotarsal areas, as these are the most commonly
afflicted sites, even if one only identifies mild, subtle
lesions. Papules, if present, should also be scraped. The
material is then transferred to a glass slide and a cover
slip is applied. The sample is then evaluated microscopically with either ×4 (scanning objective) or ×10 magnification in a systematic fashion. The condenser should be
lowered to increase contrast and facilitate the finding of
mites. Look for all parasitic life stages. The observation
of just one egg is considered a positive finding; however,
a negative skin scrape does not rule out surface mites. In
these cases, when the aforementioned mites are suspected but cannot be confirmed with superficial skin
scrapings, a treatment trial may be needed to verify the
presence (or absence) of these mites (see Diagnostic
Treatment Trials below and see also Chapter 165).
Deep skin scrapes differ from the superficial version in
that the sample will be procured from a focal, localized
area, squeezing the skin prior to the scrape (and during
the scrape if possible) to facilitate extrusion of the mites
from the follicles. Several drops of mineral oil are applied
either directly to the sample area or to the No. 10 scalpel
blade or skin scraping spatula and the skin is scraped in
the direction of hair growth until capillary bleeding is
evident. Lesions that should be scraped include areas
where comedones, erythema, scaling, papules, and pustules are evident. The author finds that comedones are
especially important lesions to scrape when follicular
demodicosis is suspected. The collected material is then
transferred to a glass slide and a cover slip applied and
evaluated as described above. If properly performed with

Fine needle aspirates are best utilized for evaluation of
nodular to tumorous lesions. A 20–25 gauge needle
attached to a 6–12 cc syringe is used to aspirate the
lesion. It is important to release the pressure on the
syringe before the needle is withdrawn from the lesion.
Once the needle and syringe are removed from the
lesion, the needle is detached and the plunger of
the syringe is pulled back to draw air into the barrel. The
syringe is then reattached to the needle and the contents
are expressed onto a slide, gently smeared using a separate clean slide and allowed to air‐dry. Alternatively, the
fine needle capillary technique can be used. A 22–25
gauge needle is introduced into the lesion by holding
onto the hub. Several quick, back‐and‐forth movements
are then made in multiple directions within the lesion,
without completely withdrawing the needle, to ensure a
representative sample is obtained. The needle is then
withdrawn and attached to a syringe (6–12 cc) into which
air was already drawn. The plunger is then depressed to
expel the material within the needle onto a clean glass
slide, spread, and allowed to air‐dry.
Following the use of either technique, the slide is
then stained with Diff‐Quik. Other staining options
include gram stain or new methylene blue. Evaluation
for microorganisms, such as bacteria, yeast and deep
fungal species, and for the overall cell type (i.e., inflammatory or neoplastic) is performed by first evaluating
the specimen using the ×10 objective and finally with
the high‐power objective (×40). The oil immersion
objective can also be utilized to evaluate the sample in
greater detail.
Trichography (Hair Examination)

Trichography is used for a number of indications. It
can be used to detect the presence of parasitic or infectious organisms, such as Demodex and dermatophyte
arthrospores. Traumatic hair loss due to pruritic behaviors can be confirmed by the presence of hair shafts with
blunted tips. When hairs are predominantly found to be
in telogen (i.e., resting phase), this may be an indication
that an underlying endocrinopathy or follicular arrest
may be present. Finally, a presumptive diagnosis of various follicular dysplasias can be made when, for example,
marked melanin clumping is present within the hair
shafts. The author prefers to gently pluck the hairs using
the fingertips so as not to create iatrogenic trauma. The
hairs are then placed onto a slide with a drop of mineral
oil in an orderly array. A cover slip is placed atop the
sample and evaluation is initially performed using ×10

Skin Scrapes

VetBooks.ir

157 Approach to the Patient with Dermatologic Disease

an appropriate number of deep skin scrapes along with
the sampling of appropriate lesions, a negative skin
scrape can rule out D. canis and D. cati. However, the
diagnosis of pododemodicosis may require biopsy and
certain breeds require biopsy to confirm a diagnosis,
particularly shar‐peis. The identification and treatment
of parasitic diseases will be discussed in Chapter 165.
Culture
Bacterial Culture

In this age of methicillin and multidrug resistance, bacterial culture and sensitivity has become a more routinely
implemented test in patients with superficial bacterial
folliculitis. While performing an aerobic bacterial culture
is never contraindicated, there are some instances which
make it a necessary test. These include the following:
poor response and the emergence of new lesions in
spite of appropriate antibiotic therapy
●● patients with chronic recurrent pyoderma, especially
those with a history of multiple courses of antimicrobial therapy
●● when rods or unusual organisms are present on cytology
●● in cases of deep pyoderma
●●

In cases of superficial bacterial folliculitis, pustules are
the ideal lesion to sample; however, epidermal collarettes
and crusts can also be sampled. The skin is not cleaned
prior to sampling. The pustule is gently lanced with
a sterile 25 gauge needle and a mini‐tip culturette is
touched to the purulent material, taking care to avoid
contact with the surrounding nonlesional skin. If crusts
are present, the culture should be obtained from underneath the crust. When epidermal collarettes are present,
the sample should be obtained from the leading edge
where the epithelium is lifted to avoid surface contaminants. The culturette is then placed back into the transport media device and refrigerated until sent overnight
to the laboratory. Mini‐tip culturettes are commercially
available through most microbiology laboratories.
Bacterial cultures of deep infection can vary somewhat
depending on the type of lesion being sampled. Fine needle aspiration can be performed to obtain specimens
from bullae and dermal or subcutaneous lesions with
pockets of fluid. Tissue cultures using sterile technique
are best when a nodule, tumor or cellulitis is present. It is
also ideal to obtain a tissue culture in the presence of
deep infection characterized by exudative draining
tracts, rather than merely swabbing any drainage, which
will often be contaminated with superficial organisms
while deeper organisms may be missed.
The surface should be aseptically prepared by gently
swabbing the area with 70% alcohol and can be followed
by a rinse with nonpreserved saline. Specimens are
obtained via punch biopsy from nonulcerated areas

(punch biopsy technique is described in detail below).
Local anesthesia is accomplished by infusing 1–2 mL of
2% lidocaine subcutaneously using a 25 gauge needle.
Care must be taken not to inject the lidocaine too superficially as it can inhibit microbial growth within the
­specimen. When in doubt, a ring block may be more
appropriate, especially if subcutaneous tissue is also
going to be submitted. Sterile instruments should be
used as well as gloves. The epidermis is then aseptically
removed with a No. 10 surgical scalpel and the remaining deep dermal tissue is used for culture. Removal of the
epidermis prevents overgrowth of the tissue culture by
surface bacteria that are not relevant to the deep infection. The dermal tissue is placed in a sterile red‐top tube
with just enough nonbacteriostatic sterile saline to keep
the sample moist, and refrigerated and shipped overnight to the laboratory. The tissue sample can be submitted for aerobic, anaerobic, and mycobacteria culture
purposes. The laboratory should be notified of the differential diagnoses, as culture media adjustments will be
made to facilitate the growth, isolation, and identification of the suspected organisms.
Fungal Culture
Fungal Culture for Deep Mycoses

When deep fungal
infection is suspected, samples are obtained using the
same principles as described above for bacterial cultures
of deep infection. Laboratories should be contacted in
advance of the differential diagnoses so that modification of culture techniques can be implemented in
advance, not only for diagnostic purposes but also
because of the human health risks associated with various fungal diseases. Laboratories should also be consulted regarding special requirements for tissue
submission. Depending on the suspected organism,
additional tests beyond culture may be required, such as
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing.

Dermatophyte Culture In cases of suspected dermatophytosis, cultures (considered the gold standard for diagnosis) can be performed in hospital using dermatophyte
test medium (DTM) or, alternatively, samples may be submitted to a diagnostic laboratory. The clinician should
check with their laboratory regarding the preferred means
of sample submission. Dermatophyte test medium is most
useful because the red color indicator is a helpful diagnostic aid and it also contains inhibitors of bacterial and saprophytic contaminants (e.g., Sab‐Duets, Hardy
Diagnostics, Santa Maria, CA, USA). Sab‐Duets are also
popular in that they are double plated: one side contains
DTM and the other side contains plain Sabouraud dextrose agar. Dermatophyte test medium may decrease
development of conidia, and therefore it is best to perform
microscopic identification using the sample plated onto

1393

VetBooks.ir

1394

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

Sabouraud dextrose agar. The most common dermatophytic agents include Microsporum canis, Microsporum
gypseum, and Trichophytan mentagrophytes.
When procuring samples for DTM, hairs should be
plucked from within the lesion close to the periphery. A
medical‐grade plug‐in long wave Wood’s lamp with
magnification can be helpful for identifying fluorescing
hairs that can be selected for culture in approximately
50% or more of cases caused by M. canis and rarely
with M. gypseum. The Burton Ultraviolet (Wood’s)
Exam Light (Philips Burton, Franklin Park, IL, USA) is
an excellent model as it provides magnification, and
replacement bulbs can be purchased. Medical‐grade
Wood’s lamps do not require a period to warm up, but
the room should be darkened and the evaluator allowed
to let their eyes adjust for 2–3 minutes. The lamp should
be held close to the skin (i.e., 4–10 cm). Infected hair
shafts will fluoresce a bright apple green. These are
often hiding under crusts, and thus it is important to lift
crusts and examine the hairs beneath. Fluorescing hairs
are then plucked for ­culture and can also be evaluated
by direct examination to confirm an infection (ectothrix
arthroconidia may be observed). Besides directly plucking hairs for culture purposes, the MacKenzie toothbrush technique can be used. Individually packaged
toothbrushes can be purchased readily online. This
method is especially helpful for sampling poorly circumscribed lesions and nonlesional patients when looking for asymptomatic carriers. A newly unwrapped
toothbrush is used to brush the lesions (or the entire
patient in asymptomatic animals), and the scales and
loose hairs caught in the bristles are gently embedded
onto the agar. A sterile needle or hemostat can also be
used to remove trapped hair and scale from the toothbrush for placement onto the culture medium.
After inoculation, the culture plate should be placed in
a sealable plastic baggie to prevent contamination and
dehydration, and put in an incubator. The incubation
temperature should be maintained at 75–80 °F and the
humidity should be approximately 30%. A digital aquarium thermometer can be used to monitor the temperature, and placing a pan of water in the incubator should
be enough to sustain adequate humidity. The plates
should be kept away from sunlight or fluorescent light.
Cultures should be examined daily and color change
(which occurs due to a change in the pH of the media)
and colony growth findings must be recorded. Pale, buff‐
colored to white colonies that simultaneously develop a
red ring of color around them as they grow are indicative
of dermatophytes. The colonies are typically cottony or
velvety and growth will often occur in 4–7 days. A contaminant is likely when there is colony growth and
no associated color change of the media or the color
change appears more than 10 days after colony growth.

Contaminants are also likely when there is a color change
but the colony is pigmented. Cultures should be incubated for three weeks before declaring them negative to
ensure that there is no late growth of a pathogen.
Cultures grossly suspicious for dermatophyte growth
should be evaluated microscopically. The sticky side of
clear acetate tape is gently brushed against the colony
growing on Sabouraud dextrose agar and placed over
several drops of lactophenol cotton blue stain on a glass
slide. The sample should sit for 5–10 minutes before
examination. This allows for proper absorption of the
stain by the spores and thus better visualization. The
sample is then ready to be evaluated with the ×10 and
×40 objectives. The macroconidia of M. canis are spindle‐shaped and have thick, spiny walls that have six or
more divisions with a knob at the terminal end. M. canis
does not produce as many macroconidia as M. gypseum,
which are thin‐walled and ellipsoid with rounded ends
having less than six divisions. Microscopic evaluation of
T. mentagrophytes will typically reveal large numbers of
spherical microconidia, rare cigar‐shaped macroconidia,
and spiral hyphae. The website https://drfungus.org/
contains helpful information regarding the macro‐ and
microscopic evaluation of dermatophytes.
Diagnostic Treatment Trials
Treatment trials are performed often in veterinary dermatology and are used to confirm a suspected diagnosis
where the response to therapy is either the only or the best
way to diagnose the possible underlying disease. Examples
of this include the improvement or elimination of clinical
signs with insecticidal therapy in presumptive cases of flea
bite hypersensitivity, sarcoptic mange, and D. gatoi infestation in cats. In other cases, confirmation of the underlying disease is made when a relapse is observed after
discontinuing the trial with subsequent resolution on
restarting the trial, as is the case when food elimination
trials are performed for diagnosing adverse food reactions. Another example of this concept is the use of glucocorticoids to support a diagnosis of allergic dermatitis
when other infectious and parasitic diseases have been
ruled out. Further discussion of specific treatment trials
can be found in the relevant chapters of this section.
Biopsy and Histopathology
There are several indications for performing skin biopsy
early on in the clinical work‐up. These include the presence of unusual lesions or lesions that evolve dramatically and/or severely, as in the case of a possible cutaneous
adverse drug reaction. Erosive to ulcerative draining dermatoses, especially those that are nodular, also should be
biopsied early on. At any point when there is concern of

VetBooks.ir

157 Approach to the Patient with Dermatologic Disease

a life‐threatening dermatosis, autoimmune or metabolic
disease, or the suspicion of n
­ eoplasia, biopsy should be
immediately undertaken. Finally, skin biopsies are particularly indicated when a specific condition is suspected
and the histopathology is recognized to be diagnostic of
that disease. Other less critical reasons for pursuing
biopsy include when other tests have not resulted in
identification of the condition and when treatment has
not resolved the problem. It is important to remember
that performing a skin biopsy is never useless. In the best
case scenario, it provides a definitive diagnosis, and in
the worst case it can rule out other dermatoses and narrow down the category of diseases to be considered.
Inform the owner that a precise diagnosis may not be
reached but in any case the information obtained will be
useful.
In order to maximize results, biopsies must be taken
that are representative of the entire disease process. This
entails the procurement of spontaneous, primary lesions
which generally occur earlier in the course of the disease,
along with secondary, more chronic lesions. Therefore,
in almost all cases, multiple biopsies should be taken in
order to capture the clinical spectrum and evolution of
the disease. It is prudent to select lesions that have not
been altered by scratching or infection. For depigmenting diseases (e.g., discoid lupus erythematosus), newly
depigmented areas are ideal sites for biopsy (e.g., the
slate gray areas of the nasal planum rather than the more
chronic white/pink or ulcerated areas). When ulcerated
areas need to be sampled, biopsy the advancing edge to
include some of the epidermis rather than the center of
the ulcer. For diseases characterized by alopecia, biopsies
should be obtained from the most chronic area of complete alopecia as well as from the junctional and normal
areas.
If possible, glucocorticoid therapy should be discontinued 2–3 weeks prior to biopsy. If a long‐acting injectable corticosteroid was administered to the patient, it is
best to postpone the biopsy for 6–8 weeks, when feasible. Generally, 3–5 biopsies are an acceptable average.
When possible, a 6 or 8 mm punch biopsy tool is used. A
3 or 4 mm instrument is used only for difficult‐to‐biopsy
areas (e.g., periocular region, pinnae, nasal planum or
footpad). In many cases, punch biopsies can be performed using local anesthesia with 2% lidocaine, with or
without sedation. However, when biopsying challenging
areas, general anesthesia may be best.
It is helpful to create a small dermatology surgery pack
so that all necessary instruments and materials are
readily available. Include a No. 10 scalpel blade and handle, straight and curved iris scissors, gauze, Mayo and
Metzenbaum scissors, needle and suture, an atraumatic
forceps such as a Debakey tissue forceps, and a needle
holder. Disposable biopsy punches and 10% formalin‐

filled vials are readily available in a number of sizes and
volumes, respectively.
The biopsy sites must remain perfectly intact and be
handled carefully. A scissors or clippers can be used if
necessary to gently shorten the overlying hair and
improve visualization of the area to be biopsied, taking
extreme care not to touch the skin surface or disturb the
lesion itself, including crusts. Preliminary scrubbing
should never be performed, except in the case of dermal
or subcutaneous nodules, where a light prep with 70%
alcohol should suffice. An indelible marker is used to circle the lesion and a local anesthetic, such as 2% lidocaine,
is injected subcutaneously using a 25 gauge needle and
fanning it under the area of the circle. The needle is
inserted at the periphery of the site to be biopsied so as
not to disturb the lesion itself. Typically 0.5–2.0 mL of
anesthetic per site should suffice. The maximum dose of
lidocaine that may be administered is 5 mg/kg in dogs
and 2.5 mg/kg in cats to avoid adverse effects, such as
cardiac arrhythmias. Wait at least five minutes prior to
biopsy to allow for optimal analgesic effect.
Center the lesion within the punch biopsy tool and
choose a size that minimizes the amount of normal skin
margin. However, for vesicles, bullae and pustules, which
are fragile and can easily rupture with biopsy, use the
largest punch possible or perform an excisional or wedge
biopsy. If the procurement of subcutaneous fat is essential to establishing an underlying diagnosis, it may also
be pertinent to use an excisional or wedge biopsy technique, and anesthetize the area using a ring block to minimize distortion of the subcutaneous tissue due to local
lidocaine infiltration. Rotate the punch biopsy tool in
one direction to minimize damaging shearing forces and
apply even, continuous pressure until an adequate depth
has been obtained to free the tissue down to the subcutaneous fat layer, which should be included in the specimen as it may be important for the accurate assessment
and diagnosis of many inflammatory processes. An edge
of the subcutaneous fat is gently grasped using an atraumatic tissue forceps to elevate the specimen. The epidermis or dermis should not be grasped, as this could result
in a crushing artifact and lead to a nondiagnostic sample.
The subcutaneous attachment is then cut. The author
prefers a straight or curved iris scissors in most cases.
The biopsy sample is then gently blotted to remove
excess artefactual blood from the surface.
The sample should be immediately placed in 10% formalin, with a minimum of 10 parts formalin to 1 part
tissue required for adequate fixation. Thin samples
should be placed, panniculus down, on a small piece of
tongue depressor before placement into the fixative to
prevent rolling of the specimen, which can make histopathologic evaluation more challenging. Affixed samples must be placed face down into the formalin jar. The

1395

VetBooks.ir

1396

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

incision is then closed utilizing 1–2 simple interrupted
or cruciate sutures.
Provide a thorough history on your biopsy submission
form, as well as a description of the physical exam.
Preliminary diagnostic tests and their results should also
be included if applicable, along with a list of differential
diagnoses. Current and past therapy, including response,
may also be beneficial. Submission of digital photographs
can be very helpful and ideally a dermatohistopathologist should be utilized.
Tests of Noncutaneous Organs
When a dermatopathy is suspected to co‐exist with an
underlying systemic disease or endocrinopathy, a complete blood count, small animal chemistry profile, and
urinalysis may be indicated. These basic tests are also
advised to obtain baseline information prior to initiating

various treatments. Specific endocrine tests are available
for the evaluation of hypothyroidism, hypercortisolism,
and sex hormone abnormalities. Various imaging modalities may also be indicated such as radiography and ultrasound. Advanced imaging modalities, including magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography
(CT) scans, may also be needed in some cases. The indications and use of these various tests will be elaborated
upon in the relevant chapters of this section.

­Therapeutic Plan and Client Education
After thorough evaluation, the therapeutic plan most
beneficial to the patient can be formulated. Client education is one of the most important aspects of treating the
dermatologic patient adequately. Because many skin diseases are controllable but not curable, close communication is essential for a satisfactory long‐term result.

­Further Reading
Foster AP, Foil CS. History, examination and initial
evaluation. In: BSAVA Manual of Small Animal
Dermatology, 2nd edn. Gloucester: British Small Animal
Veterinary Association, 2003, pp. 11–19.
Miller WH, Griffin CE, Campbell KL. Diagnostic
methods. In: Miller W, Griffin C, Campbell K,
eds. Muller and Kirk’s Small Animal

Dermatology, 7th edn. St Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2013,
pp. 57–107.
Mueller RS. Dermatology for the Small Animal Practitioner.
Jackson, WY: Teton NewMedia, 2000, pp. 2–50.
Smith SA, Tobias AH, Fine DM, Jacob KA, Ployngam T.
Corticosteroid‐associated congestive heart failure in 12
cats. Int J Appl Res Vet Med 2004; 2(3): 159–70.

VetBooks.ir

1397

158
Principles of Therapy of Dermatologic Diseases
Sandra N. Koch, DVM, MS, DACVD
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA

This chapter gives a broad overview of a variety of
­dermatologic therapies and presents the most important
general principles that guide their use, including
­supporting concepts and most common indications. The
reader is referred to other chapters in this textbook or
reference therapeutic books for details regarding the
treatment of various dermatologic diseases using the
therapy modalities discussed here.

­Topical Therapy
Topical therapy is a useful and versatile treatment
modality widely used for skin and otic disorders.
Advantages of topical therapy include direct delivery to
the target tissue resulting in high drug concentration at
the treated site, replacement or reduction of the usage of
systemic ­therapy, avoidance of drug metabolism or gastrointestinal disturbances, lower cost compared to most
systemic medications and less probability of causing
microbial resistance as seen with systemic antibiotics.
On the other hand, topical therapy requires client education for proper use, and can be time‐consuming and
clients because of staining or greasy
unpleasant to ­
preparations.
There are many factors that need to be considered
when prescribing topical therapy such as the condition
of the skin and ears, the type of lesions present, the need
for residual activity, the presence of hair in the area, and
the body region and surface area to be treated. Other
­factors to consider include the active and inactive ingredients (i.e., vehicle) of the medication and administration
of adequate drug volume. The vehicle influences treatment effectiveness and may have therapeutic effects;
however, it may cause adverse effects such as irritant
dermatitis. The ability of the owners to follow instructions and frequency of use should also be considered.

Lastly, there are different formulations or delivery systems available that should be tailored to each patient’s
needs. These formulations include shampoos, rinses,
lotions, powders, creams, ointments, emulsions, sprays,
gels, mousses, spot‐on solutions, wipes, and ear cleaner
solutions. They may have similar active ingredients but
their vehicle, efficacy, irritant or cosmetic aspects, ease
of administration, and cost will be different according to
each formulation and method of application.
Common Formulations of Topical Agents
Shampoos

Medicated shampoos may be effective for cleansing and
hydrating the skin, soothing and reducing pruritus, and preventing or treating skin infections. Shampoos may be used
for localized or generalized skin disease and may vary in
their lathering effect. The type of shampoo and frequency of
use are decided on an individual basis according to the skin
disorder and ability of the client to bathe their pet. In most
shampoo formulations, the active ingredients have limited
residual effect; therefore it is generally recommended to
keep the shampoo in contact with the skin for 5–10 minutes
prior to rinsing. Shampoos are also frequently used as maintenance therapy, such as in allergic animals and those predisposed to skin infections. Different shampoos may be used
on an alternating basis or on different parts of the body.
Medicated shampoos are typically classified based on
their function, as emollient and moisturizing or hypoallergenic, antipruritic and/or anti–inflammatory, antiseborrheic (keratolytic and/or keratoplastic, and/or degreasing),
antibacterial and/or antifungal, and antiparasitic.
Rinses

Rinses are commonly used after shampoos and are available in different forms including those that need to be
rinsed off, leave‐on formulations that dry on the skin and

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1398

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

allow more prolonged effect, and newer formulations
such as microemulsion sprays which can work well on
large body surfaces without the need for baths. The active
ingredients in rinses may vary but they often include
moisturizers, antiseborrheic agents, and antimicrobials.

antiseborrheic agents, astringents, anti–inflammatory,
antimicrobial, and antiparasitic ingredients. Some animals may not allow their application. Alcohol‐containing
sprays, which are meant to quickly dry, may be irritating,
particularly in acute inflamed skin disorders.

Lotions

Mousses

Lotions are often used for their cooling, antipruritic,
antimicrobial, and drying effects, depending on their
inactive agents such as water, alcohol and propylene
­glycol, and their anti–inflammatory, antipruritic, and
­antimicrobial active ingredients. They are usually recommended for a determined period of time but may also
be used for maintenance.

Mousses are a new form of topical therapy in veterinary
medicine and provide an easy and pleasant way for pet
owners to deliver active ingredients to haired and nonhaired skin. The product must be applied directly to the
skin in order to be effective. Mousses may contain antipruritic, antimicrobial, and antiseborrheic agents.

Creams and Ointments

Spot‐on formulations include flea and tick preventatives,
fatty acids, ceramides and keratolytic or antiseborrheic
agents. These formulations are usually lipophilic with
large molecular weights which slow dermal absorption,
lower systemic bioavailability, and provide a large area of
distribution.

Creams and ointments lubricate the skin, facilitate hydration of the stratum corneum, help prevent water loss, and
form a protective covering increasing the p
­ enetration of
active ingredients. However, these formulations are contraindicated in exudative areas. They may contain water‐
washable bases such as polyethylene glycol or hydrophobic
oils such as mineral oil. The main disadvantages of these
products include their somewhat difficult application to
hairy skin, their occlusive properties which can potentially
lead to folliculitis, and they can be greasy and messy (ointments). Also, their use is ­limited to localized and small
areas such as the paws, elbows, and nose. They are also
often used in ears. Most commonly, these formulations
contain antimicrobials, anti–inflammatory, antipruritic,
keratolytic, and ultraviolet (UV) radiation‐blocking
agents. Creams are white and nongreasy and contain preservatives to protect against growth of bacteria and fungi.
Ointments are oil based or emulsions of oil and water
droplets that do not dissipate well when applied to the
skin. They are greasy and clear and do not require preservatives. Ointments are selected when increased absorption, hydration, and occlusion are required.
Gels

Gels do not have a sticky residue and are not messy, compared to creams and ointments. Most commonly, they
contain anti–inflammatory, antimicrobial, and keratolytic
agents in combination with other inactive agents such as
propylene glycol and carboxypolymethylene. They are
mostly used for localized treatment or small skin areas.
Sprays

Sprays can be very useful and convenient for the treatment of large body areas when frequent baths are not
possible and can also complement the use of medicated
shampoos. They may also facilitate treatment of difficult
areas such as perianal areas and the interdigital aspects
of paws. Sprays may contain emollients, moisturizers,

Spot‐On Solutions

Wipes

Medicated wipes are very useful for treatment of intertriginous areas such as the interdigital, perianal, perivulvar, facial, and tail skinfolds. They contain antimicrobials
or antiseptics and can be used for prevention and treatment of bacterial and yeast skin infections. Alcohol‐­
containing wipes may be irritating, particularly in acute
inflamed skin disorders.
Ear Cleaner Solutions

Ear cleaners can be used for the treatment of ear
­infections, on a maintenance regimen to help prevent
infections, and after bathing or swimming to keep the
ear canals dry. Ear cleaners are often used in conjunction
with topical antibiotics, antifungals, and/or glucocorticoids. The frequency of cleaning varies from once daily
to once weekly according to the needs of each patient. It
is important to demonstrate the cleaning technique to
pet owners to improve compliance and efficacy.
The choice of cleaner depends on the condition of the
ears. Ceruminolytic agents help remove dry waxy material by dissolving cerumen and include propylene glycol,
mineral and vegetable oils, essential oils, glycerine, and
xylene. Astringents work as drying agents, reducing
humidity and helping prevent maceration. They are indicated for moist ears and include isopropanol, boric acid,
benzoic acid, salicylic acid, acetic acid, and aluminum
acetate. Drying agents are typically used after debris or
exudate has been removed from the ear canals with a
ceruminolytic agent. Surfactants emulsify debris and are
good for removing tightly adhered debris and include
docusate, calcium sulphosuccinate, and sodium lauryl

VetBooks.ir

158 Principles of Therapy of Dermatologic Diseases

sulfate. Antimicrobial agents help remove ­
purulent
­discharge and treat bacterial and fungal infections; they
include chlorhexidine, ethylenediaminetetraacetic ­acid‐
tromethamine (Tris‐EDTA), monosaccharides, parachlorometaxylenol (PCMX), and organic acids.
The appropriate use and indications for the various ear
cleansing agents will be discussed in more detail in
Chapter 167.

­Systemic Therapy
Systemic therapy is commonly implemented to treat various dermatoses; however, it requires much knowledge
of the patient’s medical history, drug pharmacokinetics
and pharmacodynamics, potential side‐effects, toxicity
monitoring guidelines, and potential drug interactions.
The veterinarian needs to be familiar with the disease
being treated and be aware of all treatment options and
decide on the most appropriate therapeutic intervention
in order to achieve the best clinical efficacy with the least
possible toxicity.

­Categories and Indications of Topical
and Systemic Therapy
Some of the major categories used in veterinary dermatology include anti–inflammatory, antipruritic, immunosuppressive, antibacterial and antifungal agents, antiparasitics
and medications to treat hormonal disorders.
Anti–inflammatory Agents
Topical anti–inflammatory agents include glucocorticoids
and essential fatty acids. Topical glucocorticoids may be a
useful adjunct to systemic therapy in the treatment of both
allergic and autoimmune skin disease. They are often used
in pruritic and/or inflammatory skin and otic conditions.
Common topical glucocorticoids include betamethasone,
hydrocortisone, isoflupredone acetate, fluocinolone,
mometasone furoate monohydrate, and triamcinolone acetonide. These products are available in the form of ointments, creams, lotions, gels, wipes, shampoos, rinses, and
sprays. Many of the available products are otic preparations
containing antimicrobials that are also used extra‐label on
the skin. Topical essential fatty acids may be used as adjunctive therapy to treat inflammatory dermatoses including
atopic dermatitis and sebaceous adenitis, as well as keratinization disorders. They are available in formulations such as
spot‐on, sprays, shampoos, rinses, and mousses.
Systemic products with anti–inflammatory and/or
antipruritic and immunosuppressive effects include
­

glucocorticoids, cyclosporine, oclacitinib maleate,
­
­essential fatty acids, pentoxifylline, and a combination of
a tetracycline and niacinamide. Systemic glucocorticoid
therapy is somewhat arbitrarily divided into anti‐­
inflammatory and immunosuppressive, depending on
the dosage used to treat the disease.
There are many indications for the anti–inflammatory
effects of glucocorticoids including treatment of pruritic
dermatoses such as allergic skin diseases and otitis.
Indications for the immunosuppressive effects of glucocorticoids include many autoimmune skin disorders such
as the pemphigus complex and various sterile inflammatory dermatoses. Commonly used systemic gluco­
corticoids include methylprednisolone, prednisone or
prednisolone, dexamethasone, and triamcinolone acetonide. The glucocorticoid potency must be chosen based
on the disease being treated, its severity, and the patient’s
overall health. It has been shown that only 21% of orally
administered prednisone was present in the blood of
cats when compared to prednisolone, suggesting poor
prednisone absorption or inadequate conversion into
­
prednisolone in the liver. Therefore, prednisolone should
be used in cats instead of prednisone due to potential
lack of response to prednisone. Injectable glucocorticoids should be avoided for treatment of chronic skin and
ear diseases because this route of administration does
not offer any therapeutic benefits over oral administration and is associated with more severe hypothalamic‐
pituitary‐adrenal axis side‐effects.
Cyclosporine is a calcineurin inhibitor that is used as
an anti–inflammatory or immunosuppressive medication according to the condition being treated and the
dose used. It is labeled for the treatment of atopic dermatitis in dogs and cats. Other indications include perianal
fistulae in dogs, sebaceous adenitis, autoimmune diseases such as the pemphigus complex (particularly in
cats), and various sterile and inflammatory skin disorders. For most treated conditions, cyclosporine may take
4–6 weeks to be effective.
Oclacitinib maleate, a novel immunomodulatory drug,
is a selective Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor, preferentially
JAK‐1, labeled for the control of pruritus and inflammation associated with canine allergic skin diseases, including atopic dermatitis, in dogs at least 12 months of age. It
has a rapid mode of action in most patients, reducing
pruritus within 24 hours.
Essential fatty acids are nutritional supplements with
anti–inflammatory properties. They may be used concurrently with other medications to treat pruritic and/or
inflammatory dermatoses such as atopic dermatitis,
sebaceous adenitis, and symmetric onychodystrophy, as
well as keratinization disorders. They may also help
improve the skin barrier and hair coat quality and
­ameliorate dry and scaly skin. Omega‐3 formulations

1399

VetBooks.ir

1400

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

(containing eicosapentaenoic acid [EPA] and docosahexaenoic acid [DHA]) are usually recommended for inflammatory conditions such as allergic skin diseases, while
omega‐6 or omega‐3/omega‐6 combination products
are typically recommended for keratinization disorders
or to improve the skin barrier. There is no current
­evidence of the ideal formulation, combination, dosage
or ratio of essential fatty acids and many different formulations are available. It may take 8–12 weeks for full
­clinical benefit to be seen.
Pentoxifylline is a methylxanthine derivative with
important anti–inflammatory and rheologic properties
which results in increased red blood cell pliability, an
especially important feature for the treatment of ischemic
dermatopathies such as vasculitis. It may be used as an
adjunctive or single agent for the treatment of various
dermatoses including vaccine‐induced dermatopathies,
canine familial dermatomyositis, symmetric onychodystrophy, cutaneous vasculitis, and various sterile inflammatory skin diseases. It may take 4–6 weeks for clinical
improvement to be seen.
Combinations of a tetracycline and niacinamide have
been used to treat a number of immune‐mediated
­diseases such as discoid lupus erythematosus, pemphigus foliaceus, symmetric onychodystrophy, and sterile
granulomatous diseases with variable response and a lag
period for efficacy of 4–6 weeks.
Antipruritic Agents
Topical antipruritic substances can provide temporary
relief and soothing effect for itching and also pain (e.g.,
lidocaine), and may be used for adjunctive treatment of
localized skin conditions including minor skin irritations, allergic or pruritic reactions, acute moist dermatitis, intertrigo, and acral lick dermatitis. These agents
include colloidal oatmeal, diphenhydramine hydrochloride (HCl), lidocaine, neutralized zinc and pramoxine HCl, and glucocorticoids (previously discussed).
Depending on the product, they are available as powders,
solutions, shampoos, lotions, conditioners, rinses, sprays,
gels, ointments, and creams.
Systemic antipruritic medications commonly used
include antihistamines and glucocorticoids (previously
discussed). Antihistamines are usually indicated for the
management of histamine‐mediated pruritic and allergic
skin diseases including urticaria and insect bite hypersensitivity. Despite the frequent use of antihistamines to
treat atopic dermatitis, currently there is no conclusive
evidence of the efficacy of type 1 antihistamines
for ­treatment of chronic and acute flares of canine atopic
dermatitis. The response to any selected antihistamine is generally individualized and unpredictable.
Commonly used antihistamines include amitriptyline

­ iphenhydramine, hydroxyzine HCl or pamoate,
HCl, d
chlorpheniramine maleate, and doxepin HCl. Their sedative effect can be beneficial when treating pruritic skin
disorders. Although the newer generation antihistamines such as fexofenadine HCl and cetirizine HCl present a more ­convenient once‐daily dosage, there is no
current evidence that these antihistamines have superior
efficacy compared to the older generation antihistamines. However, their less sedative effect may be a disadvantage for the treatment of pruritic skin disorders. A
novel anti-IL31 monoclonal antibody therapy, labeled
for the treatment of canine atopic dermatitis, is available
for subcutaneous administration, under veterinarian
supervision, with 4–8 weeks of efficacy duration.
Immunosuppressive Agents
Topical immunosuppressive agents include tacrolimus
and glucocorticoids (previously discussed). Tacrolimus is
a calcineurin inhibitor similar to ciclosporin; however, it is
available as an ointment and is 100% more potent. It may
be beneficial as adjunct therapy for allergic skin ­diseases,
discoid lupus erythematosus, pemphigus e­ rythematosus,
localized cutaneous vasculopathies, and perianal fistula.
Systemic immunosuppressive agents are commonly
used for the management of immune‐mediated skin
diseases including autoimmune diseases, such as the
­
pemphigus complex, cutaneous bullous diseases, and
various forms of cutaneous lupus erythematosus. These
medications include azathioprine, chlorambucil and
cyclophosphamide, in addition to glucocorticoids and
cyclosporine (previously discussed).
Azathioprine is a derivative of 6‐mercaptopurine and
is commonly used in conjunction with a glucocorticoid
for the first weeks or months as there is a lag period of up
to six weeks before its effect can be noted. The use of
azathioprine in cats is not recommended because cats
are very susceptible to bone marrow suppression when
treated with azathioprine.
Chlorambucil and cyclophosphamide are alkylating
agents that are more commonly used individually or in
conjunction with other drugs such as glucocorticoids.
Their lag period for efficacy is usually up to eight weeks.
Antibacterial Agents
Topical antibacterial agents are often used to treat localized bacterial skin infections such as those associated
with wounds, acne, perianal dermatitis, pododermatitis,
allergic skin diseases, acral lick dermatitis, and otitis
externa. They can also be a good adjunct to systemic
therapy in severe or generalized cases of bacterial skin
infection. These agents include acetic acid, boric acid,
bacitracin, benzoyl peroxide, clindamycin, gentamicin,

VetBooks.ir

158 Principles of Therapy of Dermatologic Diseases

neomycin, mupirocin, nitrofurazone, silver sulfadiazine,
nisin, and enzyme systems. Often, topical antibacterial
agents contain glucocorticoids and antifungals which
enhance their effect against other organisms and help
reduce inflammation and pruritus. Benzoyl peroxide
and clindamycin are often efficacious products for
acne cases. Mupirocin is particularly effective against
Staphylococcus infections, including methicillin‐resistant
bacteria. These products are usually available as creams,
ointments, gels, sprays, or wipes and some may also be
available in the form of shampoos, such as benzoyl peroxide, and ear solutions, such as acetic and boric acid.
Systemic antibiotics are usually indicated to treat
severe and generalized bacterial skin infections including superficial and deep pyodermas and wounds. The
use of systemic antibiotics in cases of otitis media
remains controversial; however, high doses of antibiotics
may be used in combination with topical therapy in
selective cases. The most common systemic antibiotics
used include amoxicillin‐clavulanic acid, cefovecin
sodium, cefpodoxime proxetil, cephalexin, clindamycin
HCl, potentiated sulfonamides, doxycycline HCl, chloramphenicol, ­enrofloxacin, and marbofloxacin. Ideally,
for recurrent or chronic infections, systemic antibiotic
selection should be based on bacterial culture and sensitivity. Broad‐spectrum antibiotics such as fluoroquinolones should be avoided empirically and as first‐choice
agents as they may select for bacterial resistance.
Ciprofloxacin has poor and variable oral bioavailability
in dogs and cats and should be avoided in these species.
Antifungal Agents
Topical antifungals are usually prescribed for localized
fungal infections, otitis externa associated with
Malassezia infections, or as concurrent therapy with
systemic medications for more generalized or severe
cases. The most commonly used topical antifungal
agents include clotrimazole, miconazole nitrate, nystatin, ketoconazole, posaconazole, terbinafine, and lime
sulfur. Some of these products may ­contain a combination of glucocorticoids and antibiotics which might be
beneficial when concurrent bacterial infection and
inflammation and/or pruritus are present. These agents
are usually available as creams, ointments, gels, solutions, shampoos, rinses, and wipes.
Systemic antifungals are usually indicated for extensive
or severe superficial, subcutaneous and systemic or deep
fungal infections including dermatophytosis, Malassezia
dermatitis, onychomycosis, candidiasis, sporotrichosis,
blastomycosis, cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis, and
aspergillosis. Systemic antifungals may also be used in
severe otitis externa cases in conjunction with topical
therapy. The most commonly used systemic antifungal

agents include ketoconazole, itraconazole, fluconazole,
terbinafine, and amphotericin B.
Ketoconazole is most commonly used in cases of
Malassezia dermatitis and dermatophytosis in dogs. It
should not be used solely as a first choice for systemic
mycosis and should be avoided in cats due to its hepatotoxic effects.
Itraconazole is better tolerated in cats compared to
ketoconazole. Itraconazole is also commonly used in
­systemic infections and Malassezia dermatitis, but may
be cost‐prohibitive in large‐breed dogs.
Fluconazole can be used for Malassezia dermatitis,
but it is mostly useful in systemic infections when brain
or ocular penetration is needed.
Terbinafine has been reported to be effective in
Malassezia dermatitis and can also be used for dermatophytosis and systemic or deep mycoses.
Amphotericin B is mostly indicated for cases of systemic mycosis but potential nephrotoxicity is a limiting
factor to its use. Lipid‐based formulations are available
and are much less nephrotoxic than the traditional
(deoxycholate) form.
Antiparasitics
Antiparasitic products are used for prevention of fleas,
ticks and lice, and treatment of parasitic diseases such as
ear mites, demodicosis, sarcoptic mange, and cheyletiellosis. Most commonly used antiparasitic formulations
include collars, sprays, shampoos, dips, spot‐on solutions, otic solutions, and ointments.
Amitraz solution diluted and applied as a dip is labeled
for the treatment of canine demodicosis. Amitraz should
be avoided or used carefully in cats. Rotenone ointment
may also be used in localized forms of canine demodicosis.
Flea and tick preventatives are available in a variety of
combinations and include deltamethrin, imidacloprid, flumethrin, fipronil, (S)‐methoprene, dinotefuran, pyriproxyfen, permethrin, spinetoram, moxidectin, and indoxacarb.
An imidacloprid and moxidectin combination has also
been used successfully for the treatment of sarcoptic
mange, cheyletiellosis, and mild cases of demodicosis.
Products containing permethrin should not be used in
cats due to their sensitivity to this compound. Other pyrethroids should be used carefully and according to label
instructions, particularly in small kittens. Lime sulfur dip
is effective against canine and feline scabies (Notoedres),
feline surface demodicosis (Demodex gatoi), cheyletiellosis and lice, but it is ineffective against fleas. There are several effective products available for the treatment of ear
mites including products containing pyrethrin, ivermectin, milbemycin, selamectin, and thiabendazole.
Systemic antiparasitic agents include ivermectin,
doramectin, moxidectin, milbemycin oxime, selamectin,

1401

VetBooks.ir

1402

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

nitenpyram, lufenuron (+/‐ milbemycin oxime), spinosad (+/‐ milbemycin oxime), and the newest class of parasiticides called isoxazolines, which include fluralaner,
afoxolaner, sarolaner and lotilaner.
Ivermectin, doramectin, moxidectin, and milbemycin oxime are macrocyclic lactones that have been
used s­ uccessfully to treat diseases caused by Otodectes,
Sarcoptes, Notoedres, Demodex, and Cheyletiella in
dogs and cats under numerous extra‐label dosage and
administration regimens.
Selamectin is also a macrocyclic lactone and is labeled
for use in dogs and cats for the prevention and treatment
of fleas, ticks and biting lice, and treatment of sarcoptic
mange in dogs and otoacariasis in dogs and cats. It has
also been used for the treatment of cheyletiellosis with
good results.
Nitenpyram is a neonicotinoid labeled for the control
and treatment of flea infestation in dogs and cats. Since
it is an adulticide, it should be combined with an insect
growth regulator.
Lufenuron is a benzoylurea compound that is used
as an insect growth regulator for flea control in dogs
and cats.
Spinosad stimulates the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor in insects with efficacy against adult fleas in dogs
and cats.
Isoxazolines work by selective inhibition of GABA- and
glutamate-gated chloride channels, leading to hyper-­
excitation and death of the flea or tick. They are indicated
for the treatment and prevention of adult fleas and tick
infestations. Additionally, they have been used successfully

extra-label for the treatment of parasitic diseases such as
demodicosis, sarcoptic mange, cheyletiellosis, and otodectes in dogs and cats.
Systemic Medications for the Treatment
of Hormonal Disorders
Systemic medications commonly used for the treatment
of hormonal disorders include mitotane, trilostane, melatonin, and levothyroxine sodium.
Mitotane is an adrenolytic agent that selectively
destroys the zonas fasciculata and reticularis of the adrenal cortex, while generally sparing the zona glomerulosa.
Mitotane is indicated for the treatment of pituitary‐
dependent hyperadrenocorticism in dogs and may also
be used in cases of adrenal‐dependent hyperadrenocorticism; however, the induction dose may be higher and the
duration longer compared to pituitary‐dependent cases.
Trilostane is an adrenal suppressant that reversibly
blocks 3‐beta‐hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, an enzyme
necessary for steroid synthesis in the adrenal cortex.
Trilostane is approved for the treatment of hyperadrenocorticism of pituitary or adrenal origin in dogs and may
also be beneficial for the treatment of hyperadrenocorticism in cats and alopecia X or hair cycle arrest in dogs.
Melatonin is a hormone synthesized in the pineal
gland used in dogs to treat alopecia X with anecdotal
success in 50% of cases. It may take 3–4 months for
­beneficial effects to be noticed.
Levothyroxine sodium is indicated for the treatment of
hypothyroidism in dogs and cats.

­Further Reading
Foy DS, Trepanier LA. Antifungal treatment of small
animal veterinary patients. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 2010; 40(6): 1171–88.
Graham‐Mize CA, Rosser EJ. Absorption,
bioavailability and activity of prednisone and
prednisolone in cats. In: Hillier A, Foster AP,
Kwochka KW, eds. Advances in Veterinary Dermatology,
vol. 5. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing, 2005,
pp. 152–8.
Koch SN, Torres SMF, Plumb DC. Canine and Feline
Dermatology Drug Handbook. Ames, IA: Wiley‐
Blackwell, 2012.

Miller WH, Griffin CE, Campbell KL. Muller and Kirk’s
Small Animal Dermatology, 7th edn. St Louis, MO:
Elsevier, 2013.
Nuttall T, Cole LK. Ear cleaning: the UK and US
perspective. Vet Dermatol 2004; 15(2): 127–36.
Plumb DC. Plumb’s Veterinary Drug Handbook, 8th edn.
Ames, IA: Wiley‐Blackwell, 2015.
Viviano KR. Update on immunosuppressive therapies for
dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2013; 43(5): 1149–70.
White SD. Systemic treatment of bacterial skin infections
of dogs and cats. Vet Dermatol 1996; 7(3): 133–43.

VetBooks.ir

1403

159
Atopic Dermatitis
Alison Diesel, DVM, DACVD
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
In the dog, atopic dermatitis is defined as “a genetically
predisposed inflammatory and pruritic allergic skin disease with characteristic clinical features associated with
IgE antibodies most commonly directed against environmental allergens.” Although the exact pathogenesis of
disease development is incompletely understood, current theory supports a multifactorial involvement of
genetic predisposition, immunologic dysregulation, and
epidermal barrier dysfunction.
During sensitization, it is suspected that epidermal
barrier defects allow enhanced contact of allergens with
Langerhans cells in the epidermis. These cells capture
the allergens and migrate to regional lymph nodes, a­ cting
as antigen‐presenting cells. In the lymph nodes,
Langerhans cells interact with T lymphocytes, creating a
skewed distribution and formation of type 2 T helper
(Th2) cells. Upon repeated exposure to the allergen, the
sensitized Th2 cells produce a variety of inflammatory
cytokines which promote production of IgE and infiltration of inflammatory cells into the skin.
Increased levels of interleukin (IL)‐4, IL‐5, and IL‐13
are noted in dogs with atopic dermatitis, along with
­elevated levels of interferon (INF)‐gamma. Recent studies have also documented elevated levels of IL‐31 in dogs
with atopic dermatitis. This novel cytokine is also produced by Th2 cells and appears to be responsible for
much of the pruritus associated with clinical allergic skin
disease. In more chronic lesions, the response favors Th1
cytokine production which will contribute to perpetuation of the inflammatory process.
Historically, atopic dermatitis in dogs was believed to
be due primarily to immunologic dysregulation and
genetic predisposition (as evidenced by the current definition of the disease). However, more recent evidence
supports abnormalities in the epidermal barrier which

may also influence disease development. Abnormal
structure and composition of the stratum corneum intercellular lipid lamellae, altered ceramide content, and
abnormal expression of filaggrin (the epidermal filament‐­
associated protein responsible for binding keratin molecules) have been documented in many dogs with atopic
dermatitis. Subsequent to these structural abnormalities, increased transepidermal water loss is also noted.
The combination of these changes can increase inflammation and severity of disease. Whether these changes
are seen in all dogs with atopic dermatitis or only a
­percentage of patients is currently unknown. There is a
similar disease in dogs, termed “atopic‐like dermatitis,”
which manifests with identical history and clinical signs
(see below), but in which documentation of IgE involvement cannot be confirmed. Epidermal barrier dysfunction may be a more important contributing factor for
disease development in these patients.
In the cat, the etiology and pathogenesis are even less
well defined. Although many of the immunologic mechanisms appear to be similar to those seen in the dog,
there is a question of the true implication of IgE involvement with disease development. Additionally, epidermal
barrier function has not been evaluated in the cat as a
contributing factor. For these and other reasons, many
prefer to use the term “nonflea nonfood hypersensitivity
dermatitis” when discussing atopic dermatitis in cats.

­Epidemiology
Atopic dermatitis can present in dogs and cats worldwide, though geographic differences may play a role in
the development of disease (e.g., clinical signs may manifest earlier in life in animals in warm weather climates
where the level of allergen exposure is rather high), as
well as prevalence in that region. A few older studies have

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1404

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

reported variable prevalence of the disease, ranging from
less than 5% to greater than 25% of the canine ­population;
true prevalence of disease is uncertain. For the past few
years, atopic dermatitis (or “skin allergies”) has been consistently listed in the top 10 reasons for dogs and cats to
be presented to veterinarians in the United States.

­Signalment
Depending on literature cited, age of onset may range
from 4 months to 7 years, though the majority of dogs and
cats with atopic dermatitis will typically start to manifest
clinical disease between 6 months and 3 years of age.
There does not appear to be consensus on whether the
disease is more prevalent in females or males, or whether
sex predilection affects disease development. Although
any breed of dog may be diagnosed with atopic dermatitis,
breed predisposition has been reported due to the genetic
component of disease pathogenesis. More commonly
affected breeds include but are not limited to Boston terrier, boxer, Chinese shar‐pei, Dalmatian, English bulldog,
German shepherd, golden retriever, Labrador retriever,
pug, and West Highland white terrier dogs. Although
genetic involvement has also been noted in cats, no specific breed predispositions have been identified.

Figure 159.1 Moderately erythematous, coalescing macules in
the inguinal region of a dog with atopic dermatitis.

­History and Clinical Signs
The hallmark of atopic dermatitis in both dogs and cats
is pruritus, which will often be reported as mild at first
but progresses to become more moderate to severe as
the disease advances. Depending on which specific allergens are involved and/or flare factors in the animal’s particular environment, pruritus may be present seasonally
or nonseasonally. This may also be affected by geographic location; in dogs and cats with historically mild
disease, the severity might increase if they move to a
warmer climate where allergen load is higher or different
from what they were exposed to historically. If concurrent allergic conjunctivitis or rhinitis is present, serous
ocular or nasal discharge, sneezing, or congestion,
respectively, may also be present with pruritic skin. In
cats, feline asthma may also be a concurrent finding.
In early stages of disease, pruritus may present sine
materia, or without concurrent lesions. More often,
though, dogs without secondary bacterial skin infection
or yeast overgrowth will present with fairly symmetric,
variably erythematous macules and patches (Figure 159.1)
or small papular lesions (Figure 159.2). Additionally,
signs of self‐trauma may be noted in the form of excoriations (often linear), hemorrhagic crusts, self‐induced
alopecia/barbered hair, hyperpigmentation, and lichenification (Figure 159.3).

Figure 159.2 Pinpoint, faint papules on the sternum of a dog with
mild atopic dermatitis.

Uncommonly, urticarial lesions (hives) may be seen in
dogs with atopic dermatitis. Salivary staining of the hair
is commonly noted, particularly in light‐colored
dogs, which also supports the presence of pruritus
(Figure 159.4).
On close physical examination, the clinician will often
find broken pieces of barbered hair stuck between the
gingival tissue and dental arcade, another “clue” that pruritus is present. When additional lesions are noted, such
as pustules, crusts, or epidermal collarettes, alternative
disease entities including parasites (Demodex) and

VetBooks.ir

159 Atopic Dermatitis

Figure 159.3 Marked lichenification and hyperpigmentation
of the periocular skin in a dog with severe atopic dermatitis.
Additionally, hemorrhagic crusts and additional
hyperpigmentation with associated alopecia can be seen along
the dorsal aspect of the muzzle. Facial pruritus was marked in
this patient.
Figure 159.5 Cat with moderate‐to‐severe periocular erythema,
swelling, and self‐induced excoriation from scratching.

Figure 159.4 Salivary staining on the paws of a patient with
atopic dermatitis. Moderate erythema can also be appreciated
within the interdigital webs of the right front paw.

­infections (particularly superficial bacterial pyoderma
and dermatophytosis) need to be investigated.
The distribution pattern of lesions and pruritus is most
helpful when considering atopic dermatitis. Clinical disease in dogs most commonly affects ventral sparsely
haired areas including the abdomen, thorax, inguinal,
and axillary folds. Facial distribution including periocular skin and muzzle is also common. The dorsal and ventral interdigital webbing of the paws along with the lower
portion of the limbs is often concurrently pruritic; flexural surfaces of the elbows are included in this body
region. Otitis externa and perianal pruritus are often
reported by owners, and may manifest as head shaking

or scooting, respectively. In most cases, the dorsal aspect
of the dog is spared, unless concurrent flea allergy dermatitis is noted (caudal hind end distribution including
rump and tail head). In some dogs, a more widespread
distribution of lesions and pruritus is noted. This may be
seen more commonly in different breeds including
German shepherd, Chinese shar‐pei, and West Highland
white terrier dogs, which have shown phenotypic diversity compared to other dog breeds with more standard
distribution of lesions reflecting atopic dermatitis.
In cats, the distribution pattern and clinical lesions
tend to be less consistent. Cats will, however, generally
present with one or more cutaneous reaction patterns:
cervicofacial dermatitis (head, neck, pinnal pruritus)
(Figure 159.5), self‐induced noninflammatory alopecia
(Figure 159.6), miliary dermatitis (Figure 159.7) and/or
eosinophilic skin lesions (i.e., eosinophilic plaque)
(Figure 159.8), eosinophilic granuloma, and indolent
ulcer (Figure 153.9). None of these reaction patterns,
however, are pathognomonic for allergic skin disease in
the cat. Other causes of pruritus need to be investigated
prior to diagnosing atopic dermatitis. This is especially
true for eosinophilic lesions (particularly plaques and
indolent ulcers) as these are often manifestations of bacterial pyoderma in the cat.
In people, a phenomenon known as the “atopic march”
has been described where the disease starts with atopic
dermatitis or eczema and progresses to rhinitis and
asthma. Although the “atopic march” has not been

1405

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

VetBooks.ir

1406

Figure 159.6 Self‐induced noninflammatory alopecia on the
abdomen of an atopic cat.

Figure 159.7 Miliary dermatitis lesions (crusted erythematous
papules) on the ventrum of an atopic cat. These lesions were
readily palpated, but not easily visible until the patient was
shaved.

reported in dogs, the disease may start off fairly mild with
regard to severity of pruritus noted, or be limited to only
certain body regions. However, as the dog ages, and particularly if therapeutic intervention is not pursued, the
disease will commonly progress. More severe pruritus is
generally reported and more body regions become
affected over time. Additionally, the seasonality of the
disease will often change; what may have begun as very
seasonal pruritus will show evidence of extension of season (e.g., signs of atopic dermatitis may have initially been

Figure 159.8 Eosinophilic plaque lesions on the ventral abdomen
of an allergic cat. Several individual plaque‐like lesions coalesced
to form the large plaque in the image.

Figure 159.9 Unilateral indolent ulcer on the upper lip of an
allergic cat.

only in the spring, but now extend into the summer and
fall) and eventually be present year‐round. Seasonal flares
or worsening may still, however, be present in these dogs.

­Diagnosis
The diagnosis of atopic dermatitis is based on a consistent and fitting history, clinical signs, and exclusion of
all other pruritic dermatoses. There is no test which

VetBooks.ir

159 Atopic Dermatitis

definitively diagnoses atopic dermatitis (this is true for
dogs, cats, horses, and humans); rather, it is a diagnosis
of exclusion. This includes ruling out pruritus due to
the presence of parasites (fleas, lice, Sarcoptes,
Otodectes, Cheyletiella, Demodex), infections (staphylococcal pyoderma, Malassezia overgrowth, dermatophytosis), flea allergy dermatitis, and cutaneous adverse
reaction to food. As pruritus is an additive process,
meaning that several contributing factors/diseases can
result in the manifestation of pruritus in a given patient,
and multiple factors may be present at the same time
(e.g., atopic dermatitis with secondary superficial
­bacterial folliculitis), it is imperative to rule out confounding factors prior to arriving at a diagnosis of
atopic dermatitis. Additionally, every patient is slightly
different with regard to their “pruritic threshold.” Once
secondary problems or confounding pruritic dermatoses are identified and addressed, the clinician might
note that the patient’s baseline level of pruritus is much
less severe than what was initially thought.
Recently, a set of criteria has been proposed to aid in
the diagnosis of atopic dermatitis in dogs. Granted, the
parameters suggested may be seen along with other pruritic skin diseases but if the clinician takes the appropriate steps to rule out parasites and infections, the presence
of these criteria strongly supports a clinical diagnosis.
The presence of five of the criteria has a specificity of
79% and a sensitivity of 85% to differentiate dogs with
atopic dermatitis from those with other chronic and
­pruritic skin diseases. The presence of a sixth criterion
increases specificity to 89%, but sensitivity is decreased
to 58%. The criteria (referred to as Favrot’s criteria) are
as follows:

lack of standardization protocols lead to a great deal of
variability between tests. Currently, comparison of tests
from different laboratories does not show appreciable
correlation.
Intradermal allergen testing is considered to be the
“gold standard” for documentation of IgE involvement in
atopic dermatitis in the dog. Intradermal injection of
various environmental allergens causes mast cell degranulation, extravasation of edema fluid, erythema, and formation of a wheal by IgE binding with sensitized
molecules (Figure 159.10). Intradermal testing in cats
tends to be more difficult and often frustrating; cats tend
to form less distinct wheals and more subtle positive
reactions when compared to dogs, although the test can
be beneficial in this species as well. This test is best performed by a board‐certified veterinary dermatologist; it
requires practice with regard to technique and interpretation, and cost of allergen upkeep may be prohibitive for
the general practitioner.
It is important to remember that a positive test result
must be viewed in light of the animal’s history and seasonality of disease. Additionally, these allergy tests can
be positive in approximately 50% of animals without a
clinical diagnosis of atopic dermatitis so it is imperative
that serum and intradermal allergen tests are not used to
diagnose disease. Rather, these tests become important
considerations if the owner wishes to pursue immunotherapy for their pet (see below). Their importance
stems from educated guidance on immunotherapy
formulation.

Onset of signs before 3 years of age
Dog living mostly indoors
●● Glucocorticoid‐responsive pruritus
●● Chronic or recurrent yeast infections
●● Affected front feet
●● Affected ear pinnae
●● Nonaffected ear margins
●● Nonaffected dorsolumbar area
●●
●●

Once a clinical diagnosis of atopic dermatitis has been
made, documentation of IgE involvement may be pursued with either serum or intradermal allergen testing.
With allergen serology tests, radioallergosorbent
(RAST), enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA),
or liquid‐phase immunoenzymatic assays are used to
identify the presence of allergen‐specific IgE in the
patient’s serum via colorimetric, fluorometric, or radiometric analysis. Various commercial laboratories utilize
different methodologies for detection of allergen‐­specific
IgE; specificity of the testing reagent (e.g., decreased
cross‐reactivity with IgG), allergen extracts used, and

Figure 159.10 Intradermal allergen test showing several positive
reactions to various environmental pollens. Positive reactions are
demonstrated by the formation of an erythematous wheal.

1407

VetBooks.ir

1408

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

Several factors can influence the results of allergen
testing, including time of year (particularly if seasonal
variation is noted), strength of allergens, and significant
inflammatory skin disease (either due to atopic dermatitis alone or other concurrent pruritic dermatosis).
Additionally, administration of antipruritic pharmacotherapy can dampen or mask “positive” test results. This
is especially true for intradermal allergen testing. A
recent review proposed optimal and minimal withdrawal
times of antipruritic drugs prior to allergen testing.
Based on a review of the current literature, antihistamines should be withdrawn for at least seven days, oral
and topical glucocorticoids (including otic preparations)
for at least 14 days, and a minimum of 28 days for longer‐
acting injectable glucocorticoids (although many dermatologists recommend at least 4–8 weeks withdrawal)
prior to intradermal allergen testing. There was insufficient evidence to make recommendations for medication withdrawal prior to serology allergen testing; these
tests may be less influenced by the presence of antipruritic pharmacotherapy but care must be taken with
regard to interpretation of results.

­Therapy
As with people and other domestic animal species, there
is no cure for atopic dermatitis in dogs or cats. However,
the disease can be fairly well managed with various therapeutic interventions. Therapy falls into two categories:
medical and allergen‐specific immunotherapy. Medical
therapies aim to primarily address the pruritus and
­discomfort associated with atopic dermatitis, whereas
allergen‐specific immunotherapy attempts to “retrain”
the immune system, shifting back towards a more “normal” Th1 response as opposed to Th2 dysregulation.
Medical Therapy
With regard to medical therapy for atopic dermatitis,
interventions span the spectrum from fairly conservative
to more aggressive. Options for conservative therapy
include implementation of environmental allergen
avoidance, bathing and other topical therapy, antihistamines, and essential fatty acid administration. More
potent, “aggressive” medical therapy includes administration of systemic glucocorticoids, ciclosporin, or oclacitinib. Additional/alternative therapies have also been
evaluated with variable success.
Avoidance

Avoidance of environmental allergens can be rather
difficult, particularly since many dogs and cats with
­

atopic dermatitis show reactions to allergens which cannot easily be avoided or eliminated. Pollens, for example,
are essentially impossible to eliminate. Owners will often
ask about changing the immediate environment to which
the dog or cat is exposed (e.g., removing problematic
trees or grasses from the property). However, the spread
of aeroallergens can have an approximately 100 mile
radius or more, depending on environmental conditions.
The statement “if it is not in your own yard, it might be in
your neighbor’s” holds a large amount of truth.
There is a large market as well for avoidance and reduction of house dust mite allergen (the most common environmental allergen implicated in atopic dermatitis in
dogs worldwide). Special air filters, pillow, and mattress
covers are designed to reduce the load of house dust mite
in the environment, and household cleaning products
have been designed to kill and thereby reduce house dust
mites in the home. These measures do not completely
eliminate allergens from the environment and therefore
are insufficient on their own to reduce severity of disease. Decreased exposure, however, may allow for a
reduced flare of atopic dermatitis and/or provide benefit
as an adjunct intervention with additional therapeutic
measures. Additional recommendations for improved
allergen avoidance include frequent washing of pet and
household bedding, maintained replacement of air filters
in the home, avoiding fresh cut grass (for pollen allergens), and frequent bathing.
Bathing and Other Topical Therapy

Along with mechanical removal of environmental allergens, bathing provides additional therapeutic benefit to
the atopic dog. Shampoos containing antipruritic ingredients such as colloidal oatmeal, pramoxine (topical
analgesic), antihistamine, or glucocorticoids are often
recommended as maintenance therapy for the allergic
dog; interestingly, however, studies have not documented
improvement with any specific ingredient over another.
A small study evaluated a lipid and complex sugar‐­
containing shampoo with and without the addition of
whirlpool bathing; bathing with the shampoo showed
evidence of clinical reduction of pruritus, which was
reduced further when a whirlpool was also used. Taken
together, the physical act of bathing may be the most
important factor for providing relief to the pruritic dog
as opposed to a specific ingredient or formulation. The
above ingredients, however, are benign and often owners
feel their pet experiences more beneficial results when a
particular product or ingredient is used.
Bathing is typically recommended once every 1–2
weeks long term. In the face of an allergic flare, more
­frequent bathing may be beneficial. In dogs where secondary bacterial or yeast skin infections are contributing
factors associated with atopic dermatitis, shampoos

VetBooks.ir

159 Atopic Dermatitis

containing antiseptic ingredients (e.g., chlorhexidine,
­
miconazole, ketoconazole, ethyl lactate) may be better
recommended for maintenance bathing.
Although bathing has historically been considered the
“gold standard” adjunct therapy for allergic dogs, newer
formulations of products are cropping up with increased
frequency. The addition of spray, mousse, and leave‐on
lotion formulations may increase client compliance due
to the decreased effort/time involved in application.
These products often are identical to or mimic their
shampoo counterparts with regard to active ingredients;
depending on the formulation, they may be used to
decrease frequency of bathing, or provide longer acting
beneficial response after the recommended bath. As
many cats are not overly fond of bathing, these alternative formulations may be of added benefit in this species
as part of the therapeutic regime.
Application of topical essential fatty acids, lipids, and
ceramides has been a newer area of investigation for
therapy of canine atopic dermatitis. These products aim
to improve the structure and/or function of the epidermal barrier by “normalizing” lipid and ceramide content
of the epidermis. Much of the information regarding
these therapies has been largely anecdotal; smaller studies indicate that benefits may take several weeks to be
apparent (upwards of 12 weeks to see maximal benefit).
In the mildly atopic patient, these formulations may be
sufficient solely (or with occasional additional conservative therapy) to control disease; however, they are likely
to be insufficient on their own to control a more severely
affected atopic dog. Their benefit in that case may be as
an adjunct therapy, allowing for reduction of more potent
therapeutic interventions. As it is still unclear whether
all or only some dogs with atopic dermatitis manifest
with epidermal barrier dysfunction as part of their clinical disease, the true benefit of these products is largely
uncertain.
Particularly when fairly localized pruritus is present in
the atopic patient, topical glucocorticoids may provide
beneficial results with minimal systemic absorption.
These may come in ocular or otic preparations, or in
topical lotions, creams, or sprays. The efficacy of various
products varies markedly with the potency of the steroid
used. Evidence exists in favor of utilization of a 0.0584%
hydrocortisone aceponate‐containing spray (Cortavance®
Virbac, Canada) or 0.025% budesonide‐containing leave‐
on lotion (Barazone®, Dermcare‐Vet, Australia) for management of atopic dermatitis in the dog; these products,
however, are not necessarily available worldwide (both
are currently unavailable in the USA). Depending on formulation and potency of steroid used, side‐effects can
include some systemic absorption, thinning and
decreased elasticity of the skin, phlebectasia, and milia
formation.

Similar to topical glucocorticoids, application of topical tacrolimus (Protopic® 0.03% or 0.1% ointment,
Astellas Pharma, Illinois, USA) may provide localized
control of pruritus in the atopic dog. This calcineurin
inhibitor acts similarly to ciclosporin; it more specifically
reduces T cell‐mediated inflammation without the side‐
effects of topical glucocorticoid therapy. It does, however, have a much slower onset and may not be beneficial
in the face of an acute pruritic flare.
Antihistamines

The benefit of antihistamines in atopic dermatitis is
markedly uncertain. As the manifestation of pruritus
involves many more inflammatory mediators other than
histamine, which may in fact only account for a very
small part of itch development in an atopic dog or cat,
antihistamine administration by itself may make a negligible difference in the management of the allergic patient.
According to a review of the evidence, their benefit has
not been convincing, particularly in the case of an acute
flare. That said, they may more importantly serve as an
adjunct therapeutic intervention, allowing for reduced
administration of more potent antipruritic therapy, in
particular systemic glucocorticoid administration.
Commonly used antihistamines in the dog include
cetirizine (0.5–1 mg/kg PO q24h), hydroxyzine (2 mg/kg
PO q12h), diphenhydramine (2.2 mg/kg PO q12h), amitriptyline (1–2 mg/kg PO q12h), chlorpheniramine
(0.4 mg/kg PO q8–12h), and loratidine (1 mg/kg PO
q12–24h). Additionally, some evidence exists to suggest
that fexofenadine (1–2 mg/kg PO q24h) may provide sufficient improvement in pruritus in atopic dogs. In cats,
additional options include clemastine (0.25–0.68 mg/kg
PO q12h) and cyproheptadine (2 mg/cat PO q12h). It is
important to remember that every allergic dog and cat is
a bit different; one antihistamine medication may be
more effective than another for reduction of pruritus.
Serial two‐week trials of antihistamine medications may
be necessary to arrive at an adequate therapeutic choice.
Essential Fatty Acids and Other Nutritional
Supplements

Similar to topical ceramide‐ and lipid‐containing products, systemic administration of essential fatty acids may
enhance epidermal barrier function by incorporating
more “normal” skin lipids into the epidermis. Although
the ideal ratio of omega‐3/6 essential fatty acids is
unknown, most dermatologists recommend dosing
based on eicosapentanoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). Supplementation of 180 mg/4.5 kg EPA
and 120 mg/4.5 kg DHA per day is favored for atopic dermatitis; the daily dose is calculated based on the concentration of EPA and DHA in a particular product.
Additional nutritional supplements such as choline,

1409

VetBooks.ir

1410

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

­nicotinamide, histidine, and inositol have been shown to
possibly augment barrier function in healthy dogs by
increasing production of ceramide skin lipids; whether
they have beneficial results in dogs with atopic dermatitis, however, is uncertain. As with some of the other conservative medical therapies, their most important benefit
may be in the form of adjunct therapy for the disease,
thereby decreasing the need for additional medical
interventions.
Glucocorticoids

Glucocorticoids have historically been touted as a mainstay therapy for atopic dermatitis in dogs and cats. Their
efficacy in management of pruritus associated with the
disease is without question; in fact, excellent response to
glucocorticoid therapy can be a key factor in confirming
a clinical diagnosis of atopic dermatitis. Strong evidence
exists with regard to efficacy, particularly for controlling
nonlocalized pruritus associated with atopic dermatitis.
Particularly for the acute flare, short‐course oral glucocorticoid administration can be highly effective in managing the atopic patient. Recommended dosing for oral
glucocorticoids (prednisone, prednisolone, methylprednisolone) is initiation of therapy at 0.5 mg/kg PO q12–
24h and then reducing to the lowest possible (ideally
alternate‐day) dosing which provides sufficient comfort.
In cats, it is imperative that either prednisolone or methylprednisolone be prescribed as most cats do not respond
as well to the prodrug (prednisone). Additionally, allergic
cats often require a higher initial dose (1–2 mg/kg PO
q24h) for clinical effect. The use of long‐acting injectable
glucocorticoids should be avoided for the management
of chronic inflammatory diseases such as atopic
­dermatitis, as they have a much stronger effect on the
hypothalamic‐pituitary‐adrenal axis. Moreover, their
antipruritic/­
antiinflammatory effect is not superior
compared to oral short‐acting glucocorticoids.
Although highly effective and cost‐effective (even for
large patients), the side‐effects of continued long‐term
glucocorticoid administration are concerning. Clinicians
are encouraged to consider and pursue alternative therapy for atopic dermatitis if glucocorticoid administration
is necessary for several months of the year to provide
benefit.
Ciclosporin

As with glucocorticoids, there is strong evidence to support ciclosporin administration for management of
atopic dermatitis in dogs and cats. This calcineurin
inhibitor more specifically targets T cell‐mediated
inflammation associated with atopic dermatitis. It is
important, however, to remember that the modified version of the drug (e.g., Atopica®, Elanco Animal Health,
Indiana, USA) must be administered for predicted

­efficacy. This microemulsion of the parent drug is more
predictably absorbed and metabolized in the dog and cat
compared to nonmodified formulations.
Dosing is initially recommended to be 5–7 mg/kg PO
q24h. Cats, particularly those with indolent ulcers, may
require a higher initial dose (7–10 mg/kg PO q24h) to
achieve initial beneficial results. When remission is
achieved, this dose or frequency of administration may
often be decreased while still achieving similar clinical
benefit on a long‐term basis. Although it is recommended to be given on an empty stomach, administration with food has not been proven to alter clinical
improvement. Additionally, drug level monitoring is
generally not indicated for the allergic patient; therapeutic drug levels do not typically correlate with clinical
improvement. Obtaining ciclosporin drug levels may,
however, be beneficial in a dog or cat with a clinical
­diagnosis of atopic dermatitis that is not responding
favorably to therapy.
Compared to glucocorticoids, ciclosporin is generally
better tolerated with fewer side‐effects, even long term.
This is not to say that side‐effects do not occur; it is recommended to monitor basic internal health (e.g., complete blood count, serum biochemistry, urinalysis and
urine culture and sensitivity) every 6–12 months long
term with continued ciclosporin administration. The
most commonly reported side‐effect is gastrointestinal
upset (e.g., vomiting, diarrhea, decreased appetite).
These side‐effects are typically self‐limiting and transient; gastrointestinal upset will typically resolve within
1–2 weeks of initiating therapy. Antinausea medication
(e.g., maropitant) may be necessary in the short term to
minimize undue patient discomfort.
Other less commonly reported side‐effects of ciclosporin include bacterial infections, bone marrow suppression, hirsutism and excessive shedding, gingival
hyperplasia, hepatitis, papillomatosis, and seizures.
Additionally, in cats, acute and fatal toxoplasmosis has
also been documented. It is recommended that cats
remain indoors and not be fed a raw diet, be completely
restricted with regard to scavenging and hunting, and
have serology documenting toxoplasma and feline leukemia virus/feline immunodeficiency virus (FeLV/FIV)
status prior to initiating therapy.
Ciclosporin levels in the blood may be influenced
by concurrent administration of other medications.
Ketoconazole and fluconazole, for example, can increase
the circulating ciclosporin levels via competitive binding
of the cytochrome P450 enzyme. Although this combination can be clinically useful (e.g., allowing for lowered
dose of ciclosporin required to achieve clinical results,
thereby decreasing the cost of therapy), it can also
increase the chance of side‐effects. Care must be taken
with other cytochrome P450‐associated medications

VetBooks.ir

159 Atopic Dermatitis

(e.g., metoclopramide, metronidazole) as concurrent
administration may increase side‐effects.
As opposed to glucocorticoids, which cause a rapid
reduction in pruritus, there is a lag associated with ciclosporin administration and clinical improvement.
Maximal benefit is typically noted within about 4–6
weeks. At that time, if the patient is sufficiently comfortable, the medication may be tapered.
Oclacitinib

Oclacitinib (Apoquel® Zoetis, New Jersey, USA) is a
novel Janus kinase inhibitor approved for dogs in the
USA and Europe to control the pruritus associated with
allergic dermatitis in general and, specifically, atopic
dermatitis. Oclacitinib rather specifically inhibits
­
­production of IL‐31 from T cells in the dog.
This targeted therapeutic is similar to other tyrosine
kinase molecules which have shown some benefits in the
treatment of atopic dermatitis (e.g., masitinib), but the
safety profile is markedly enhanced. In a recent study, side‐
effects were reduced compared to either glucocorticoids or
ciclosporin even when the medication was administered
long term. Vomiting and diarrhea were the most frequent
side‐effects reported but were typically transient and self‐
limiting and did not require additional therapy or withdrawal of medication. Minimal changes were noted on
bloodwork and urinalysis, with values remaining typically
within the normal range. Decrease in white blood cells was
noted in some patients, along with increased cholesterol
and lipase in others; however, n
­ either fell outside a normal
reference range. Efficacy for control of pruritus associated
with atopic dermatitis is considered excellent in most dogs.
Dosing is recommended at 0.4–0.6 mg/kg PO q12h for
the first two weeks, and then q24h long term. Increase in
pruritus is commonly noted as the frequency of administration is reduced to once daily; however, care should be
taken to not administer the dose twice daily longer than
the recommended two weeks because of increased risk
for concerning, long‐term side‐effects. The increase in
pruritus is likely because the drug has a rather short
serum half‐life and dividing the once‐a‐day dose to
twice‐a‐day administration may help control the pruritus flare in some patients. Oclacitinib has a very rapid
onset, often markedly decreasing pruritus within the
first one to two doses. It has not been extensively evaluated in cats with allergic skin disease and its use in this
species is not currently recommended.
Lokivetmab

Lokivetmab (Cytopoint, Zoetis)is the first anti-IL31 monoclonal antibody (mAB) licensed for the treatment of allergic
and atopic dermatitis in dogs. The injection is administered
subcutaneously at a minimum dose of 2 mg/kg under the
direction of the veterinarian. It can provide efficacy within

24 hours and can provide therapy for an average of 4–8
weeks, at which time it may be repeated. This therapy is
considered to be safe and is intended for both short- and
long-term use. Side effects are minimal; vomiting, diarrhea,
injection site discomfort, and lethargy are most commonly
reported and tend to be self-limiting in nature. It may be
used in dogs of any age, including those with concomitant
diseases. There are no drug-drug interactions reported
thereby adding to Cytopoint’s robust safety profile. As this
is a caninized mAB, it should only be administered in dogs.
Miscellaneous Therapies

Many additional therapeutic interventions have been
investigated for controlling pruritus associated with
atopic dermatitis in the dog. There is some evidence
to support administration of recombinant interferons
(either recombinant feline INF‐omega or recombinant
canine INF‐gamma); these injections have shown moderate efficacy and a good safety profile in several allergic
dogs. However, products are not necessarily available
worldwide. Other therapies such as azathioprine, various
cyclooxygenase/cyclooxygenase‐lipoxygenase
inhibitors, and pentoxifylline have been evaluated but have not
shown appreciable efficacy in atopic dogs.
Allergen‐Specific Immunotherapy
As opposed to addressing strictly the clinical signs associated with atopic dermatitis, allergen‐specific immunotherapy aims to address the underlying immunologic
dysregulation which is part of the disease pathogenesis.
Although the exact mechanism of action is uncertain,
successful therapy may lead to a more “normalized”
immunologic response to allergen exposure. This was
documented in one study where dogs that responded
favorably to therapy showed increases in less inflammatory cytokines (IL‐10) and regulatory T cells.
Allergen‐specific immunotherapy is a “cocktail” of
extracts of various environmental allergens based on the
results of allergen testing (see above). Although no well‐
controlled clinical studies have established an ideal treatment protocol, formulation, or administration schedule
for immunotherapy, benefits do appear to be noted in
some dogs and cats with atopic dermatitis. Efficacy,
however, does appear to be less when compared to other
options (e.g., glucocorticoids, ciclosporin, oclacitinib).
Based on anecdotal reports, approximately 50–75% of
dogs and cats with atopic dermatitis show beneficial
results with immunotherapy administration. As the therapy aims at changing the underlying immune response,
results may take several months to be apparent. Clinical
improvements may initially be seen within the first 3–6
months but maximal benefits may not be noted until
12–18 months. Most patients require the addition of

1411

VetBooks.ir

1412

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

concurrent antipruritic pharmacotherapy during the
induction of immunotherapy.
Two formulations currently exist for immunotherapy:
subcutaneous injections and sublingual/oral drops.
Injections have been available much longer than the oral
formulation and so we have much more information
regarding their use. Although they are very safe, side‐
effects may include injection site pruritus, angioedema, or
anaphylaxis in a small percentage of patients. Anecdotally,
these effects may be more common in toy‐breed and very
small patients. They are generally well tolerated by cats.
Sublingual immunotherapy is a newer option; it is a needle‐free way to administer the formulated allergen “cocktail” which may improve client c­ ompliance. Although a set
protocol has yet to be developed, sublingual immunotherapy is typically administered more frequently (e.g., 1–3
times daily) compared to its injectable counterpart (e.g.,
q1–3 weeks long term). Although less information is
available for the sublingual formulation, trends appear to
follow what is seen for immunotherapy injections with
regard to time to improvement and percentage of animals
experiencing clinical benefit.
There are alternative options for immunotherapy
which have been developed more recently. Regional
immunotherapy and more generalized formulations
eliminate the need for allergen testing prior to formulation. How these less specific options compare to injectable or sublingual allergen‐specific immunotherapy has
yet to be determined.

­Prognosis
Although there is no cure for atopic dermatitis in the dog
or cat, the long‐term prognosis is considered to be good.
Most patients, however, require life‐long therapy for the
disease and, even with generally good control, flares may
periodically occur, necessitating additional therapeutic
intervention.

­Conclusion
Atopic dermatitis can be extremely frustrating to manage for the practitioner and owner alike. That being said,
thorough client education efforts can markedly enhance
compliance and, therefore, results long term. It is important to let clients know from the beginning that this
is a disease which can be managed but never cured.
Additionally, even with excellent control overall, flares
may periodically occur and the animal may still be considered more pruritic than a normal patient. Although
we strive for perfection, it is rarely achieved in a dog or
cat with atopic dermatitis. Goals for the patient should
be to improve their comfort (e.g., reduction of pruritus,
decreased frequency of secondary infections) by approximately 80–90% for approximately 80–90% of the time.
This may require a combination of therapeutic interventions including bathing/topical therapy along with
immunotherapy or various medications. Every patient
with atopic dermatitis is different; specific therapy needs
to be tailored to the individual based on both patient and
client feasibility. Having a client “onboard” with a multimodal approach to atopic dermatitis is imperative for
successful management.
Additionally, it is important to remember that rarely
does a therapy “stop working” for managing the disease.
For example, a dog has been doing fairly well on allergen‐specific immunotherapy injections for several
months/years and all of a sudden develops moderate to
severe pruritus. Prior to jumping to repeating allergen
testing/reformulating immunotherapy or abandoning
immunotherapy altogether for alternative medications,
secondary flare factors such as infections and parasites
(particularly fleas and Sarcoptes) should be investigated
and addressed appropriately. In endemic areas, all
patients should be treated year‐round with adulticide
flea prevention at least every 30 days to minimize the
chance of flea infestation leading to an increase in pruritus, thereby exacerbating atopic dermatitis.

­Further Reading
Favrot C, Steffan J, Seewald W, et al. A prospective study on
the clinical features of chronic canine atopic dermatitis and
its diagnosis. Vet Dermatol 2010; 21(1): 23–31.
Hobi S, Linek M, Marignac G, et al. Clinical characteristics
and causes of pruritus in cats: a multicenter study on
feline hypersensitivity‐associated dermatoses. Vet
Dermatol 2011; 22(5): 406–13.
Olivry T. Is the skin barrier abnormal in dogs with atopic
dermatitis? Vet Immunol Immunopathol 2011; 144: 11–16.

Olivry T, Bizikova P. A systemic review of randomized
controlled trials for prevention or treatment of atopic
dermatitis in dogs: 2008–2011 update. Vet Dermatol
2013; 24(1): 97–117.
Olivry T, DeBoer DJ, Favrot C, et al. for the International
Task Force on Canine Atopic Dermatitis. Treatment of
canine atopic dermatitis: 2010 clinical practice
guidelines from the International Task Force on Canine
Atopic Dermatitis. Vet Dermatol 2010; 21(3): 233–48.

VetBooks.ir

1413

160
Allergic Skin Diseases
Patrick Hensel, Dr. Med.Vet., DACVD
Tierdermatologie, Basel, Switzerland

This chapter includes common allergic skin diseases of
dogs and cats with the exception of atopic dermatitis and
cutaneous adverse food reactions, which are covered in
Chapters 159 and 161, respectively.

­Urticaria and Angioedema
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Immunologic and nonimmunologic mechanisms are
suspected to be involved in the pathogenesis of urticaria
and angioedema, causing degranulation of mast cells or
basophils which results in vascular dilation and recruitment of inflammatory cells. The inflammation remains
limited to the dermis in patients with urticaria, but it
extends to the subcutis with angioedema. While the
immunologic process is mediated by a predominantly
type I or III hypersensitivity reaction (e.g., allergies),
nonimmunologic causes (e.g., heat, cold, stress, chemicals) can also trigger mast cell degranulation (Table 160.1).
A hypersensitivity reaction to an offending substance
may not result in clinical signs at the first exposure, but
will more likely occur with repeated exposures. Repeated
exposures may also potentially result in more severe
reactions.
Epidemiology
Urticaria and angioedema are rare in cats and uncommon in dogs and have been associated with various
­triggering factors as described above.
Signalment
Urticaria and angioedema can occur at any age and affect
male and female animals equally. A specific breed
­predisposition has not been established.

History and Clinical Signs
Urticaria and angioedema typically have an acute onset
(minutes to a few hours). Urticaria is characterized by
erythematous wheals which are small (1–5 cm in diameter) and present in a multifocal to coalescing pattern
(Figure 160.1). They are transient and normally fade
within 24 hours but new lesions form as long as the animal remains exposed to the triggering factor. Angioedema
presents as a locally extensive and ill‐defined swelling of
the face and ventral neck due to edema in the deep
­dermis and subcutaneous tissue (Figure 160.2). In severe
cases, serum may leak through the skin. Very rarely and
only in severe cases, fever, lethargy, and anorexia may be
present. Pruritus may or may not accompany urticaria
and angioedema.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is based on the patient’s history, clinical
presentation, behavior of the skin lesions, diascopy
(blanching) and, if necessary, histopathology. Identifying
any triggering factor should be a priority. For this reason,
a thorough patient history, including vaccination and any
drug exposure, should be recorded. Pyoderma and vasculitis are differential diagnoses consistent with urticaria,
but the lesions of those diseases will not blanch on
diascopy. Mast cell tumor, cutaneous lymphoma, and
­
amyloidosis should also be considered as differential diagnoses for urticarial lesions. Differential diagnoses consistent with angioedema are cutaneous lymphoma, juvenile
cellulitis, mast cell tumor, and infectious cellulitis.
Therapy
The triggering cause should be identified and eliminated
to evade symptomatic therapy and prevent recurrences;

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1414

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

Table 160.1 Possible factors for triggering urticaria
and angioedema in dogs and cats
Trigger

Remarks

Foods
Drugs

Penicillin, ampicillin, cephalexin,
tetracycline, vitamin K, propylthiouracil,
amitraz, ivermectin, moxidectin,
vincristine, azathioprine

Vaccines

Panleukopenia, leptospirosis, distemper‐
hepatitis, rabies, feline leukemia

Insect bites/stings Bee, hornet, mosquito, black fly, spider, ant
Atopy

Pollen, mold, dust mite

Blood transfusions
Plants

Nettle, buttercup

Intestinal parasites Ascarids, hookworms, tapeworms
Infections

Staphylococcal pyoderma, canine
distemper

Sunlight
Excessive heat and
cold
Estrus
Dermatographism
Psychogenic
factors
Vasculitis

Figure 160.2 Three‐year‐old female spayed mastiff with facial
angioedema.

however, this may be challenging and not always
­achievable. In persistent or severe cases, symptomatic
therapy is necessary. Epinephrine (0.1–0.5 mL of a 1:1000
solution SC or IM) combined with injectable glucocorticoids and/or antihistamines may be needed for severe
cases. For persistent cases of urticaria, oral glucocorticoids (e.g., prednisone/prednisolone at 2 mg/kg/day PO)
as well as oral antihistamines (e.g diphenhydramine,
hydroxyzine, each at 2.0 mg/kg twice daily) are given. In
mild cases, antihistamines are typically used as sole
therapy.
Prognosis
If the cause of the disease can be identified and exposure
eliminated, the prognosis is considered good.

­Allergic Contact Dermatitis
Etiology/Pathophysiology

Figure 160.1 Five‐year‐old male neutered mixed‐breed dog with
multifocal wheals on lateral trunk and hind legs.

Allergic contact dermatitis is a type IV hypersensitivity
reaction associated with a cell‐mediated allergic response
to haptens, which are small reactive lipid‐soluble molecules. Although an overlap between irritant and allergic
contact dermatitis has been reported in regard to
cytokine profile and inflammatory cell activation, allergen‐specific CD4+ T cells (CCR10+) and some
chemokines (e.g., IP‐10) seem to be expressed exclusively

VetBooks.ir

160 Allergic Skin Diseases

in allergic contact dermatitis, which may represent differences in regulatory mechanisms.
Epidemiology
A wide range of allergens, such as various plants (e.g.,
dandelion, Asian jasmine, cedar mulch), cement, plastic
toys and bowls, household cleaners, and topical drugs
(e.g., neomycin, propylene glycol), have the potential to
trigger contact hypersensitivity. An overlap of contact
hypersensitivity with atopic dermatitis (AD) may also
exist, since it is suspected that about 20% of dogs with
contact hypersensitivity also suffer from AD.
Signalment
Allergic contact dermatitis is considered to be a rare pruritic condition and has no age or gender predisposition.
However, some short‐haired breeds such as the boxer, pit
bull, dachshund, and Boston terrier appear to be affected
more frequently.
History and Clinical Signs
Skin lesions typically occur on sites which are sparsely
haired and directly exposed to allergens such as the ventral aspects of the neck, chest, abdomen, tail, digital
spaces, muzzle, concave aspects of the pinnae, and scrotum (Figure 160.3). Lesions may also develop in haired

areas if the sensitizer is in liquid, powder or aerosol form.
The skin lesions are characterized by macules, papules,
and erythema which may progress in chronic cases and
become lichenified, hyperpigmented, and alopecic.
Secondary bacterial and yeast infections are commonly
present. Excoriations may also occur due to the associated pruritus. As with other hypersensitivity reactions,
previous allergen exposure is necessary for the development of sensitization and resultant clinical signs.
Diagnosis
Allergic contact hypersensitivity is diagnosed based on the
patient’s history, physical examination findings, resolution
of clinical signs after elimination of the offending allergen,
provocation of skin lesions with reexposure, and patch
testing. The most common differential diagnoses associated with contact hypersensitivity are cutaneous adverse
food reaction, atopic dermatitis, scabies, pyoderma,
Malassezia dermatitis, and insect bite hypersensitivity.
Therapy
The primary goal should be to prevent further exposure
to the offending allergen. Symptomatic therapy with glucocorticoids (e.g., prednisone/prednisolone at 0.5–1 mg/
kg PO daily) may be attempted where elimination is not
feasible; however, response to glucocorticoids occasionally fails. Pentoxifylline (10–30 mg/kg PO 2–3 times
daily) has shown some beneficial effect for long‐term
management and prophylaxis. Patients with a poor
response to glucocorticoids may benefit from treatment
with ciclosporin (5 mg/kg PO daily).
Prognosis
Prognosis is considered good if the allergen can be eliminated from the patient’s environment and good clinical
response can be achieved with immunomodulating drugs.

­Flea Allergy Dermatitis
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Several allergens responsible for flea allergy dermatitis
(FAD) in dogs and cats have been identified in flea saliva.
So far, one major allergen, a protein called Ctef1 from the
cat flea Ctenocephalides felis, has been associated with
flea allergy in dogs.
Figure 160.3 Severe contact dermatitis to a plant fertilizer in a 5‐
year‐old golden retriever. Erythema, edema, serosanguinous to
purulent exudate, and brownish crusts were present on the
ventral abdomen and inner thighs. Source: Courtesy of Sheila
Torres.

Epidemiology
The prevalence of FAD varies greatly depending on the
climate and geographic location, but it is the most

1415

VetBooks.ir

1416

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

common hypersensitivity in dogs and cats in flea‐
­
endemic areas. Fleas can be a perennial problem in subtropical and tropical climate zones, seasonal in more
temperate climate zones, and practically nonexistent in
arid, high elevation, or cold climates. Even if fleas are
considered to be absent from a particular area, there is a
possibility that animal movement or contact may bring
fleas into the area.
Signalment
Any dog and cat in a flea‐endemic area can become allergic to fleas but no breed or sex predilection has been
identified. Although FAD can develop at any age, dogs
predisposed to FAD will generally develop clinical signs
by 5 years of age.
History and Clinical Signs
The most typical clinical sign associated with fleas is
pruritus, but FAD must be differentiated from flea infestation. Clinical signs associated with flea infestation are
variable. The pruritus is generally intermittent and an
increased number of fleas is common.
The typical predilection sites for FAD in dogs are the
lumbosacral area, tail base, and caudomedial thighs, and
minimal flea burden is typical. In cats, skin lesions are
commonly found on the caudodorsal area, as in dogs, but
can also be present on the head and neck. Many dogs and
cats suffering from FAD may have concurrent atopic dermatitis and/or cutaneous adverse food reaction which
may complicate the clinical presentation and diagnosis.
The most common skin lesions seen in dogs with FAD
are erythematous papules and in more severe and
chronic cases, self‐induced alopecia, lichenification, and
seborrhea on the predilection sites (Figure 160.4).
In cats, skin lesions range from miliary dermatitis
(crusted papules) to excoriations to self‐induced alopecia. Cats also often show skin lesions consistent with
eosinophilic granuloma, especially indolent ulcers on the
upper lips which can be found in up to 60% of flea‐allergic cats (Figure 160.5).

Figure 160.4 Five‐year‐old female spayed mixed‐breed dog with
flea allergy dermatitis exhibiting alopecia, erythema, excoriations,
and seborrhea along the caudodorsal aspects of the trunk, tail,
and hindlegs.

Diagnosis
Any pruritic skin disease should be considered as a
potential differential diagnosis for FAD and mainly
includes other ectoparasitic disorders, microbial skin
infections, or other hypersensitivities. Diagnosis is based
on history, clinical signs, and response to therapy. The
presence of fleas is not an adequate indicator of FAD and
allergy skin testing with flea allergen can show false‐­
negative results. Nevertheless, flea combing should be
performed for direct identification of fleas or flea feces.

Figure 160.5 An indolent ulcer in a 4‐year‐old female spayed
domestic shorthair cat with flea allergy dermatitis.

VetBooks.ir

160 Allergic Skin Diseases

Therapy
The most effective treatment for animals with FAD is
avoiding exposure to fleas combined with aggressive flea
control. Veterinarians should be aware that none of the
current flea preventives have an effective repellent effect.
Since fleas in the pupal stage can survive up to 174 days
in the environment, it is not unusual for the response to
effective flea prevention to take a couple of months. For
this reason, it is strongly recommended to maintain regular application of flea products in endemic areas. Fast‐
acting systemic adulticides are recommended over
topically applied flea preventives because they reduce
the contact time between the flea and the animal, resulting in faster reduction of irritation and pruritus. Flea
preventives with a rapid adulticidal effect act through
activation of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors or inhibition of gamma‐aminobutyric acid (GABA)‐gated chloride channels. Such products are available as oral tablets
and topical solutions, and contain either nitenpyram,
spinosad, or an isoxazoline (e.g., fluralaner, sarolaner,
afoxolaner, lotilaner). Cats are very sensitive to
permethrin so parasiticidals containing this product
­
should be avoided in this species.
Despite strict flea prevention and depending on the
severity of FAD, dogs and cats may develop episodes of

increased pruritus after exposure to a flea. For the symptomatic therapy of pruritus, antiinflammatory dosages of
oral glucocorticoids (e.g., prednisone/prednisolone at
0.5–1 mg/kg PO daily) and/or topical therapy (e.g., hydrocortisone aceponate spray [Cortavance®,Virbac], available
only in Canada and Europe, or triamcinolone acetonide
topical spray [Genesis®, Virbac]) may provide sufficient
relief. In dogs, oclacitinib (Apoquel, Zoetis) can be
administered at a dose of 0.4-0.6 mg/kg PO BID for up to
2 weeks, then once daily thereafter to alleviate pruritus
associated with FAD. Lokivetmab (Cytopoint, Zoetis) is
now licensed for the treatment of allergic dermatitis in
dogs and, thus, could also be considered as an option for
treating pruritus. A minimum dose of 2 mg/kg is administered SC and can be repeated every 4 to 8 weeks as
needed. Other important measures include keeping the
affected animal indoors and treating all in‐contact pets.
Prognosis
Canine and feline FAD tends to worsen with age but with
strict flea control, control of other underlying hypersensitivities and other measures which may help to reduce
exposure to fleas, the disease can be well controlled.

­Further Reading
Bruet V, Bourdeau PJ, Roussel A, Imparato L. Desfontis
JC. Characterization of pruritus in canine atopic
dermatitis, flea bite hypersensitivity and flea infestation
and its role in diagnosis. Vet Dermatol 2012; 23(6):
487–93.
Dryden MW, Ryan WG, Bell M, Rumschlag AJ, Young LM,
Snyder DE. Assessment of owner‐administered monthly
treatments with oral spinosad or topical spot‐on
fipronil/(S)‐methoprene in controlling fleas and

associated pruritus in dogs. Vet Parasitol 2013; 191(3‐4):
340–6.
Koch SN, Torres SMF, Plumb DC. Canine and Feline
Dermatology Drug Handbook. Ames, IA: Wiley‐
Blackwell, 2012.
Miller WH, Griffin CE, Campbell KL. Hypersensitivity
disorders. In: Miller WH, Griffin CE, Campbell KL, eds.
Muller and Kirk’s Small Animal Dermatology, 7th edn.
St Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2013, pp. 363–41.

1417

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1419

161
Cutaneous Adverse Food Reactions
Ralf S. Mueller, Dr. Med.Vet., DACVD, FANZCVSc
Centre for Clinical Veterinary Medicine, Ludwig‐Maximilians‐University of Munich, Munich, Germany

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Cutaneous adverse food reactions include any skin reactions that are reproducible. Most commonly seen is pruritus, but recurrent pyoderma or edema have also been
reported. Food allergy is an immunologically mediated
reaction caused by food. Type I hypersensitivity mediated by food‐specific IgE antibodies is the most common
reaction, but delayed type II (T cell mediated) and type
III (where food‐specific antibodies and food antigens
form complexes) hypersensitivities may also occur.
In veterinary practice, the immunologic basis of food
reactions is rarely documented. Thus, technically, the commonly used term “food allergy” is inappropriate, because
adverse food reactions may also be nonimmunologically
induced (and are then called food intolerances). Food intolerance may be pharmacologic, such as those mediated by
pharmacologically active ingredients of the diet (e.g., histamine), toxic (caused by toxins in the food commonly produced by microorganisms in contaminated food stuffs), or
metabolic (ingredients in the food are metabolized in the
patient to a substance causing the reaction). If none of those
mechanisms can be identified, the reaction is idiosyncratic.
However, proving the exact pathogenesis in an individual patient in practice is very difficult. Serum IgE testing for food‐specific antibodies in normal dogs without
clinical problems is characterized by a high number of
false‐positive reactions and reliable tests for other types
of adverse food reactions are lacking. Thus, in most cases
the diagnosis of adverse food reaction is made by
response to an elimination diet and deterioration on
rechallenge, as described below.
In human medicine, food allergens are typically glycoproteins with molecular weights between 10 and 70 kDa
and some typical allergens come from nuts, shellfish,
milk, and eggs. In dogs, the most commonly identified
food antigens are beef, dairy products, chicken, soy, and

wheat – ingredients that are most commonly present in
commercial dog foods (Table 161.1). In the cat, beef,
dairy, fish, and chicken are the most common reported
offending antigens (see Table 161.1).
To what degree related proteins can cause clinical
problems via cross‐reactivity is not clear. One study evaluating individual rechallenges in dogs with adverse food
reactions could not demonstrate evidence of cross‐­
reactivity between, for example, beef and cow’s milk.
However, a case report of a dog with oral allergy syndrome described cross‐reactivity with tomato and cedar
pollen. A further in vitro study identified bovine IgG as a
major antigen in dogs and a potential source of cross‐
reactivity between beef, cow’s milk and potentially mutton (as there is a high homology between bovine and
ovine IgG), but whether this is clinically relevant has not
been demonstrated convincingly at this point.

­History and Clinical Signs
Adverse food reaction is characterized in most cases by a
pruritic and nonseasonal dermatitis. The face, feet, ventrum, and perianal area are often affected in the dog
(Figure 161.1). Otitis externa is common and may be the
only presenting sign in some dogs (Figure 161.2).
The skin may be erythematous; self‐trauma quickly
leads to alopecia and excoriation and in chronic cases
lichenification of affected skin (Figure 161.3).
Papules, pustules, and oily and scaly skin may be due to
common secondary infections with bacteria and/or yeast
organisms. Concurrent gastrointestinal signs are seen in
up to 25% of affected dogs. Beyond vomiting and diarrhea, gastrointestinal signs may include frequent defecation, borborygmi and flatulence, which may in some
dogs be the only noncutaneous clinical signs. Recurrent
bacterial infection and vasculitis were also reported in

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1420

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

Table 161.1 Ingredients reported to cause adverse food reaction
(AFR) in dogs and cats (in order of reported incidence)
Ingredients causing
canine AFRs

Ingredients causing feline
AFRs

Beef
Dairy
Chicken
Wheat
Egg
Soy
Lamb
Pork
Fish
Corn
Turkey
Rice
Duck

Beef
Dairy
Fish
Chicken
Corn
Lamb
Wheat
Egg

Figure 161.2 Erythematous otitis externa in an 8‐year‐old, female
spayed golden retriever with adverse food reaction.

Figure 161.1 Periocular lichenification, crusting, and
hyperpigmentation in a 15‐year‐old, female mixed‐breed dog with
adverse food reaction.

some dogs. In one dog, erythema multiforme was apparently triggered by an adverse food reaction. Concurrent
­allergic diseases such as atopic dermatitis due to environmental allergens or flea bite hypersensitivity are seen
in 20–75% of patients, depending on the study. Gender
­predispositions have not been reported.
As adverse food reaction and nonseasonal environmentally induced atopic dermatitis have identical cutaneous signs and are often present concurrently, breeds
seemingly overrepresented include West Highland white
terriers, Labrador and golden retrievers, American
cocker and English springer spaniels, Chinese shar‐peis,

Figure 161.3 Ventral lichenification, ulceration, and crusting in a
7‐year‐old, male castrated schnauzer with adverse food reaction.

and miniature schnauzers. In a recent study from
Switzerland, West Highland white terriers, Rhodesian
ridgebacks, boxers, and pugs were predisposed.
In cats, all cutaneous reaction patterns associated with
flea allergy or environmental allergy can also be due to
an adverse food reaction. Food‐induced miliary dermatitis, noninflammatory alopecia, eosinophilic granuloma,
and head and neck pruritus have all been reported.

VetBooks.ir

161 Cutaneous Adverse Food Reactions

­Diagnosis
Although serum testing for food allergen‐specific IgE is
offered in many countries, there is no evidence that this
test has any value in the diagnosis of adverse food
­reactions. In all previous publications, numerous false‐
positive and false‐negative reactions were detected, when
comparing test results with clinical rechallenges. In one
recent study, false‐negative reactions were less likely.
However, at this time there is unanimous agreement
amongst dermatologists worldwide that the only reliable
way to diagnose an adverse food reaction is an elimination diet with food stuffs previously not fed to the patient.
Choice of Elimination Diet
In dogs, one protein source and one carbohydrate source
not previously fed will be used exclusively; in cats, feeding only the protein source increases palatibility and
compliance. Thus, it is important to obtain a reliable and
detailed feeding history for the patient as well as the
ingredient lists of commercial foods fed in the past.
Ideally, the food should be home‐cooked to assure that
only the selected food stuffs are used. This is even more
important after evidence has been published that many
dog foods may include food sources not listed on the
label. However, convincing owners to cook for their pets
for several weeks may be more difficult nowadays than it
used to be half a century ago. In addition, home‐cooked
diets are rarely balanced, which typically does not lead to
clinical problems in adult dogs on a deficient diet for
only a short time such as a month or two. However, if
home‐cooked diets are fed for extended time periods or
if the patient is a young dog or cat still growing, care
must be taken to seek advice from a nutritionist and
­balance the diet to avoid nutritional deficiencies.
To what degree cross‐reactivities between related
allergens (for example, beef and mutton or cow’s milk)
are clinically relevant in the dog and cat is currently
unclear. One study showed in vitro evidence of reactivity
of most dog sera with specific IgE antibodies against
bovine IgG present in cow’s milk and lamb and beef
extract. Studies evaluating clinical cross‐reactivity are
rare and so far have not confirmed those findings. The
author prefers to use food sources removed as far as possible from the previously fed antigens; for example, animals fed predominantly meat such as beef, mutton or
pork will receive poultry proteins such as duck or goose
and pets on a predominantly chicken‐based food will be
recommended goat, buffalo or reindeer.
If owners cannot be convinced to cook for their pets,
commercial diets with selected protein and carbohydrate
sources are sold by many companies. Furthermore,
­hydrolyzed diets are also available. These diets contain
hydrolyzed proteins and their small sizes make

cross‐linking of IgE on the surface of inflammatory cells
less likely, and thus these diets can be considered truly
“hypoallergenic.” Hydrolyzed diets and selected protein
diets do not lead to remission in all animals with an adverse
food reaction and thus are the second best option for diagnosing the condition. The exact reason for this decreased
efficacy is not known at this time, but may relate to the
presence of a concurrent allergic condition, cross‐­
reactivities or adverse food reactions that are not immune
mediated in the first place. However, these diets are often
ideally suited for long‐term maintenance, once the diagnosis is made and patients have been shown to tolerate them.
If it is not possible for owners to feed a previously
unfed protein or carbohydrate source, either because
what is available is simply too costly (which may be relevant for owners of large dogs) or because dogs or cats
have been fed a wide variety of foods in the past, then it
is sensible to choose the food sources the animals have
seen the least or only in the more distant past, when clinical signs were not present. In one Dutch study of dogs
with an adverse food reaction being fed three commercial protein diets, no dog responded to all of the diets but
almost all dogs responded to at least one of them. Thus,
performing two or three commercial diet trials in dogs
with a suspected adverse food reaction may be useful.
Duration and Execution of the Diet
The ideal duration of an elimination diet is controversial.
In a study evaluating the duration until clinical remission
in 51 dogs with adverse food reaction, less than a quarter
of the dogs responded within the first three weeks, a
­further half after 4–6 weeks, 10 dogs after 7–8 weeks,
and three dogs after 9–10 weeks. However, although the
time to complete remission can be extended, most dogs
will start improving within the first 6–8 weeks and if a
patient shows no clinical improvement on an appropriate elimination diet within that time, the author considers adverse food reaction ruled out. One has to keep in
mind that the longer the trial duration, the higher the
likelihood for lack of owner compliance.
In most patients, a gradual switch from the original diet to
the elimination diet over a few days will help with compliance as well as gastrointestinal complications, particularly
in finicky dogs and in cats. In dogs, owners are the limiting
factor for most unsuccessful diet trials. However, cats often
prove more difficult and due to the threat of hepatic lipidosis after several days of refusing to accept the diet, particularly in obese cats, it is not uncommon to try a number of
feeding options before a suitable diet is identified.
The most important detail to relate to the owners is
the need for maximal compliance. Even small amounts of
food antigens fed infrequently can trigger pruritus and
thus mask improvement, so flavored medications or
treats such as rawhide, pig’s ears, and others must be

1421

VetBooks.ir

1422

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

avoided during the time of the diet. In particular, dog
owners used to giving treats will often only be able to
complete a diet trial if suitable alternatives are agreed on
prior to starting the diet. For example, jerky of the meat
used for the elimination diet can be home‐made or
acquired in bigger pet stores as chews or treats. Dogs
with a high affinity for scavenging need to be kept on the
leash and cats with outdoor access are ideally kept
indoors. If those restraints are not possible for whatever
reason, then an elimination diet trial may still be
attempted but the limitation of these more relaxed elimination diets is that a lack of improvement does not rule
out adverse food reaction in that patient, although some
patients may still improve when the intake of the offending allergen is limited at least to some degree.
Interpretation of the Outcome
of an Elimination Diet
If a reevaluation after 6–8 weeks shows no improvement
on an appropriate elimination diet and a secondary
infection masking the improvement is not present, then
adverse food reaction is ruled out and the diet trial does
not need to be extended. If, however, there is some
improvement seen, then in some patients it may be
necessary to continue the trial for up to 12 weeks.
­
Improvement may be due to the elimination diet, concurrent treatments, seasonal changes or other factors, so
a rechallenge with the old diet is absolutely necessary for
the diagnosis (although some owners will need some
convincing) and leads to deterioration of clinical signs
within a few days. If after two weeks on the previous diet
there is no deterioration of clinical signs, adverse food
reaction is ruled out and improvement was due to other
factors. As soon as a deterioration is detected, the elimination diet is fed again and if clinical signs improve again
(typically much faster than at the initial introduction of
the elimination diet), the diagnosis is confirmed.
Subsequently, there are three choices for the client. The
easiest is to stay on the elimination diet long term. However,
ideally, one food source after another is i­ntroduced again
gradually for a few days to weeks, depending on the origi-

nal rechallenge. If a patient deteriorated after two days on
the old diet, then sequential rechallenges for four days
each should be sufficient. If the original rechallenge led to
deterioration after one week, then sequential rechallenges
should probably be performed for two weeks each. This
way, offending allergens can be identified and this knowledge permits greater flexibility in feeding, although it
requires more effort. And lastly, if a home‐cooked diet was
used for the diagnosis, a commercial diet can be tried
based on the feeding history of the patient.

­Therapy
Ideally, avoidance of the offending food antigens is the
best way to treat adverse food reactions in dogs and cats.
If home cooking is used for long‐term management, care
should be taken to create a well‐balanced diet and advice
from a veterinary nutritionist may be useful.
However, if avoidance is not possible or if flares due to
inadvertent ingestion of antigens are encountered, medical treatment with antiinflammatory drugs also used for
environmental atopic dermatitis may be attempted.
­
Glucocorticoids and ciclosporin are efficacious options
for dogs and cats suffering from cutaneous adverse food
reactions, although anecdotal evidence indicates that
higher doses are needed to achieve remission than with
atopic dermatitis due to environmental allergens.
Oclacitinib (Apoquel; Zoetis) and lokivetmab (Cytopoint;
Zoetis) are also licensed for the treatment of allergic dermatitis in dogs and thus are excellent, alternative options
for controlling pruritus in canine patients with cutaneous adverse food reaction.

­Prognosis
Once the diagnosis is established and offending allergens
are identified, the prognosis is excellent, although some
rare dogs and cats will develop a reaction against the new
food antigens with time and will have to undergo a
repeated change in their diet.

­Further Reading
Bethlehem S, Bexley J, Mueller RS. Patch testing and
allergen‐specific serum IgE and IgG antibodies in the
diagnosis of canine adverse food reactions. Vet
Immunol Immunopathol 2012; 145(3–4): 582–9.
Olivry T, Bizikova P. A systematic review of the evidence of
reduced allergenicity and clinical benefit of food
hydrolysates in dogs with cutaneous adverse food
reactions. Vet Dermatol 2010; 21(1): 32–41.
Picco F, Zini E, Nett C, et al. A prospective study on
canine atopic dermatitis and food‐induced

allergic dermatitis in Switzerland. Vet Dermatol
2008; 19(3): 150–5.
Ricci R, Granato A, Vascellari M, et al. Identification of
undeclared sources of animal origin in canine dry foods
used in dietary elimination trials. J Anim Physiol Anim
Nutr 2013; 97(s1): 32–8.
Roudebush P. Ingredients and foods associated with
adverse reactions in dogs and cats. Vet Dermatology
2013; 24(2): 293–4.

VetBooks.ir

1423

162
Autoimmune and Immune‐Mediated Skin Diseases
Nicole A. Heinrich, DVM, DACVD
McKeever Dermatology Clinics, Eden Prairie, MN, USA

­Canine Familial Dermatomyositis
Dermatomyositis (DM) is a hereditary, ischemic dermatopathy and myopathy that occurs most commonly in
collies, Shetland sheepdogs, Beauceron shepherds,
Belgian tervurens, and Portuguese water dogs. Affected
dogs generally develop lesions when they are less than
6 months of age, and either sex can be affected.
Dermatomyositis is characterized by nonpruritic
­alopecia, erythema, scaling, and mild crusting of the face,
ears, distal limbs, digits, tail, and bony prominences
(Figure 162.1). Additionally, claws may slough and fragment and ulceration may be rarely present in the oral
cavity. Skin lesions may vary in severity depending on the
individual. The presence and degree of myositis also vary.
Clinical signs of myositis include regurgitation associated with megaesophagus, a high‐stepping stiff gait, and
atrophy of the masticatory muscles and distal limbs.
The diagnosis of DM is made through history, physical
examination, and skin biopsy. Punch biopsies should be
taken from the center of an alopecic area of skin. Crusted
lesions can also be biopsied. The skin should not be
scrubbed or clipped prior to procuring the biopsy. Care
should be taken to include only abnormal skin in the
biopsy. Histopathology will feature changes characteristic of ischemic dermatopathy.
Benign neglect may be an appropriate treatment
approach for minimally affected patients. Avoidance of
trauma to bony prominences and avoidance of prolonged
sun exposure may also be beneficial. Pentoxifylline,
prednisone, vitamin E, omega‐3 fatty acids, tetracycline
with niacinamide, and topical tacrolimus are therapies
that may be used either alone or in combination depending on patient response (Table 162.1).
Complications can include secondary pyoderma for
those dogs with more significant skin lesions and ­aspiration
pneumonia for those with megaesophagus. Amyloidosis

may rarely occur in chronically affected dogs. Minimally
affected dogs may experience spontaneous resolution of
skin lesions while other dogs may require lifelong therapy.

­Erythema Multiforme
Erythema multiforme (EM) is an inflammatory cutaneous reaction pattern of multifactorial etiology, and dogs
and cats of any age, breed or sex may be affected. It is
characterized by rarely pruritic, sometimes painful, erythematous macules or papules that coalesce and eventually form a clear center and acquire an annular to
arciform shape. Additional skin lesions may include
plaques, vesicles and bullae, ulcers, and urticaria. Classic
target lesions are present in only about one‐third of
cases. The axillae, groin, mucocutaneous junctions,
­pinnae, and footpads are most frequently affected. Oral
ulceration may be present in some cases. Erythema
multiforme can be classified into various categories
­
based upon severity; however, such classifications are
beyond the scope of this chapter.
The disease is diagnosed based on history, physical
examination, and skin biopsy findings. Punch biopsies
should be taken from the center of an erythematous area
of skin. The clinician should biopsy affected skin and avoid
ulcerated areas as ulcerated skin may yield a nondiagnostic sample. The skin should not be scrubbed or clipped
prior to procuring the biopsy. Care should be taken to
include only abnormal skin in the biopsy. Histopathology
reveals apoptosis of keratinocytes at ­various levels of the
epidermis combined with lymphocyte satellitosis.
Erythema multiforme has a variable appearance, and
therefore many potential clinical differentials. Some
­differential diagnoses include systemic lupus erythematosus, urticaria, superficial pyoderma, dermatophytosis,
demodicosis, bullous autoimmune disease, vasculitis

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

VetBooks.ir

1424

Figure 162.1 Less than 1‐year‐old, male, intact collie with
nonpruritic alopecia associated with dermatomyositis.

and necrotizing dermatoses, superficial necrolytic dermatitis, and zinc‐responsive dermatosis.
The identification and removal of the possible underlying cause are important in the management of EM;
however, some cases are idiopathic. Triggering causes
may include drugs, bacterial infections, Pneumocystis
pneumonia, parvovirus, food, neoplasia or possibly herpesvirus. Mildly affected individuals may experience
resolution of disease without additional therapy. Other
patients may need immunosuppressive therapy such as
glucocorticoids, azathioprine, ciclosporin, and/or intravenous immunoglobulin therapy (IVIG) (see Table 162.1).
Complications can include secondary pyoderma. The
prognosis depends on the severity of the lesions and
response to therapy.

­Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis
Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) is a severe vesiculobullous disorder affecting the skin and oral mucosa of
dogs and cats. Dogs and cats of any age, sex or breed can
be affected.
Toxic epidermal necrolysis is characterized by generalized erythematous or purpuric patches, and skin ulceration involving more than 30% of the body. Systemic signs
(pyrexia, lethargy, depression, and/or anorexia) typically
accompany the skin lesions.
Toxic epidermal necrolysis is often thought of as a
severe variation of EM although some clinicians consider the two as separate diseases. It is generally differentiated from EM based on the severity of skin lesions and
the percentage of the body that is affected.
The disease is diagnosed based on history, physical
examination, and skin biopsy findings. Punch biopsies

should be taken from an erythematous area of skin adjacent to an ulcer. The clinician should take care to avoid
sampling eroded or ulcerated skin. Ulcerated skin has
less diagnostic value. The skin should not be scrubbed or
clipped prior to procuring the biopsy. Care should be
taken to include only abnormal skin in the biopsy. The
histopathology reveals diffuse necrosis of the epidermis
with minimal dermal inflammation.
Clinical differential diagnoses include first‐degree
burn and toxic shock syndrome.
The identification and removal of a possible underlying cause are important in the management of TEN;
however, many cases are idiopathic. The most common
precipitating factor is drugs. Other less common triggers
include vaccination, neoplasia, infections, and pregnancy. Wound care and general supportive care are critical to attempt to prevent sepsis. The use of glucocorticoids
is controversial but ciclosporin and IVIG have been used
with beneficial results in some cases.
Complications can include severe pyoderma and
­sepsis. The prognosis is guarded.

­Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus
Discoid Lupus Erythematosus
Discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE) is a fairly common
photoaggravated or perhaps even photoinduced, depigmenting autoimmune skin disease. It affects middle‐
aged dogs, and collies, Shetland sheepdogs, German
shepherd dogs, and Siberian huskies are predisposed.
One case of generalized DLE has been reported in a
Chinese crested dog. DLE has rarely been reported
in cats. Sex and age predilections have not been
substantiated.
The disease is characterized by depigmentation and
loss of cobblestone architecture of the nasal planum
(Figure 162.2). Erosions and crusting may also develop.
While the nasal planum is most typically affected, lesions
may also be found extending proximal to the nasal
­planum, around the eyes, around the mouth, on the
­genitals and distal extremities. Oral ulceration may also
be present.
Diagnosis is based on history, physical examination,
exclusion of systemic involvement, and skin biopsy findings. The clinician should select a site of recent depigmentation for punch biopsy. Lesions with severe crusting,
ulceration or scarring should be avoided. The skin should
not be scrubbed or clipped prior to procuring the biopsy.
Care should be taken to include only abnormal skin in
the biopsy. Histopathology reveals lymphocytic interface
dermatitis. Direct immunofluorescence can further
­support the diagnosis.

VetBooks.ir

162 Autoimmune and Immune‐Mediated Skin Diseases

Table 162.1 Immunosuppressive drug therapy
Drug

Dose

Comments

Pentoxifylline

Dogs: 15–25 mg/kg PO q8–12h

May require 8 weeks for maximum benefit

Tetracycline

Dogs >10 kg receive 500 mg PO q8h
Dogs <10 kg receive 250 mg PO q8h

This class of antibiotic combined with niacinamide
may require 3 months for maximum benefit

Doxycycline

Dogs: 5–10 mg/kg PO q12h

Can be used when tetracycline is unavailable.
Use carefully in dogs with liver disease

Minocycline

Dogs: 5–12.5 mg/kg PO q12h

Can be used when tetracycline or doxycycline is
unavailable.
May cause more GI upset than other tetracyclines

Niacinamide

Dogs >10 kg receive 500 mg PO q8–12h
Dogs <10 kg receive 250 mg PO q8–12h

May cause GI upset

Prednisone
Prednisolone
Dexamethasone

Dogs: 1–3 mg/kg PO
Cats: 2–4 mg/kg PO
Dogs: 0.1–0.2 mg/kg PO
Cats: 1.5 mg/average sized cat PO

Triamcinolone
Methylprednisolone

Dogs: 0.3–1 mg/kg PO
Cats: 0.3–1 mg/kg PO
Dogs: 0.8–2 mg/kg PO or 4 mg/10 lb

As a general rule, glucocorticoids should be
administered q24h until the disease is controlled.
Once the disease is controlled, they should be
administered q48h or less. A slightly higher dose
administered q48h tends to have fewer side‐effects
than a daily dose, even if the daily dose is lower

Azathioprine

1.5–2.5 mg/kg PO q24–48h

Dosing q48h reduces side‐effects. Monitor CBC/
chemistry q2 weeks for initial 3–4 months. May
require 2 months for maximum benefit. Do not
give to cats

Ciclosporin

Dogs and cats: 5–10 mg/kg PO q24h

Use the modified CSA formulation. CSA blood
level monitoring is generally not useful when
treating skin disease

Hydroxychloroquine

Dogs: 5 mg/kg PO q24h

Omega 3 fatty acids

Dogs: 180 mg EPA and 120 mg DHA/10 lb
PO q24h

Use as adjunctive therapy. Benefit may not be
noted before 8–12 weeks

Vitamin E

Dogs: 200–800 IU PO q24h

Use as adjunctive therapy

Chlorambucil

Dogs and cats: 0.1–0.2 mg/kg PO
q24–48h

Monitor CBC/chemistry as for azathioprine

Dapsone

Dogs: 1 mg/kg PO q8h

Monitor CBC/chemistry. Do not give to cats

Tacrolimus 0.1%

Apply topically q12h

Betamethasone
valerate 0.1%
Fluocinolone
(Synotic®, Zoetis)

Apply topically q12h
Apply topically q12h

Topical steroids are useful for focal skin lesions.
Dermal atrophy may occur with prolonged use

CBC, complete blood count; CSA, ciclosporin; DHA, docosahexaenoic acid; EPA, eicosapentaenoic acid; GI, gastrointestinal; IU, international
units; PO, by mouth (per os).

Differential diagnoses include systemic lupus erythematosus, pemphigus foliaceus, pemphigus erythematosus, vitiligo, trauma, and Vogt–Koyanagi–Harada‐like
syndrome.
Treatment involves sun avoidance, oral and/or topical
glucocorticoids, topical tacrolimus, niacinamide with
tetracycline, and ciclosporin (see Table 162.1). These
therapies can be used alone or in combination, depending on response to therapy. Complications can include
secondary pyoderma.

Prognosis is generally good because DLE is limited to
the skin. Chronic, untreated lesions may rarely progress
to squamous cell carcinoma.
Exfoliative Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus
Exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus (ECLE) is an
autoimmune disease that affects German shorthaired
pointers. The disease occurs in puppies and young
adults. Sex predilection has not been noted.

1425

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

cleaned prior to sampling with a punch biopsy. Multiple
specimens should be selected from lesions of varying
stages. Histopathology reveals lymphocytic interface
dermatitis with marked hyperkeratosis and apoptotic
­
keratinocytes. Destruction of sebaceous glands may also
be observed.
Clinical differential diagnoses include primary seborrhea, ichthyosis, and sebaceous adenitis.
Glucocorticoids, ciclosporin, and hydroxychloroquine
can temporarily relieve clinical signs (see Table 162.1).
Complications may include secondary pyoderma, yeast
dermatitis, and otitis.
This disease may wax and wane. Dogs eventually succumb to the disease, but treatment can improve quality
of life in some dogs for several months to years.

VetBooks.ir

1426

Vesicular Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus

The disease is characterized by widespread scaling,
depigmentation, alopecia, ulceration and crusting on the
muzzle, pinnae, trunk, and limbs (Figure 162.3). Systemic
abnormalities such as lymphadenopathy, intermittent
pyrexia, joint pain, infertility, hyperglobulinemia, and
thrombocytopenia may also be present. Dogs often
assume a hunched stance.
Diagnosis is achieved with history, physical examination, and skin biopsy. The skin should not be clipped or

Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus (VCLE) is an
autoimmune blistering disease that primarily affects
middle‐aged to older, female Shetland sheepdogs and
collies. The disease generally occurs in the spring and
summer months, and sparsely haired areas of the skin
are most typically affected.
Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus is characterized
by transient vesicles that develop into coalescing ulcers with
serpiginous borders (Figure 162.4). The abdomen, groin,
and axillae are most frequently affected, although lesions
may also occur on the mucocutaneous junctions.
Diagnosis is based on history, physical examination,
and skin biopsy findings. The skin should not be clipped
or cleaned prior to sampling with a punch biopsy.
Vesicles or lesional skin adjacent to a fresh ulcer are ideal
for sampling. Lesions devoid of epithelium have less

Figure 162.3 One‐year‐old German shorthaired pointer with
exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Note the extensive
scaling present on the dorsal muzzle, extending to the periocular
region and forehead. Source: Courtesy of Sheila Torres.

Figure 162.4 Three‐year‐old collie with vesicular cutaneous lupus.
Note the coalescing ulcerative lesions forming a serpiginous
pattern. Source: Courtesy of Sheila Torres.

Figure 162.2 Middle‐aged, male, neutered Siberian husky with
crusting, depigmentation, and loss of cobblestone architecture of
the nasal planum associated with discoid lupus erythematosus.

VetBooks.ir

162 Autoimmune and Immune‐Mediated Skin Diseases

diagnostic value. Histopathology reveals interface vacuolation and basal cell apoptosis.
Clinical differential diagnoses include severe erythema
multiforme, systemic lupus erythematosus, pemphigus
­vulgaris, severe dermatomyositis, and bullous pemphigoid.
Treatment involves immunosuppression using glucocorticoids combined with azathioprine or ciclosporin.
Pentoxifylline, vitamin E, topical glucocorticoids, or
hydroxychloroquine can be used as adjunctive therapy
(see Table 162.1). Sun avoidance is potentially important
because sun exposure may be part of the disease pathogenesis. Topical and/or oral antibiotics along with ­general
wound care should also be instituted. Complications may
include secondary pyoderma and even septicemia.
Prognosis is generally good.

­Autoimmune Subepidermal
Blistering Diseases
This group of diseases is autoimmune in nature and characterized by vesicle formation on various parts of the body. The
diagnosis is based on signalment, physical examination, histopathology, and response to therapy. Immunohistochemistry
or immunofluorescence is also sometimes required to
­differentiate among the blistering diseases.
Bulla or vesicles should be sampled via wedge biopsy
for diagnostic purposes. If only erosions and ulcers are
present, the clinician should obtain a wedge biopsy
encompassing both margins of an erosive lesion. It is
important to include epidermis in the sample. A biopsy
that includes only dermis (e.g., center of an erosion or
ulcer) will yield minimal diagnostic information. Samples
should be submitted to an experienced dermatohistopathologist to increase the chances of obtaining a definitive diagnosis. Response to therapy and lesion appearance
can also guide the diagnosis. Bullous pemphigoid and
mucous membrane pemphigoid are fairly glucocorticoid
responsive, while epidermolysis bullosa acquisita (EBA)
is more glucocorticoid resistant.
The mucous membranes are predominantly affected
in mucous membrane pemphigoid. Areas of friction and
trauma (i.e., footpads) are predominantly affected in
EBA. Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus (discussed above) features extensive abdominal erosions.
Bullous pemphigoid and EBA generally feature tense
vesicles, while the vesicles of vesicular cutaneous lupus
erythematosus are more flaccid.

Initial lesions develop on haired skin and include erythematous macules and patches that progress to turgid
vesicles. The lesions evolve to ulcers and crusts. Lesions
are not pruritic but can be painful. Pawpads are generally
spared and mucosa is less frequently affected than in
mucous membrane pemphigoid.
Diagnosis is based on the dermatohistopathologic
findings of skin biopsy and immunofluorescence or
immunohistochemistry. Refer to the subepidermal
­blistering diseases introduction for details about biopsy
technique and special testing. Histopathology reveals
subepidermal bullae.
Clinical differential diagnoses include EBA (although
EBA typically features footpad involvement), pemphigus
variants, VCLE, and mucous membrane pemphigoid.
The presence of nonmucosal involvement is m
­ ore
­suggestive of BP than mucous membrane pemphigoid.
Treatment involves topical glucocorticoids, oral glucocorticoids, tetracycline with niacinamide, and/or azathioprine (see Table 162.1). Complications include pyoderma.
Spontaneous remission has been reported although it
should be anticipated that life‐long therapy could be
necessary.
Epidermolysis Bullosa Acquisita
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita is an autoimmune vesiculobullous disease that affects mostly young adult dogs.
Great Danes and male dogs are overrepresented.
Initial lesions include patchy erythema and vesicles of
the face, oral cavity, concave pinna, axilla, and groin
(Figure 162.5).
Vesicles may be hemorrhagic. Areas of friction tend to
have the most obvious lesions. The groin and axilla
develop erosions quickly. The oral mucosa and footpads
usually feature extensive sloughing. Affected individuals

Bullous Pemphigoid
Bullous pemphigoid (BP) is an autoimmune vesiculobullous disease that more often affects middle‐aged dogs.
Breed and sex predilections have not been identified.

Figure 162.5 One‐year‐old Great Dane with epidermolysis bullosa
acquisita. Note the ulcers on the buccal mucosa and vesiculation
at the lower lip margin. Source: Courtesy of Sandra Koch.

1427

VetBooks.ir

1428

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

may show systemic signs of illness. A localized variant of
EBA exists that does not have systemic signs.
Diagnosis is based on the dermatohistopathologic
findings of skin or mucosal biopsy and immunofluorescence or immunohistochemistry. Refer to the subepidermal blistering diseases introduction for details about
biopsy technique and special testing. Histopathology
reveals subepidermal bullae.
Clinical differential diagnoses include bullous pemphigoid, mucous membrane pemphigoid, VCLE, pemphigus
vulgaris, severe erythema multiforme, and bullous drug
eruptions.
Treatment involves immunosuppressive therapy such
as glucocorticoids and azathioprine that can be combined
with IVIG in refractory cases (see Table 162.1). Disease
complications include lethargy, fever, and sepsis. Anemia
and thrombocytopenia were observed in one dog.
Prognosis is guarded to poor because this disease does
not respond readily to treatment.
Linear IgA Disease
Linear IgA disease (LAD) is a rare autoimmune disease
of dogs. There are no known breed, age or sex predilections. The disease is characterized by ulcerations of the
mucous membranes, mucocutaneous junctions, and
skin (particularly of the extremities, axillae, groin, and
pawpads). The initial lesions are vesicles, but their transient nature means they are rarely observed.
Diagnosis is based on the dermatohistopathologic
findings of skin or mucosal biopsy and immunofluorescence or immunohistochemistry. Refer to the subepidermal blistering diseases introduction for details about
biopsy technique and special testing. Histopathology
reveals subepidermal bullae with mild to moderate
inflammation. Clinical differential diagnoses include
bullous pemphigoid, mucous membrane pemphigoid,
EBA, VCLE, systemic lupus erythematosus, pemphigus
vulgaris, severe erythema multiforme, and bullous drug
eruptions.
Treatment has not been reported for this rare disease
in dogs; however, the same immunomodulatory/immunosuppressive drugs mentioned for the other autoimmune blistering diseases can be tried (see Table 162.1).
Prognosis is guarded due to the paucity of information
about this disease in dogs.
Mucous Membrane Pemphigoid
Mucous membrane pemphigoid (MMP) is a rare autoimmune blistering disease of dogs and cats that affects the
mucous membranes and adjacent skin. Dogs are affected
in adulthood, with no recognized sex predilection.
German shepherd dogs may be predisposed.

Lesions are characterized by vesicles that progress to
form erosions, ulcers, and crusts. The oral cavity, nasal
planum, periocular region, genitalia, footpads, and concave pinnae can be affected. Hypopigmentation and
atrophic scarring may occur in some cases. The lesions
are nonpruritic, but may be painful. Lymphadenopathy
may be present.
Diagnosis is based on the dermatohistopathologic
findings of skin or mucosal biopsy and immunofluorescence or immunohistochemistry. Refer to the subepidermal blistering diseases introduction for details about
biopsy technique and special testing. Histopathology
reveals subepidermal bullae.
Clinical differential diagnoses include bullous pemphigoid, EBA, VCLE, pemphigus vulgaris, erythema multiforme, and bullous drug eruptions. The mucous
membranes are markedly affected in MMP. This characteristic can be useful in distinguishing MMP from other
blistering diseases.
Treatment involves immunosuppression. Lesions are
generally not severe, and tend to respond easily to therapy. Tetracycline and niacinamide should be considered
as initial treatment. Glucocorticoids and other immunosuppressants may be considered if the lesions are severe
or do not respond readily (see Table 162.1).
Prognosis is good to guarded. Complications include
secondary infections of the lesions.

­Pemphigus Complex
History, physical examination, impression smears, and
histopathology lead to the diagnosis of diseases
within the pemphigus complex. The hallmark of diseases in this category is acantholytic keratinocytes
(Figure 162.6) and these can be identified on cytology
and histology.
Trichophyton mentagrophytes and severe pyoderma
are the primary differentials for pemphigus because
acantholytic keratinocytes can occur in these conditions
as well.
A direct impression smear from under a moist crust or
the content of a pustule will reveal numerous nondegenerate neutrophils, acantholytic keratinocytes and sometimes eosinophils. Bacteria may be present if secondary
infections occur.
The punch biopsy technique is appropriate for d
­ iseases
in this category. The skin should not be shaved or cleaned
prior to obtaining the biopsy. Crusts should not be
removed because they contain acantholytic keratinocytes. With rare exceptions, skin devoid of epithelium
should not be biopsied because epithelium is required
for a histologic diagnosis. Moist, tightly adhered crusts,
pustules, vesicles or the epithelialized edge of an erosion

VetBooks.ir

162 Autoimmune and Immune‐Mediated Skin Diseases

Figure 162.7 Cocker spaniel with pemphigus foliaceus. Multifocal
to coalescing lesions covered with yellowish crusts localized to the
pinna, dorsal aspect of the head and muzzle. Areas of erosion are
noted where adherent crusts were removed. Source: Courtesy of
Sheila Torres.
Figure 162.6 Sample collected from a pustule in a case of
pemphigus foliaceus. The arrow shows a characteristic
acantholytic cell. Also present are large numbers of neutrophils
and eosinophils. Source: Courtesy of Lisa Reiter.

are the ideal lesions to biopsy. Periodic acid–Schiff (PAS)
stain should be requested to evaluate the sample for fungal elements. Immunofluorescence or immunohistochemistry is rarely used to support a diagnosis.
Pemphigus Foliaceus
Pemphigus foliaceus (PF) is a fairly common autoimmune disease that affects many species, including dogs
and cats. The disease affects middle‐aged to older animals. No sex predilection has been recognized.
Dogs may develop large pustules, erosions and crusts
on the face (particularly the periocular region and bridge
of the nose), concave aspect of the pinnae, pawpads, and/
or trunk (Figure 162.7). Pruritus may or may not be present. Pemphigus foliaceus in cats is characterized by
crusting on the pinnae, face, and/or nailfolds. Caseous
debris may also be present around the nails (Figure 162.8).
Pruritus is usually absent.
The reader is referred to the pemphigus introduction
above for details about biopsy technique and special testing. Histopathology reveals broad, subcorneal pustules
with acantholytic keratinocytes. Differential diagnoses
include superficial pyoderma, pustular dermatophytosis,
and drug reactions. Complications include fever, weight
loss, lethargy, and anorexia in pets that have widespread
lesions. Concurrent dermatophytosis and/or secondary
pyoderma may also be present.

Figure 162.8 Domestic shorthair cat with caseous debris and
erythema of the nailfold associated with pemphigus foliaceus.

Glucocorticoids are generally effective but often need
to be combined with azathioprine. Glucocorticoids can
also be combined with ciclosporin, chlorambucil, or tetracycline with niacinamide (see Table 162.1).
Topical flea and tick products that contain amitraz
have been associated with pemphigus‐like disease. The
first step in treatment should be to discontinue amitraz‐
containing flea/tick preventives. Immunosuppressive
therapy should then be started.

1429

VetBooks.ir

1430

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

Prognosis is guarded for pets that do not respond to or
cannot tolerate initial therapy with glucocorticoids.
Prognosis is good for pets that respond easily to therapy
and that can be controlled with low doses of medication.
Pemphigus Erythematosus
Pemphigus erythematosus (PE) is an autoimmune
­disease with characteristics of pemphigus foliaceus and
DLE. Dogs and cats are affected; no breed or sex predilections have been identified.
It is characterized by lesions that are limited to the face
and pinnae. Specifically, the nasal planum and sometimes the concave aspect of the ears are affected with
pustules, erosions, crusts and sometimes depigmentation. Refer to the pemphigus introduction above for
details about biopsy technique and special testing.
Histopathology reveals acantholysis and interface dermatitis. Differential diagnoses include dermatophytosis
(Trichophyton mentagrophytes), DLE, and pemphigus
foliaceus. Complications include secondary infections of
lesional skin.
Treatment involves immunosuppression with one or a
combination of the following: tetracycline/niacinamide,
glucocorticoids, azathioprine, ciclosporin, and/or topical tacrolimus (see Table 162.1). Avoidance of intense
sun exposure may also be helpful. Prognosis is good.
Some cases may be more responsive to therapy than
others.
Pemphigus Vegetans
Pemphigus vegetans (PV) is an exceedingly rare autoimmune disease of dogs. Three cases are described in
the literature. The disease is characterized by wart‐like
projections on the pinnae, axillae, and sternum.
Additionally, pustules and vesicles may be present on
the abdomen and paws, and erosions may be present on
­ embranes. See the pemphigus introduction
mucous m
above for details about biopsy technique and special
testing. Histopathology in humans reveals suprabasilar
clefting.
Treatment is immunosuppression (see Table 162.1),
and prognosis is guarded due to the paucity of information regarding this disease in dogs.
Pemphigus Vulgaris
Pemphigus vulgaris is a rare autoimmune blistering
­disease of dogs and cats. This disease can occur at any
age and male dogs appear to be predisposed but there is
no breed predilection.
Characteristic lesions are dramatic and include flaccid
vesicles, erosions, and ulcers. Mucosal or mucocutaneous

lesions are generally observed first, followed by lesions
that may occur on the face and nose (see Figure 162.5).
Pressure points, pawpads, and intertriginous areas are
also usually affected. Refer to the pemphigus introduction above for details about biopsy technique and special
testing. In cases where mucosal erosions ­predominate, a
wedge biopsy encompassing both margins of the lesion
may be preferred over a punch biopsy. Histopathology
reveals suprabasilar clefting with a­ cantholytic keratinocytes and rounded basal cells.
Differential diagnoses include paraneoplastic pemphigus, mucous membrane pemphigoid, bullous pemphigoid, EBA, erythema multiforme, and epitheliotropic
cutaneous lymphoma. Complications include lethargy,
anorexia, weight loss, and secondary skin infections.
Treatment involves immunosuppression with glucocorticoids combined with azathioprine or chlorambucil
or tetracycline/niacinamide (see Table 162.1). Prognosis
is guarded as this disease may be refractory to therapy.

­Uveodermatologic Syndrome
Uveodermatologic syndrome or Vogt–Koyanagi–Harada‐
like syndrome is a rare disease of dogs. The pathomechanism is currently unknown but antibodies directed against
melanocytes and pigment‐associated proteins have been
identified, suggesting that autoimmunity plays a role.
There is evidence that genetics p
­ articipates in disease
development in akitas. Uveodermatologic syndrome
affects young to middle‐aged dogs, and there is no
apparent sex predilection. Akitas, Samoyeds, Siberian
huskies, Alaskan malamutes, and chow chows are
overrepresented, although numerous other breeds have
been affected.
The disease is characterized by acute onset of unilateral or bilateral uveitis and concurrent erythema, scaling
and depigmentation of the hair, lips, eyelids, nose and
occasionally the footpads, scrotum, anus, and hard
­palate. In most cases, the skin signs are mild with depigmentation being the main lesion. Pruritus may or may
not be present.
The diagnosis is based on history, physical (especially
ocular) examination, and skin biopsy findings. The
­clinician should biopsy an area of erythematous and
depigmented skin. Histopathology reveals lichenoid
granulomatous dermatitis with melanophages. Ocular
examination is necessary to diagnose uveitis.
Differential diagnoses include concurrent separate
ocular and skin diseases. Uveitis is often an indicator of
systemic disease and may be secondary to immune‐
mediated, infectious, neoplastic, toxic, metabolic,
­traumatic, or idiopathic processes. Other causes of hair
and mucocutaneous skin depigmentation include DLE,

VetBooks.ir

162 Autoimmune and Immune‐Mediated Skin Diseases

alopecia areata, vitiligo, pemphigus erythematosus, and
epitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma.
Therapy should be directed towards preserving vision.
Skin lesions may respond while eye lesions continue to
progress. Frequent monitoring of the eyes is important.
Topical or intravitreal glucocorticoids, topical cycloplegics, and carbonic anhydrase inhibitors should be insti-

tuted along with systemic glucocorticoids combined
with azathioprine or ciclosporin (see Table 162.1).
Complications may include secondary glaucoma,
­cataracts, and blindness. Prognosis is guarded, although
better when treatment is instituted early in the disease
course. Repigmentation of the skin and hair may or may
not occur.

­Further Reading
Lehner GM, Linek M. A case of vesicular cutaneous lupus
erythematosus in a Border collie successfully treated
with topical tacrolimus and nicotinamide‐tetracycline.
Vet Dermatol 2013; 24(6): 639–41, e159–60.
Mauldin EA, Morris DO, Brown DC, Casal ML. Exfoliative
cutaneous lupus erythematosus in German shorthaired
pointer dogs: disease development, progression and
evaluation of three immunomodulatory drugs (ciclosporin,
hydroxychloroquine, and adalimumab) in a controlled
environment. Vet Dermatol 2010; 21(4): 373–82.

Morris DO. Ischemic dermatopathies. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2013; 43(1): 99–111.
Oberkirchner U, Linder KE, Olivry T. Successful treatment
of a novel generalized variant of canine discoid lupus
erythematosus with oral hydroxychloroquine. Vet
Dermatol 2012; 23(1): 65–70, e15–16.
Olivry T, Linder KE. Dermatoses affecting desmosomes
in animals: a mechanistic review of acantholytic
blistering skin diseases. Vet Dermatol 2009; 20(5–6):
313–26.

1431

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1433

163
Approach to Alopecia
Linda A. Frank, DVM, MS, DACVD
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Tennessee Institute of Agriculture, Knoxville, TN, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Alopecia or hypotrichosis are common reasons for
­presentation to a veterinarian. Alopecia implies complete
hair loss while hypotrichosis implies thinning of the hair
coat. The presentation of alopecia/hypotrichosis may be
localized or generalized and focal, patchy or diffuse,
depending on disease severity, duration, and the cause of
the hair loss. Alopecia may be traumatically induced, with
the patient scratching or licking the hair off, or due to hair
falling out or failing to regrow following normal shedding.
Trauma‐Induced Alopecia
Trauma‐induced alopecia is most often secondary to
pruritus. Common causes include allergies, ectoparasites, bacterial skin infections, and Malassezia dermatitis. Less common causes in older animals include
neoplastic diseases such as epitheliotropic lymphoma or
mast cell tumor and paraneoplastic syndromes.
Inflammation‐Induced Alopecia
Alopecia not associated with trauma may be due to an
inflammatory condition, such as pyoderma, follicular
demodicosis, dermatophytosis, or sebaceous adenitis
(Table 163.1).
Sebaceous adenitis is an immune‐mediated destruction of the sebaceous glands and is associated with scaling and alopecia. Breed predilections include the
standard poodle, Samoyed, akita, and vizsla. In short‐
coated dogs, these conditions present as a patchy or
“moth‐eaten” pattern of alopecia (Figure 163.1).
The lesions might not overtly appear inflammatory;
however, the multifocal pattern of the alopecia should
make you suspicious of an inflammatory cause. Hairs may
epilate easily from the periphery of these inflammatory

alopecic sites but not from other locations on the body.
While pruritus can be associated with these diseases and
may even be directed at the lesions, it is not the cause of
the alopecic spots.
Vasculitis from immune‐complex deposition secondary to infectious or immune‐mediated diseases may
cause multifocal alopecia due to local ischemia. Clinically,
the lesions may resemble dermatophytosis in that they
are circular and alopecic; however, they appear noninflammatory, lacking erythema and crusting with thin
rather than thickened skin, unless cutaneous necrosis
and ulceration occur (Figure 163.2).
A common example of focal ischemic alopecia is rabies
vaccination‐induced vasculitis. Vasculitis may also be
seen with drug reactions, tick‐borne diseases, and systemic lupus erythematosus. Dermatomyositis is an inherited (autosomal dominant with variable penetrance)
disorder that primarily affects collies and Shetland sheepdogs. Vasculitis and ischemic dermatitis are thought to be
part of the pathogenesis of the disease.
Autoimmune/immune‐mediated diseases such as alopecia areata or pseudopelade and neoplastic conditions such
as epitheliotropic lymphoma could result in areas of
inflammatory alopecia. Alopecia areata is an immune‐
mediated attack on the hair bulb while pseudopelade is an
immune‐mediated attack on the follicle wall, resulting in
focal to multifocal alopecia. Clinically, the areas of alopecia
may not show evidence of erythema, suggesting a noninflammatory mechanism; however, the pattern of alopecia
necessitates investigation into inflammatory differentials.
Paraneoplastic alopecia occurs in association with
internal neoplasia. This is a presumed inflammatory alopecia although the pathomechanism of the alopecia is
unknown. Paraneoplastic alopecia has been described in
cats in association with pancreatic and biliary carcinoma. The alopecia is acute and progressive with easy
epilation of hair and smooth thin skin.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1434

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

Table 163.1 Differential diagnoses for inflammation‐induced
alopecia
Common

Less common

Uncommon

Pyoderma
Demodicosis
Dermatophytosis
Sebaceous adenitis

Idiopathic vasculitis
Vaccination‐induced
vasculitis
Drug reaction
Systemic lupus
erythematosus
Dermatomyositis

Paraneoplastic
alopecia
Alopecia areata
Pseudopelade

Figure 163.2 Adult male castrated toy poodle with focal alopecia
secondary to rabies vaccination‐induced vasculitis. Dog was
referred for nonresponsive dermatophytosis because of the
circular lesion.

Figure 163.1 A 3‐year‐old male castrated English bulldog with
patchy alopecia of the trunk associated with sebaceous adenitis.

Noninflammatory Alopecia
Alopecia may also occur as a consequence of abnormal
hair cycling or hair development. These are grouped
under noninflammatory causes of alopecia and include
endocrine diseases as well as congenital/hereditary and
idiopathic causes of alopecia. To understand these conditions, it is important to understand the hair cycle.
Briefly, the anagen phase of the hair cycle is when the
hair is actively growing. In most dogs and likely all cats,
this is a relatively short phase lasting at most a few
months until the hair reaches its maximum length. The
length of the anagen phase, and thus the length of hair, is
genetically determined and may be of different durations
for different regions of the body. From anagen, the hair
goes through a short catagen phase in which it reverts
into a nongrowing or telogen hair. The hair can remain in
telogen for a prolonged period of time before a new cycle

is started. For some breeds such as the malamute, this
may be a few years. The telogen hairs are well anchored
and do not epilate easily. Thus, the presence of telogen
hairs is not necessarily pathologic. Dogs that require frequent hair clipping, such as poodles, have a hair cycle
more similar to people in that they have a prolonged anagen phase with fewer hairs in telogen at any point in
time. These dogs are more likely to develop alopecia
from chemotherapeutic agents which inhibit actively
dividing cells. Shedding, or exogen, is separate from the
hair cycle and is independent of whether a new hair cycle
is starting.
Alopecia Associated with Abnormal Hair Growth

Abnormalities in hair growth occur during the anagen
phase of the hair cycle. There are only a few conditions
that fall into this category and they include follicular
dysplasias, congenital hypotrichosis, color dilution alopecia, and black hair follicular dysplasia. Follicular
dysplasias, where abnormal follicles fail to produce
healthy anagen hairs, are most often associated with
alopecic breeds (e.g., Chinese crested dog, Mexican hairless dog, and the Sphynx cat) in which the alopecia is a
breed characteristic. Congenital hypotrichosis is poorly
described in small animals. The hypotrichosis/alopecia occurs either at birth or within the first six months of
life and may be associated with other ectodermal
defects. Color dilution alopecia and black hair follicular
dysplasia are color‐restricted alopecias that begin

VetBooks.ir

163 Approach to Alopecia

gradually in the first three years of life (Figure 163.3).
The alopecia involves a defect in melanosome migration
and/or transfer, which occurs during the anagen phase of
the hair cycle.
Alopecia Associated with Hair Cycle Arrest

Alopecia associated with abnormal hair cycling typically
occurs because the hairs remain in telogen and a new
anagen cycle is not initiated. With time, the telogen hairs
are shed but are not replaced, resulting in a diffuse, often
symmetric alopecia. Areas of wear such as the neck,
pressure points, and tail may become alopecic first as
these hairs are removed by friction.
There are many conditions that appear to be associated with hair cycle abnormalities. These include

hypercortisolemia, hypothyroidism, hyperestrogenism,
­
alopecia X, patterned alopecia of various breeds, cyclic
flank alopecia, postclipping alopecia, and anagen/telogen defluxion. Some of these conditions are associated
with a temporary alopecia (postclipping alopecia, anagen/telogen defluxion), some may be seasonal (cyclic
flank alopecia), and others are likely permanent with
variable response to treatments (alopecia X, patterned
alopecia). The cutaneous changes associated with endocrine dermatoses may also occur with other hair cycle
abnormalities, including diffuse alopecia often sparing
the head and distal extremities, seborrhea, comedones,
hyperpigmentation, and cutaneous infections. In addition, many of the histologic characteristics associated
with endocrine dermatoses (telogen hairs, follicular keratosis, hyperkeratosis, excess trichilemmal keratinization [flame follicles], thin epidermis, and thin dermis)
may also be seen with other hair cycle abnormalities. It is
important to realize that, with a few exceptions, histopathology cannot differentiate endocrine diseases from
other causes of hair cycle arrest.
Specific Noninflammatory Alopecic Disorders
Alopecia X

Figure 163.3 Neck region of a 9‐year‐old female spayed gray and
white Italian greyhound with long‐standing color dilution
alopecia. The white hairs are normal. The area which had gray
hairs is seborrheic and lichenified.

Alopecia X is a hair cycle arrest that affects primarily
plush‐coated breeds but also toy and miniature poodles
(Table 163.2). It is presumed to be hereditary because of
the strong breed predilections although the specific
defects or mode of inheritance have yet to be determined. Dogs affected are usually young adults but alopecia X can affect any dog between 1 and 10 years of age.
There is no sex or neuter status preference with this condition. Clinically, dogs present with progressive symmetric alopecia that spares the head and distal extremities
(Figure 163.4).
The alopecia is often associated with hyperpigmentation of the skin. Because of the similarity of this condition with endocrine dermatoses, it is important to rule
those conditions out before a diagnosis of alopecia X can
be made. A unique feature of this disease is hair regrowth
at the site of biopsy or surgical trauma.

Table 163.2 Common breeds associated with noninflammatory alopecic syndromes (not inclusive)
Alopecia X

Patterned alopecia

Cyclic flank alopecia

Color dilution alopecia

Other

Chow chow
Keeshond
Malamute
Pomeranian
Samoyed
Siberian husky
Spitz
Toy/miniature poodle

American water spaniel
Boston terrier
Dachshund
Greyhound
Irish water spaniel
Portuguese water dog

Airedale
Boxer
English bulldog
French bulldog

Chihuahua (blue)
Dachshund (blue)
Doberman pinscher
(blue and fawn)
Weimaraner
Yorkshire terrier

Chesapeake Bay retriever
Labrador retriever (silver)
Schipperke

1435

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

alopecia of the ventral neck, flank, and caudal regions
of water spaniels, and alopecia of the caudal thighs of
greyhounds. The actual mechanism of the alopecia is
not known. Because some dogs can regrow normal hair
at these sites, it is thought not to be a follicular dysplasia but more likely a hair cycle abnormality, although
multiple etiologies are possible. The breed associations
suggest a genetic component.

VetBooks.ir

1436

Cyclic Flank Alopecia

Figure 163.4 Adult male castrated Pomeranian dog with alopecia
X. Note that the alopecia spares the head and distal extremities,
similar to hypercortisolemia.

Patterned Alopecia

Patterned alopecia is a tardive hypotrichosis that often
starts at less than 1 year of age. Many syndromes have
been described that are breed restricted. These include
pinnal alopecia of dachshunds, ventral and caudal alopecia of dachshunds and Boston terriers (Figure 163.5),

Figure 163.5 Patterned alopecia in a young adult female spayed
Boston terrier with alopecia of the lateral thorax and ventrum.

Cyclic flank alopecia is a seasonal or cyclic truncal alopecia that usually occurs during or just after short daylength period. The alopecia affects the flanks, lateral
thorax, and sometimes caudodorsum and nose bridge
(Figure 163.6).
There are often bizarre patterns to the alopecia and the
skin may be intensely hyperpigmented. Less common presentations include hypotrichosis and hair pigment changes
without overt alopecia, also in strange patterns. The alopecia may not recur each year or in some cases may be permanent. Age of onset is 1.5–4.5 years. Breeds reported to be
affected by this condition include boxers, English and
French bulldogs, and Airedales (see Table 163.2).
Postclipping Hair Follicle Arrest

Postclipping alopecia or hair follicle arrest refers to failure of hair regrowth following close clipping, usually in
preparation for surgery (Figure 163.7).
It may occur more frequently in plush‐coated breeds
and there are two theories as to why this occurs. The first

Figure 163.6 Alopecia of the lateral thorax and flank in a male
castrated boxer with cyclic flank alopecia.

163 Approach to Alopecia

VetBooks.ir

­Signalment
The breed and age of onset should aid in the initial differential list (see Table 163.1). Congenital/hereditary alopecias are more likely to occur within the first few years
of life while endocrine dermatoses and neoplastic diseases occur in middle‐aged to older animals. Depending
on the trigger, immune‐mediated dermatoses can occur
within a wide age range and affect many breeds and their
crosses.

­History and Clinical Signs

Figure 163.7 Adult male castrated mastiff with postclipping
alopecia secondary to receiving an epidural injection.

is that the clipping/surgical preparation causes a hair
cycle arrest, possibly because of a temperature change
with vasoconstriction to the skin surface. The other theory applies primarily to the plush‐coated breeds. It is
thought that these dogs may have been clipped during a
time when their hair is in a prolonged telogen phase and
not able to initiate a new anagen cycle. It is also possible
that the clipping uncovered an endocrine or other noninflammatory alopecia condition. The hairs are not
cycling because of an underlying disease such as hypercortisolemia or alopecia X but alopecia has not yet
occurred. The clipping simply hastened the alopecia.
With postclipping hair follicle arrest, the hairs should
spontaneously resume normal cycling within 7–30
months, often following a strong stimulus for hair cycling
such as shortening day length.
Anagen/Telogen Defluxion

Anagen or telogen defluxion involves hair loss following
an illness. Telogen defluxion occurs more commonly in
small animals. The illness causes an abrupt cessation of
anagen, synchronizing all hairs in telogen. In 1–3 months
following the illness, large numbers of telogen hairs are
shed synchronously as a new anagen hair cycle begins.
Hairs epilate easily during this time. Anagen defluxion
occurs more commonly in large animals. The illness
causes a generalized disturbance of the anagen stage of
the hair cycle resulting in a sudden loss of coat. In contrast to telogen defluxion, hair loss occurs within two
days to one week following the illness. In both of these
conditions, hairs regrow normally.

When evaluating the dog or cat for alopecia, a thorough
history and physical examination are in order.
Determining the presence or absence of pruritus and the
distribution and pattern of hair loss will help determine
the ultimate cause of the alopecia.
Clinically, pruritus‐induced alopecias are characterized by broken hairs where the animal has been
scratching. Microscopic examination of the tips of the
hairs (trichogram) will show a blunted or fractured tip
instead of a tapered tip if the animal is inducing the
alopecia secondary to trauma. This technique is not
helpful if dogs are groomed and clipped regularly, as all
of their hairs will be blunted. Evidence of excoriations
supporting pruritus may also be observed in the alopecic areas.
Onset of Alopecia
If the onset of alopecia is rapid, infectious or paraneoplastic conditions need to be considered. Also, a recent
history of systemic illness could be the cause of a rapid
onset of alopecia.
Ease of Epilation
Easy epilation of hairs is more often associated with
inflammatory causes of alopecia such as pyoderma, dermatophytosis or demodicosis but can also be seen with
conditions that result in rapid progression of alopecia
such as anagen/telogen defluxion.
Distribution and Pattern of Alopecia
Distribution and pattern of the alopecia may be key to
identifying the underlying diagnosis or formulating your
differential diagnosis list but requires careful observation. If the alopecia is color restricted, likely this is color
dilution alopecia or black hair follicular dysplasia. If the

1437

VetBooks.ir

1438

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

alopecia is patchy throughout the coat, an inflammatory
cause is likely, whereas if the alopecia is diffuse and symmetric, a noninflammatory cause is more likely.

Table 163.3 Treatment options for select inflammation‐induced
alopecic conditions
Disease

Treatment options

­Diagnosis

Sebaceous adenitis

Vitamin A, synthetic retinoids,
ciclosporin, glucocorticoids

Vasculitis

Tetracyclines/niacinamide, pentoxifylline,
glucocorticoids

Alopecia areata/
pseudopelade

Glucocorticoids, ciclosporin

Minimum Dermatology Database
A minimum dermatology database consisting of skin
scrapings, fungal culture, and surface cytology should be
performed on all cases of alopecia. If infections are suspected by clinical presentation (patchy alopecia) or
detected by the dermatology database, then treatment
should be pursued and alopecia reassessed before further diagnostics are performed.
Trichogram
Trichogram involves the plucking of hairs and examination under the microscope. The tips of the hairs can
be examined to determine if the alopecia is traumatically induced (see above). The shafts of the hairs can
be examined to look for abnormal clumping of melanin and distortion of the hair shaft, suggestive of color
dilution alopecia. This method is not useful for black
hair follicular dysplasia, as the hair is too pigmented
to allow for this observation. The bulbs of the hairs
can be examined for evidence of a preponderance of
telogen hairs, which might suggest telogen defluxion
when coupled with ease of epilation and supportive
history.
Histopathology
Histopathology will help rule out many of the inflammatory causes of alopecia (e.g., folliculitis, sebaceous adenitis, vasculitis, alopecia areata, pseudopelade, neoplasia,
or paraneoplastic dermatitis) but, as stated before, it seldom allows differentiation of endocrine diseases from
other noninflammatory causes of alopecia such as alopecia X or patterned alopecias. It is helpful to first treat any
infections that are identified prior to performing a biopsy
as inflammation associated with the infection could
mask other causes of alopecia.
Endocrine Testing
If noninflammatory alopecia is first occurring in a
­middle‐aged dog, further investigation into a possible
endocrinopathy is warranted. This may include basic
bloodwork and urinalysis to screen for abnormalities
consistent with an endocrinopathy. However, even if all

laboratory parameters are within normal limits, endocrine testing may still be indicated.
Additional Diagnostic Tests
If an older dog or cat first develops alopecia, screening
for neoplasia becomes very important. Diagnostics in
this case may include basic bloodwork, urinalysis, histopathology, and imaging.

­Therapy
Treatment depends on the cause of the alopecia.
Table 163.3 lists treatment options for some of the
inflammation‐induced causes of alopecia.
For many of the noninflammatory causes of alopecia
associated with hair cycle arrest (alopecia X, patterned
alopecia, cyclic flank alopecia, and postclipping alopecia), melatonin therapy may result in hair regrowth. The
recommended dosage is 3 mg q12h for small dogs and
6–12 mg q12h for larger dogs. Side‐effects are minimal,
with the most common one being sedation. It is possible
that melatonin causes insulin resistance so it should be
used with caution in diabetic animals. Recently, medroxyprogesterone acetate injections were shown to be marginally effective for treating some Pomeranian dogs with
alopecia X.

­Prognosis
Alopecia in itself is seldom a life‐threatening condition
although, in some instances, it may be a cutaneous
marker for a systemic disease that could carry a guarded
to grave prognosis. Most alopecia caused by pruritus or
inflammation can be managed or treated once the underlying cause is identified. If follicular destruction occurs
secondary to severe inflammation or ischemia, alopecia
could be permanent. In addition, immune‐mediated
conditions such as alopecia areata and pseudopelade
may fail to respond to treatment.

VetBooks.ir

163 Approach to Alopecia

Many congenital/hereditary alopecias have a guarded
prognosis for hair regrowth. Once the diagnosis has been
determined, it becomes of cosmetic concern only. While
some treatments may result in varying degrees of hair

regrowth for these individuals, the veterinarian and client must decide if the risks of the treatment are warranted for the disease.

­Further Reading
Frank LA, Watson JB. Treatment of alopecia X with
medroxyprogesterone acetate. Vet Dermatol 2013; 24(6):
624–7.
Mecklenburg L, Linek M, Tobin DJ, eds. Part 3 Non‐
inflammatory alopecias. In: Hair Loss Disorders in
Domestic Animals. Ames, IA: Wiley‐Blackwell, 2009, pp.
93–192.

Müntener T, Schuepbach‐Regula G, Frank L, Rüfenacht S,
Welle MM. Canine noninflammatory alopecia: a
comprehensive evaluation of common and distinguishing
histological characteristics. Vet Dermatol 2012; 23(3):
206–21.
Scott DW. Retrospective record review of canine postclipping
hair follicle arrest. Vet Dermatol 2012; 23(3): 248–9.

1439

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1441

164
Canine Sterile Papular and Nodular Skin Diseases
Sandra Diaz, DVM, MS, DACVD
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA

This chapter will review the etiology, pathogenesis,
diagnosis, management, and prognosis of the most
common canine sterile papular and nodular dermatoses, including histiocytic disorders, sterile nodular
panniculitis, sterile granuloma/pyogranuloma syndrome,
and juvenile cellulitis.

­Canine Histiocytic Disorders
Canine histiocytic disorders include canine reactive histiocytosis (cutaneous and systemic) and histiocytic sarcoma complex (localized and disseminated histiocytic
sarcoma).
Canine Reactive Histiocytosis
Canine reactive histiocytosis includes systemic histiocytosis (SH) and cutaneous histiocytosis (CH). Both
forms are characterized by reactive proliferation of activated dermal dendritic cells. They affect mainly the
skin and subcutaneous tissue, but in the systemic form
other organ systems can be involved, including lymph
nodes, eyelids, sclera, nasal cavity, lungs, spleen, and
bone marrow.

antigen‐presenting cells, admixed with T lymphocytes
and neutrophils. The cellular phenotype has become the
basis for definitive diagnosis (see diagnosis section below).
Epidemiology

Age at the time of diagnosis ranges from 3 to 9 years and
males and females can both be affected, but one study
showed male predilection. Collies and Shetland sheepdogs may be predisposed.
Clinical Signs

Cutaneous histiocytosis is characterized by multiple
hairless, erythematous dermal to subcutaneous nodules
localized predominantly to the face, neck, nasal mucosa,
perineum, scrotum, and feet (Figures 164.1 and 164.2).
The lesions are not pruritic or painful, but larger lesions
may become ulcerated and cause discomfort. The lesions
wax and wane, with older lesions spontaneously regressing as new ones form. The disease is usually slowly progressive and, in some cases, may spontaneously resolve.
Diagnosis

The clinical differential diagnoses include other ­nodular
skin diseases such as neoplasia (e.g., multiple ­cutaneous
histiocytomas, mast cell tumors, cutaneous lymphoma),
infectious granulomas, sterile nodular panniculitis,
Cutaneous Histiocytosis
and cutaneous sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma
Etiology/Pathophysiology
syndrome.
The etiology and pathogenesis of CH are unknown. Since
Diagnosis is based on the patient’s history, clinical
infectious agents have not been identified and the disease
signs, cytologic findings, and primarily histopathologic
responds to immunosuppressive therapy, immune‐­ findings. Immunohistochemistry may be required to
dysregulatory mechanisms are likely involved. This disconfirm the diagnosis.
ease is characterized by specific morphologic and
Cytologic examination shows large numbers of histioimmunohistochemistry criteria. According to Affolter
cytes with abundant cytoplasm; binucleated and multiand Moore, CH originates from CD1+, CD11c+, MHC
nucleated cells can be seen. Variable numbers of other
II+, CD4+, and Thy‐1+ (CD90) activated dermal dendritic
inflammatory cells can be present.
Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome, multiple
cutaneous histiocytomas, and cutaneous lymphoma.
­
Immunohistochemistry may be required to differentiate
cutaneous histiocytosis from these conditions.
It is recommended to contact veterinary diagnostic
laboratories for availability and tissue submission
requirements for immunohistochemistry. Because a limited number of markers are available to be used on formalin fixed specimens, the submission of fresh tissue
samples may be necessary. Canine cutaneous histiocytosis has been characterized by proliferation of CD1+,
CD11c+, MHC II +, CD4+, and Thy‐1+ (CD90) activated
dermal dendritic cells.

VetBooks.ir

1442

Therapy

Figure 164.1 Two‐year old Bernese mountain dog with
cutaneous histiocytosis. Nodular lesions are present on the lips
and planum nasale.

Immunosuppressive drugs have been used with mixed
results. Most cases respond completely or partially to
immunosuppressive therapy with glucocorticoids, but
require long‐term or intermittent therapy to induce
remission and prevent reoccurrence. Up to 50% of cases
respond to prednisone as sole therapy. Azathioprine,
ciclosporin, and leflunomide have also been shown to be
effective, and can be helpful in cases not responding to
glucocorticoid therapy. Tetracycline/niacinamide treatment has been found to be effective as maintenance therapy to avoid recurrence. Since tetracycline has been
unavailable in the US market, doxycycline or minocycline can be substituted for tetracycline.
Prognosis

Prognosis is guarded. Up to one‐third of patients have
reoccurrence of skin lesions and thus long‐term therapy
is required. Dogs with nasal involvement may be more
likely to have recurrence.
Systemic Histiocytosis

Systemic histiocytosis is considered a disseminated form
of cutaneous histiocytosis. In addition to the skin and
mucocutaneous junctions, lesions may be found in the
lungs, spleen, liver, lymph nodes, eyelids, sclera, and
bone marrow.
Figure 164.2 Close‐up of the lesions on the lips of the dog in
Figure 164.1. Note the multiple, crusted, erosive to ulcerative
nodules.

Histologically, the skin lesions are characterized by a
nodular to diffuse infiltrate that extends from middermis
to the subcutaneous tissue. The infiltrate is perivascular
and periadnexal. Early lesions have a linear or nodular
configuration, but it may become diffuse in chronic cases.
The infiltrate can invade the wall of blood vessels, causing
focal or multifocal areas of ischemic necrosis. Important
differential diagnoses for histopathology include sterile

Etiology/Pathophysiology

The etiology and pathogenesis of SH are currently
unknown. As for CH, since infectious agents have not
been identified and the disease responds to immunosuppressive therapy, immune‐dysregulatory mechanisms
are likely involved.
Signalment

Systemic histiocytosis was first recognized in Bernese
mountain dogs, but since then has been described in several other breeds. In one report including 26 dogs,
Bernese mountain dogs were overrepresented (11/26),

VetBooks.ir

164 Canine Sterile Papular and Nodular Skin Diseases

followed by Rottweilers (4/26), and golden and Labrador
retrievers (3/26). The age at the time of diagnosis varies
from 1 to 9 years. Males seem to be more frequently
affected in Bernese mountain dogs. No sex predisposition was observed in other breeds.

in the pathogenesis of canine reactive histiocytosis.
Ocular lesions may be more difficult to treat and often
require the use of ophthalmic ciclosporin preparations.
The use of high doses of glucocorticoids and cytotoxic
agents has shown poor response.

Clinical Signs

Prognosis

Systemic histiocytosis differs from CH in the extent of
lesions present and the multiorgan involvement. Lesions
affect the skin, with high prevalence for mucocutaneous
junctions; other organs commonly involved include the
nasal cavity, eyes, spleen, lymph nodes and testicular tissue. Bone marrow, liver, lungs, and gingiva can also be
affected. In a recent study, 2/26 dogs had hypercalcemia.
The clinical signs vary depending on the organs affected
and extension of the lesions. Anorexia, weight loss, conjunctivitis, and stertorous respiration are commonly
seen. The disease waxes and wanes and dogs are asymptomatic between clinical episodes. The clinical episodes
can increase in severity and respond less effectively to
therapy with chronicity.

The prognosis is guarded; the clinical course waxes and
wanes but it is usually prolonged. Most cases are euthanized due to relapse of clinical signs or poor response to
therapy.

Diagnosis

Clinical differential diagnoses include neoplasia, infectious and sterile granulomas, cutaneous histiocytosis,
and cutaneous sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome. The diagnosis is based on history, clinical signs,
cytology, histopathology, and ruling out infectious causes.
Cytologic findings are similar to CH, consisting mainly
of large numbers of histiocytes, with occasional bi‐ or
multinucleated giant cells. Histopathologic findings are
identical to those observed with CH, composed of multifocal nodular infiltrate affecting the deep dermis and
subcutaneous tissue. The cellular infiltrate consists
mainly of histiocytes, lymphocytes, and neutrophils. The
infiltrate is angiocentric and may invade the blood vessels, causing destruction of the vascular wall, thrombosis, and ischemic necrosis. Invasion of the blood vessel
wall has been observed more consistently in cases of SH.
The infiltrating histiocytes express CD1+, CD11c+,
MHC II+, CD4+, and Thy‐1+ (CD90), consistent with
activated dermal dendritic cells.
Therapy

The clinical signs wax and wane, and some dogs can
undergo long periods of remission, but most cases require
long‐term immunomodulatory therapy. The experimental use of thymosin, which modulates T lymphocyte
effector and regulatory function, has shown promising
results; however, further use of this treatment has not
been documented. Good response has been seen with
leflunomide and ciclosporin, both of which have an
inhibitory effect on T lymphocytes. The good response to
these drugs suggests an important role of T lymphocytes

Histiocytic Sarcoma Complex

Previously known as malignant histiocytosis, this complex includes localized and disseminated histiocytic sarcoma (HS). Histiocytic sarcoma is a highly aggressive
neoplasm. It may develop as a localized tumor or a
widely disseminated disease; animals with initially localized disease often develop metastasis. The disease is
characterized by infiltration of neoplastic proliferation
of cells of the histiocytic lineage, including dendritic
antigen‐presenting cells and macrophages. The presence of macrophages has been documented only in
cases of hemophagocytic HS, in which the histiocytes
are markedly erythrophagocytic. Histiocytic sarcoma is
highly breed specific, with Bernese mountain dogs,
Rottweilers, and flat‐coated and golden retrievers having a high prevalence. Immunohistochemistry plays an
important role in differentiating histiocytic tumors from
other neoplasias with similar histopathologic findings
such as lymphoma, poorly differentiated mast cell
tumors, and malignant fibrous histiocytoma.
Pathogenesis

Histiocytic sarcomas are characterized by localized
or disseminated infiltration of malignant histiocytes.
Expected immunohistochemical expression pattern
for HS in snap‐frozen tissue samples is CD1+, CD4‐,
CD11c+, CD11d‐, MHC II+, ICAM1+, Thy ‐1+/‐.
Hemophagocytic HS expresses MHC II, beta‐2 integrin,
and CD11d. The disease is familial in Bernese mountain
dogs in which an oligogenic mode of transmission has
been proposed.
Signalment

Histiocytic sarcoma affects mainly Bernese mountain
dogs, Rottweilers, flat‐coated and golden retrievers with
a median age at presentation of 8 years. The tumor has
been found to have a male predisposition in Bernese
mountain dogs and flat‐coated retrievers.
Clinical Signs

Localized HS is reported to be most common in the
bone, appendicular joints, and skin. Distant metastasis

1443

VetBooks.ir

1444

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

to the lungs, lymph nodes, and abdominal viscera has
been reported in up to 91% of cases. Affected dogs are
usually presented for lameness or a soft tissue swelling.
In dogs with disseminated HS, the clinical signs are
vague and include anorexia, lethargy, and weight loss.
Pulmonary involvement is common and dogs may show
evidence of dyspnea at the time of initial presentation.
Neurologic abnormalities, including ataxia and paraparesis, are also common. Other organs often affected
include the liver and spleen. Although clinicopathologic
findings are nonspecific, anemia, thrombocytopenia,
and hypoalbuminemia were consistently reported in
cases of hemophagocytic HS. Diffuse splenomegaly
with ill‐defined masses was also consistently present in
these cases.

and prednisone has also been reported to induce a temporary response.

Diagnosis

­Sterile Nodular Panniculitis

The diagnosis is based on clinical signs, signalment, and
cytologic and histopathologic findings. The main clinical differential diagnoses are other neoplasias and systemic histiocytosis. Both localized and disseminated HS
have the potential for highly aggressive behavior so
complete staging to determine disease extent is recommended to determine possible treatments and prognosis. Cytologic finding include large round cells with
foamy cytoplasm and multinucleated giant cells admixed
with spindle‐shaped cells. Histopathologically, the tumors
are poorly demarcated and the neoplastic infiltrate consists of pleomorphic mononuclear cells and multinucleated
giant cells. Phagocytosis of neutrophils and erythrocytes is not uncommon. Marked anisokaryosis and
anisocytosis with high mitotic rate are also present. The
histopathologic findings and the use of immunohistochemical staining help differentiate these tumors from
other round cell tumors.
Recently, a screening program has been proposed for
early detection of disseminated HS in Bernese mountain
dogs. The program suggests screening of Bernese mountain dogs over 4 years of age every six months, including
diagnostic imaging and measurement of ferritin as a
blood‐borne marker of the disease.
Therapy

For cases of localized HS, improved outcome has been
reported with the use of localized therapy, including surgery and radiation therapy. Unfortunately, the rate of
metastasis is very high (up to 91%) so the use of adjuvant
systemic therapy may be beneficial. The disseminated
form of the disease usually has poor sensitivity to chemotherapy. Lomustine, doxorubicin, and vincristine have
been used with variable success. The use of bisphosphonates has been proposed to increase the effectiveness of
chemotherapy against HS cells. The use of a multiple
drug protocol including cyclophosphamide, vincristine,

Prognosis

In general, the prognosis is poor. Dogs with localized
HS receiving aggressive localized treatment and systemic chemotherapy may have a better prognosis with
a median survival time of 568 days. The median survival time for dogs with disseminated HS receiving
chemotherapy is 106 days. The presence of distant
metastasis or disseminated disease worsens the prognosis. Many dogs are euthanized at the time of diagnosis because of poor clinical condition and poor
prognosis.

Panniculitis refers to inflammation of the subcutaneous fat and it may be associated with a variety of conditions. Sterile nodular panniculitis (SNP) refers to
sterile inflammation of the subcutaneous fat tissue of
unknown origin. Clinical signs include single or multiple subcutaneous nodules, intermittent fever, and
anorexia.
Concurrent inflammation of the fat in other organs
can be seen in cases of SNP. Skin lesions can be solitary
or multiple and multiple lesions can be associated with
systemic signs including fever, lethargy, and anorexia.
Pathogenesis
Sterile nodular panniculitis has been documented in
association with systemic lupus erythematosus, pancreatitis and pancreatic tumors, rheumatoid arthritis, and
lymphoplasmacytic colitis. In people, a deficiency of
alpha‐1‐antitrypsin, a protease inhibitor, has been suggested to be a predisposing factor. In dogs, this association has not been made with certainty. In one dog with
panniculitis in which alpha‐1‐antitrypsin was found to
be low, a Bartonella infection was present, making it difficult to determine the cause. In one retrospective study,
37% (16/43) of the patients had prior surgery with lesions
developing at the surgery site.
Signalment
A large retrospective study did not identify any age,
breed or sex predilection; however, others suggest 3–5
years as the most common age of onset and dachshunds,
miniature poodles, and collies as the breeds at increased
risk for SNP. In two studies, the most affected dogs were
neutered, suggesting no gender predilection.

VetBooks.ir

164 Canine Sterile Papular and Nodular Skin Diseases

Clinical Signs
Clinically, SNP manifests as single or multiple subcutaneous nodules varying in size from a few millimeters
to several centimeters in diameter. Lesions can be of
normal skin color or be erythematous or bluish in
color. Initially, the nodules are firm but they may liquefy and become soft. Some lesions regress while others develop draining tracts and become ulcerated
(Figure 164.3).
Well‐delineated ulcers are characteristic. Draining
lesions discharge an oily, clear to yellowish brown material, which may also be hemorrhagic (Figure 164.4).
Nodules may heal with scarring and are more commonly found on the trunk but can occur anywhere.
Fever, lethargy, and anorexia are commonly seen in dogs
with multiple lesions; these signs occur simultaneously
or just before the beginning of nodule formation. Other

Figure 164.3 Multifocal areas of ulceration on the lateral thorax of
a Labrador retriever with sterile nodular panniculitis.

systemic signs reported include peripheral lymphadenopathy, joint effusion and pain, vomiting, and abdominal pain.
Diagnosis
Sterile nodular panniculitis must be differentiated from
other forms of panniculitis and other diseases with similar clinical presentation, including infectious diseases
such as bacterial, fungal or mycobacterial infection, sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome, foreign
bodies, injection site reaction, insect bite, drug reaction,
and neoplasia. Sterile nodular panniculitis is diagnosed
based on the patient’s history and clinical signs, exclusion of other causes of panniculitis, and cytologic and
histopathologic findings. It can be a cutaneous marker of
a concurrent disease process so a systematic diagnostic
approach is needed to help identify a possible etiologic
factor.
A complete history, physical examination, and minimum database including hemogram, chemistry profile
and urinalysis can serve as guides in deciding which
additional test(s) will be useful in the diagnosis. In a
recent study, neutrophilia, increased alkaline phosphatase (ALP), mild hypoglycemia, and hypoalbuminemia were present in over 50% of cases with systemic
involvement. Cytologic evaluation of aspirates from
intact lesions can vary in appearance from suppurative
to pyogranulomatous or granulomatous with fat droplets
or cells present and no microorganisms. Aspirates from
deep firm nodules may show spindle cells that resemble
neoplastic cells. The definitive diagnosis can be based
only on histopathologic findings. Wedge biopsies should
be performed to collect samples that include the epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous tissue. The sample should
be collected aseptically if submitted for fungal, bacterial
(aerobic/anaerobic), and mycobacteria cultures. Bacterial
and fungal cultures of intact nodules yield no growth.
Special stains of biopsy samples can be used to help eliminate bacteria and fungi as causative agents. Some organisms are difficult to culture or identify with routine
methods, and molecular studies like polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) are necessary. This is particularly true for
mycobacteria and Leishmania.
Therapy

Figure 164.4 Oily, hemorrhagic discharge from an ulcerated
nodule in a Weimaraner with sterile nodular panniculitis.
Source: Courtesy of Dr Melanie Hnot.

Surgical excision of solitary masses can be curative. Dogs
with multiple lesions are treated with immunosuppressive drugs. In dogs, oral prednisone or prednisolone is
usually effective at 2 mg/kg/day for two weeks; then, the
patient should be reevaluated. If remission is achieved
within that time, the dose should be decreased by 25%
every seven days until the lowest effective dose is given

1445

VetBooks.ir

1446

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

every 48 hours. Regression of the lesions may take 2–8
weeks. If remission has not been achieved after four
weeks of daily immunosuppressive doses of glucocorticoids, the case may require combination therapy with
other immunosuppressive drugs such as azathioprine or
ciclosporin. Topical and intralesional corticosteroids
have been effective in some cases, and may be the treatment of choice when systemic immunosuppressive therapy is contraindicated. In addition to immunosuppressive
treatment, vitamin E and potassium iodide have been
recommended, but their efficacy is unknown.
Prognosis
The prognosis is usually good, with most cases showing
a good response to treatment. Some cases may require
prolonged immunosuppressive therapy.

­Sterile Granuloma/Pyogranuloma
Syndrome
Sterile granuloma/pyogranuloma syndrome (SGPS) is an
uncommon disease presenting clinically with cutaneous
papules, nodules or plaques of unknown origin. The
lesions may be solitary or multiple, and localized or
generalized.
Pathogenesis
Sterile granuloma/pyogranuloma syndrome is an idiopathic canine skin disorder. The pathogenesis is
unknown, but the inflammatory nature of the infiltrate,
failure to demonstrate infectious agents, and the good to
excellent response to immunomodulating drugs support
it being an immune‐mediated disorder. However, it has
been hypothesized that SGPS may be related to an
immune response against persistent endogenous or
exogenous antigens, such as Leishmania spp. or
Mycobacterium spp. organisms or incomplete clearing of
associated antigens, causing a granulomatous/pyogranulomatous inflammatory reaction. The presence of
Leishmania spp. DNA has been documented in cases of
SGPS in Spain and Italy. The finding of antigenic fragments or organisms may become possible as we advance
our diagnostic techniques.

Clinical Signs
The clinical signs are characterized by firm, hair‐covered
to partially alopecic, erythematous papules, nodules, or
plaques. Lesions develop more commonly on the head
and distal extremities, and less commonly on the pinnae,
eyes, trunk, and abdomen. Lesions involving the tongue
and prepuce have been seen in individual dogs. In most
cases, the lesions are multiple and are not associated
with pain or pruritus. Occasionally, draining tracts and
ulceration can be observed, especially on lesions localized to the feet (Figure 164.5).
Lymphadenopathy was present in 31% of the cases in a
review including 29 dogs. Systemic signs associated with
this syndrome have not been reported. The condition
may resolve spontaneously or take a waxing and waning
course.
Diagnosis
Clinical differential diagnoses include bacterial and fungal infections, foreign bodies, SNP, cutaneous eosinophilic granulomas, and cutaneous neoplasms. Diagnosis
of SGPS is based on its clinical appearance, histopathologic findings, and failure to document the presence of
microorganisms. Wedge biopsies should be performed
to collect samples that include the epidermis, dermis,
and subcutaneous tissue. The samples should be collected aseptically if they are being submitted for cultures.
Histopathologically, SGPS is characterized by multifocal,
nodular to diffuse pyogranulomatous/granulomatous
dermal infiltrates. Special stains on biopsy samples are
negative. Aerobic and anaerobic bacterial cultures and
fungal culture from fresh tissue samples are also negative. Some organisms are difficult to culture or identify
with routine methods, and molecular studies such as

Signalment
Sterile granuloma/pyogranuloma syndrome can affect
dogs of any age and gender, but in a retrospective study
24/29 cases were male. It is seen more frequently in the
Great Dane, boxer, golden retriever, collie, dachshund,
English bulldog, and Weimaraner.

Figure 164.5 Partially alopecic, erythematous and ulcerated
nodule present in the interdigital space of digits 4 and 5 in a
dog with sterile granulomatous pyogranulomatous syndrome.
Source: Courtesy of Dr Wendy Lorch.

VetBooks.ir

164 Canine Sterile Papular and Nodular Skin Diseases

PCR are necessary. This is particularly true for mycobacteria and Leishmania.
Therapy
Surgical excision can be curative for solitary nodules or
plaques. Systemic treatment is often needed for multiple lesions, including immunosuppressive doses of
glucocorticoids or other immunomodulating agents.
The use of tetracycline and niacinamide combination
was shown to be effective for long‐term management in
a case of SGPS. A trial with this combination is warranted before more potent immunosuppressive drugs
are used. Tetracycline/niacinamide is used at 250 mg
of each for dogs less than 10 kg, and 500 mg of each in
dogs more than 10 kg q8–12h. If tetracycline is unavailable, doxycycline at 5 mg/kg q12h can be used. If
shortage of doxycycline occurs, minocycline can be
substituted for doxycycline.
Prednisone or prednisolone can be used at 2.2–4.4 mg/
kg q24h PO until resolution of the skin lesions (usually
10–14 days), then the medication can be tapered to the
minimal effective dose (see treatment for sterile nodular
panniculitis). Most cases require long‐term alternate‐day
glucocorticoid therapy to avoid reoccurrence. Refractory
cases may require the addition of other immunomodulating agents like ciclosporin or azathioprine.
Prognosis
The prognosis is good. The condition may resolve spontaneously or take a waxing and waning course. Most cases
required prolonged use of immunomodulatory drugs.

­Juvenile Cellulitis
Canine juvenile cellulitis, also known as juvenile pyoderma, puppy strangles, or juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis, is an uncommon
lymphocutaneous disease. It is characterized by a sterile
granulomatous or pyogranulomatous dermatitis and
lymphadenitis and usually affects young puppies.
Pathogenesis
The cause of juvenile cellulitis is unknown. Cytologic
examination of aspirates of affected lymph nodes and
skin lesions does not reveal infectious agents, and culture results of intact lesions are always negative for bacterial and fungal growth. In addition, the condition
responds dramatically to treatment with glucocorticoids,
suggesting an immune dysfunction. There may be a
­heritable component as it has been documented more

frequently in certain breeds and within litters. Vaccine
reactions have been postulated as the cause of juvenile
cellulitis, but the role of vaccine or other viruses in the
disease development remains unclear. A nonviral infectious etiology has also been considered but attempts to
isolate bacteria and fungi have not been successful.
Signalment
Most cases are young puppies less than 4 months old,
with a few reported cases in older dogs. No sex predilection has been reported. Breeds that appear to be predisposed include golden retrievers, dachshunds, Gordon
setters, and Weimeraners. Other breeds reported include
the Labrador retriever, Siberian husky, miniature poodle, Chesapeake Bay retriever, Lhasa apso, and mixed‐
breed dogs.
Clinical Signs
Early clinical signs consist of edematous moist dermatitis affecting mainly the eyelids, lips, and muzzle. The
affected skin rapidly develops papules and pustules.
Lesions are characterized by severe edema, fistulation,
and drainage with copious purulent discharge and crust
formation. Purulent otitis externa and conjunctivitis are
also common; the pinnae are often severely swollen and
may develop ulcerative lesions. Affected skin is usually
painful. Submandibular and prescapular lymphadenopathy is commonly present. Concurrent neurologic signs
and orthopedic problems have been reported preceding
or associated with the signs of juvenile cellulitis. The
patient may be lethargic and depressed and older dogs
may present with more severe systemic signs and pyrexia.
Diagnosis
Clinical differential diagnoses include angioedema in
acute cases and as lesions progress; staphylococcal pyoderma, demodicosis, and adverse cutaneous drug reaction should also be considered. Other less likely
differential diagnoses include neoplasia (cutaneous lymphoma, mast cell tumor) or infectious causes such as
nocardiosis, actinomycosis, mycobacterial infections,
and subcutaneous opportunistic mycoses. Diagnosis is
often based on characteristic clinical presentation, but
can be confirmed by cytologic or histopathologic findings. Tests may include fine needle aspirates of lymph
nodes, impression smears or skin scraping, cytology or
skin biopsy. Cytology from fine needle aspirates of
affected lymph nodes reveals a sterile granulomatous or
pyogranulomatous inflammation. Histopathologic findings usually reveal granulomatous or pyogranulomatous
dermatitis which may extend into the panniculus.

1447

VetBooks.ir

1448

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

Furunculosis and suppurative inflammation have also
been reported in advanced cases.
Therapy
Treatment consists of immunosuppressive doses of
glucocorticoids. Initial treatment should be aggressive, as scarring can be severe if the disease is not controlled quickly. Oral prednisone or prednisolone can
be given at 2 mg/kg/day until lesions resolve, usually
2–4 weeks, and then slowly tapered off completely
over the next few weeks. Some dogs may respond
­b etter to oral dexamethasone at 0.2 mg/kg/day (initial
dose). Antibiotics should be given if secondary bacterial

infections are present. Oral cephalexin can be given at
25–30 mg/kg q12h for the duration of the corticosteroid treatment. Ciclosporin has also been effective in
cases refractory to glucocorticoids. Griseofulvin was
used with good results in six puppies at the dose range
of 14.2–34 mg/kg q12h. All cases were completely
recovered within three weeks. The authors postulated
that griseofulvin could induce downregulatory signals
within the lesions.
Prognosis
The prognosis is good. Most cases respond well to treatment and relapses are uncommon.

­Further Reading
Affolter VK, Moore PF. Canine cutaneous and systemic
histiocytosis: reactive histiocytosis of dermal dendritic
cells. Am J Dermatopathol 2000; 22(1): 40–8.
Contreary CL, Outerbridge CA, Affolter VK, et al. Canine
sterile nodular panniculitis: a retrospective study of 39
dogs. Vet Dermatol 2015; 26(6): 451–8.
Miller WH, Griffin CE, Campbell KL, eds. Muller and
Kirk’s Small Animal Dermatology, 7th edn. St Louis,
MO: Elsevier, 2013.

Moore PF. A review of histiocytic diseases of dogs and
cats. Vet Pathol 2014; 51(1):167–84.
Mullin C, Clifford CA. Histiocytic sarcoma and
hemangiosarcoma update. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2019; 49(5): 855–879.
Paździor‐Czapula K, Rotkiewicz T, Otrocka‐Domagała I, et al.
Morphology and immunophenotype of canine cutaneous
histiocytic tumours with particular emphasis on diagnostic
application. Vet Res Commun 2015; 39(1): 7–17.

VetBooks.ir

1449

165
Parasitic Skin Diseases
Elizabeth E. Toops, DVM, MS, DACVD (Dermatology)
Virginia Veterinary Specialists, Charlottesville, VA, USA

­Demodicosis
Canine Demodicosis
Etiology/Pathophysiology

Canine demodicosis is currently known to be caused by
three species of mites: Demodex canis, D. injai, and D. cornei. Demodex canis and D. injai are thought to be two separate species. However, D. cornei, a short‐bodied mite, is
believed to be a morphologic variant of D. canis. Demodex
canis and D. injai live within the hair follicles or sebaceous
glands, and D. cornei lives on the stratum corneum.
Recent studies using real‐time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) have validated the widely held belief that all
dogs, healthy and diseased, harbor D. canis mites in their
skin. Puppies are believed to acquire D. canis from their
mothers at birth. However, the mode of transmission of
D. injai and D. cornei is currently not known.
Demodex canis mites have a life cycle involving four
stages. They begin as fusiform eggs. These eggs develop
into six‐legged larvae, then eight‐legged nymphs,
­followed by the adults. The life cycle of D. cornei and
D. injai has not been investigated but it is likely to mirror
the life cycle of D. canis. Adult D. injai mites are much
longer than the D. canis species (Figure 165.1). Adult
D. cornei mites have a short tail (Figure 165.2).
Demodicosis caused by D. canis can occur in juvenile
(≤18 months) or adult dogs (>4 years). Older dogs that
develop demodicosis may have another disease process
leading to an immune dysfunction that allows the mites
to multiply and cause disease. Some examples include
hyperadrenocorticism, hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, or malignant neoplasia. Immunosuppressive therapy
can also result in a proliferation of mites. This includes
topical and oral corticosteroids and oclacitinib maleate
(Apoquel® for dogs; Zoetis). Allergic dermatitis is often a
concurrent diagnosis. Often, no cause is identified for

the development of adult‐onset demodicosis. Demodex
injai has only been reported in adult dogs.
The reason for development of demodicosis in some
dogs versus others is not precisely known. We do know
that certain breeds develop disease more commonly than
others, suggesting the influence of genetics. Breeds more
commonly diagnosed with demodicosis caused by
D. canis include the shih tzu, West Highland white terrier,
English bulldog, and Boston terrier. In the author’s experience, pit bull terriers and Yorkshire terriers also seem
overrepresented. Demodicosis caused by D. injai has
been noted at greater frequency in terriers and shih tzus.
Other factors suggested to play a role include parasitism, inadequate nutrition, and stress. However, many
affected patients do not have these problems. Various ex
vivo studies have investigated the immune response of
dogs with juvenile‐onset generalized demodicosis caused
by D. canis, but a defect has yet to be identified.
Nevertheless, the current belief is that these dogs inherit
an immune dysfunction of variable severity linked to a
subset of T cells capable of recognizing specific mite
antigens and keeping the mites in small numbers. This
theory, however, needs to be validated. Overexpression
of the Toll‐like receptor 2 gene may result in the clinical
findings associated with demodicosis.
History and Clinical Signs

There are two types of infestations of Demodex mites:
localized and generalized. The localized variant consists
of one or more lesions usually on the face and forelegs.
These cases typically self‐resolve and affect puppies. An
infestation is considered generalized when large body
areas, several localized lesions, an entire body region, or
two or more paws are affected. This form primarily
begins at the puppy stage and may resolve, but typically
progresses without treatment as the puppy ages.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1450

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

(a)

(b)
Figure 165.2 Adult Demodex cornei.

Figure 165.1 (a) Adult Demodex canis. (b) Adult Demodex injai.
Source: Courtesy of Dr Linda Frank.

Demodex canis infestation can cause a variety of signs.
Lesions seen can include alopecia, erythema, scales, papules, and pustules. If hair follicles rupture (i.e., furunculosis), severe inflammation associated with tracts
draining serosanguineous to purulent exudate is noted
(Figure 165.3).
Lymphadenopathy and/or fever may occur in these
cases especially if large areas of the body are affected.
Follicular casts and comedones are very typical lesions.
Pruritus may or may not be present and is usually noted
when secondary infection or seborrhea occurs. Secondary
superficial or deep bacterial infection is often present in

Figure 165.3 Juvenile‐onset generalized demodicosis caused by
Demodex canis. Diffuse alopecia, erythema, and edema are noted.
Hemorrhagic crusts on the lateral aspect of the face correspond to
areas of furunculosis.

the generalized form of the disease and may aggravate
lesions, resulting in crusts, pustules, thickened skin,
and hyperpigmentation. Paws rarely are affected alone
and lesions can be similar to the ones described. Bullae

VetBooks.ir

165 Parasitic Skin Diseases

and fistulous tracts are also present on paws when furunculosis develops (Figure 165.4).
Demodex cornei mites have been found in demodicosis
caused by D. canis, suggesting that these mites are a morphologic variant of D. canis and not a separate species.
Demodex injai typically manifests with dorsal and
occasionally facial seborrhea oleosa (Figure 165.5). In
these areas, hypotrichosis is present. Pruritus may also
be noted.
Diagnosis

Diagnosis of D. canis infestation involves performing
multiple deep skin scrapings. As mites live in the hair
follicles and sebaceous glands, the lesional area is
squeezed before scraping in an attempt to extrude the
mites. The scraping should be deep enough that capillary
bleeding occurs. Multiple adult mites and/or immature
forms are diagnostic. Mites should be easy to find if skin
scrapings are performed adequately. If only a few mites
are found after multiple skin scrapings in an animal with

clinical signs suggestive of demodicosis, consider this
finding important. This scenario is typically encountered
in cases of juvenile, localized demodicosis.
Similar technique should be applied when D. injai
infestation is suspected; however, mites can be harder to
find because they are present in small numbers and often
in sebaceous glands, making their extrusion difficult.
Superficial scrapings should be adequate for D. cornei
but mites are typically not easy to find.
Trichoscopy may also reveal mites in severe cases of
demodicosis caused by D. canis. Various hairs are plucked
from affected areas, placed in mineral oil on a glass slide
and covered with a cover slip before microscopic evaluation. These may or may not be positive in affected dogs.
Acetate tape impressions of affected squeezed skin have
recently been shown to reveal mites in 100% of samples.
Mites can also be found on cytology of exudate collected
from draining tract lesions. Mites may also be identified
using a zinc sulfate centrifugal fecal flotation technique. It
is important to emphasize that sensitivity of these tests is
generally lower than that of deep skin scrapes adequately
performed. Biopsy may be needed in Chinese shar‐peis or
dogs with fibrotic lesions especially affecting the paws.
Mites can be found in the stratum corneum, hair follicles,
and on occasion the sebaceous glands. Inflammation
may present as an interface mural folliculitis, nodular
dermatitis, or a ­suppurative folliculitis and furunculosis.
Therapy

Figure 165.4 Feet of a dog with juvenile‐onset generalized
demodicosis caused by Demodex canis. Multiple tracts draining
serosanguineous exudate correspond to areas of furunculosis.

Figure 165.5 Excessive oil along the dorsum of a West Highland
white terrier with demodicosis caused by Demodex injai.

Affected dogs should be treated with appropriate systemic antibiotics, if indicated. Supportive care may be
needed in severe cases. Underlying disease processes
should be addressed. Localized cases are typically self‐
limiting and resolve without treatment in about 6–8
weeks. Generalized cases should be treated for one
month beyond two negative consecutive skin scrapings.
Skin scrapings are recommended monthly to assess
­progress. Numbers of live versus dead mites and their life
stages can help assess response to therapy.
The most effective treatments are amitraz, macrocyclic
lactones, and isoxazolines. The only treatment ­currently
licensed in the United States is amitraz. Labeled treatment is a 0.025% amitraz (Mitaban®; Zoetis) solution used
as a dip every 14 days. Variations of this therapy protocol,
such as weekly applications at 0.025%, 0.05%, 0.075% or
0.1%, can be considered for more difficult cases. Removal
of follicular debris, crusts, and hair that prevents penetration of the solution into the hair follicle is an important
part of this treatment regimen; therefore, medium to long
hair coats should be clipped and crusts removed prior to
dipping. This chemical is a monoamine oxidase inhibitor
as well as an alpha‐2‐adrenergic a­ gonist. Potential side‐
effects include lethargy, ataxia, vomiting and diarrhea,
polyuria and polydipsia, bradycardia, depression, and
hyperglycemia. The person ­providing treatment should

1451

VetBooks.ir

1452

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

not directly contact the solution or inhale it. Application
in a well‐ventilated area is important.
Ivermectin is a therapy that is often very efficacious in
treating demodicosis. Herding breeds should be assessed
for a mutation of the ABCB1 (formerly MDR1) gene
which encodes for the cell membrane transporter
P‐­glycoprotein. This mutation can lead to severe toxicosis
with avermectins. Some of the breeds reported to be predisposed to this mutation include collies, border c­ ollies,
Shetland sheepdogs, Australian shepherds, Old English
sheepdogs, white Swiss shepherds, long‐haired whippets,
McNab, and silken windhound. This mutation is still
possible in any dog breed, but less likely. The genetic test
for the mutated gene can be done through Washington
State University College of Veterinary Medicine.
Possible side‐effects associated with ivermectin toxicosis include lethargy, vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia, mydriasis, and ataxia. In severe cases, seizures, coma, and death
can result. Side‐effects can also occur in dogs that carry a
normal ABCB1 gene and are often less severe and may
resolve by lowering the dosage. Due to possible side‐
effects, an incremental dose increase is strongly suggested.
The dosage range is 0.3–0.6 mg/kg once a day PO. The
author determines dosing by calculating the dose desired
in this range and starting at one‐third this dose. This is
given for one week, followed by two‐thirds the final dose
for one week, then ending at the final dose desired.
Other macrocyclic lactones that can be used are
­moxidectin and doramectin. Moxidectin is dosed at 0.2–
0.5 mg/kg/day PO. Again, gradual dosing is indicated.
Possible side‐effects include those listed for ivermectin.
Moxidectin is also available as a topical product in combination with imidacloprid (Advantage Multi® for dogs;
Bayer). This is an approved European treatment applied
weekly for demodicosis. It is labeled for monthly usage in
the United States but has shown better results when
applied every 1–2 weeks, primarily for juvenile‐onset cases
and mild forms of demodicosis. Doramectin can be given
at 0.6 mg/kg subcutaneously (SC) or PO once a week. The
SC administration has resulted in better outcomes.
Milbemycin oxime (Interceptor® for dogs; Elanco) is
another efficacious product. This can be used at 0.5 mg/
kg PO once daily increasing by 0.5 mg/kg every seven
days to a final dosage of 2.0 mg/kg/day. This medication
is generally well tolerated. Mild neurologic side‐effects
have been noted. Breeds that do not tolerate ivermectin,
including collies, may tolerate this medication but care is
recommended to ensure no adverse side‐effects ensue,
as neurologic effects are still possible. Ataxia has been
noted in dogs homozygous for the ABCB1 gene mutation at a dosage of 1.5 mg/kg/day PO.
The newest available therapies are in the isoxazoline
class. These drugs are not labeled for treatment of Demodex
sp. but have been found to be very efficacious. These
include lotilaner (Credelio® for dogs; Elanco) at 20 mg/kg

PO, and sarolaner (Simparica® for dogs; Zoetis) given at
2 mg/kg PO. These products are labeled for monthly usage
for flea and tick prevention and treatment. Fluralaner
(Bravecto® for dogs; Merck) given once at a minimum dosage of 25 mg/kg PO has also been found to be very efficacious at treating demodicosis. This product is labeled for
administration every 12 weeks for the prevention and
treatment of flea and tick infestations in dogs. Afoxolaner
(Nexgard®; Merial) given at the minimum dosage of 2.5 mg/
kg PO every 14 days for two months has been found to be
very effective. However, only one dose may result in deep
negative skin scrapings. It is labeled for monthly usage for
flea and tick control and can be used in dogs 8 weeks of age
and older, whereas fluralaner and sarolaner can only be
used in dogs at least 6 months of age. Lotilaner, like afoxolaner, may be used in dogs as young as 8 weeks of age.
These parasiticides act by blocking insect GABA‐ and glutamate‐gated chloride channels and are generally very safe
but should be used with ­caution in dogs with a history of
seizures. Possible side‐effects include vomiting and diarrhea. Sarolaner may cause tremors, unsteadiness, or seizures. Fluralaner may cause seizures in patients which do
not have a history of seizures, but is labeled as safe for use
in breeding, pregnant, and lactating dogs, and in those
with the ABCB1 gene mutation. Lotilaner may also cause
an increase in blood urea nitrogen. Afoxolaner should be
used with caution in dogs with a history of seizures.
Females or males that have been treated should be
neutered due to the potential for passing the predisposition to develop demodicosis to offspring. In addition,
females should be spayed because the stress of a heat
cycle or pregnancy could worsen the disease.
Prognosis

Overall, prognosis is good. Recurrence of disease can
occur, so following the treatment recommendation of
30 days past two consecutive negative skin scrapings can
help prevent recurrences. Life‐long therapy may be
needed in some cases. Long‐term glucocorticoids are
not recommended in patients with demodicosis or that
have had demodicosis. The author believes that any glucocorticoids or oclacitinib maleate (Apoquel; Zoetis)
should be used with great caution. A dog is not considered cured until one year after treatment is completed.
With the advent of isoxazolines as maintenance flea and
tick ­preventtives, the likelihood of recurrence or even
development of demodicosis will probably diminish.
Feline Demodicosis
Etiology/Pathophysiology

Three species of demodectic mites have been implicated
in feline demodicosis. These include D. cati, D. gatoi, and
an uncommon, unnamed, morphologically distinct
Demodex mite. Demodex cati spends its life cycle in the

VetBooks.ir

165 Parasitic Skin Diseases

hair follicles and sebaceous glands. This mite is slightly
narrower than D. canis. Demodex gatoi has a shortened
abdomen and spends its life cycle on the epidermal
­surface. The length of the unnamed mite is between
D. cati and D. gatoi.
Demodicosis due to D. cati is typically associated with
an underlying disease or immunosuppressive therapy.
Concurrent diseases that may be present include feline
immunodeficiency virus, feline leukemia virus, diabetes
mellitus, squamous cell carcinoma in situ or other ­neoplastic
disorders, toxoplasmosis, systemic lupus ­erythematosus,
and hyperadrenocorticism. It has been reported to be
more common in the Burmese and Siamese breeds.
Demodex gatoi, unlike D. cati, is not generally associated with an underlying disease. However, it has been
identified in scrapings along with D. cati in cats positive
for feline immunodeficiency virus. This mite is more
commonly located in certain geographic areas. In the
United States, it is more often found in the south,
­especially in the Gulf of Mexico area.
Little is currently known about the unnamed Demodex
mite. The published reports have found this mite in cats
diagnosed with other concurrent illnesses or had recently
­recovered from illness.
History and Clinical Signs

Demodex cati can cause either a localized or generalized
infestation, both of which are rare. Localized demodicosis is primarily located around areas on the head, including in the ears, causing a ceruminous otitis externa,
particularly in feline immunodeficiency virus‐positive
cats. Pruritus is variable but typically not present. Other
signs include alopecia, erythema, and the presence of
scales and crusts. Generalized cases often affect the head
but lesions are also found elsewhere on the body.
Presentation is similar to the localized form, but may
include hyperpigmentation.
Demodicosis caused by D. gatoi is more common than
the disease caused by D. cati. It is contagious between
cats and pruritic. Clinical signs are typically fitting with
the degree of pruritus. Traumatic alopecia often results
from the severe pruritus on the sides of the thorax,
abdomen, and the medial aspect of the legs. Other signs
include erythema, scale, excoriation, and hyperpigmentation. A common clinical presentation is self‐­induced,
clinically noninflammatory, symmetric alopecia
(Figure 165.6). Some cats can be asymptomatic carriers.
Diagnosis

Skin scrapings should be performed in cases where feline
demodicosis is suspected. Broad, superficial scrapings
are performed to detect D. gatoi (surface mite), whereas
deep skin scrapings must be done to diagnose D. cati (follicular). Demodex gatoi mites are typically more d
­ ifficult
to find due to their small size and low numbers as cats

Figure 165.6 Self‐induced, clinically noninflammatory, symmetric
alopecia on the dorsum and thighs of a cat with demodicosis
caused by Demodex gatoi.

ingest these mites during grooming. Therefore, scraping
areas where the cat cannot groom may increase the
chances of finding mites. Fecal flotation may be another
means of finding D. gatoi. Cellophane tape impressions
viewed under the microscope may help to reveal the
mites. A negative test does not rule out this infestation so
diagnosis in many cases may only be made based on history and response to a therapeutic trial. The unnamed
mite has been found via trichoscopy and skin scrapings.
Therapy

Underlying causes leading to the development of demodicosis caused by D. cati should be evaluated. This disease
when localized may resolve spontaneously if underlying
diseases have been controlled. Amitraz (Mitaban; Zoetis)
at concentrations of 0.0125–0.025% applied weekly may
help. Cats are sensitive to this product and it is not recommended in cats with diabetes. A generally safe option
is lime sulfur applied as a 2–4% solution every week.
Unfortunately, therapy may need to be continued long
term as relapses are possible. Other treatment options
include doramectin administered weekly at 0.6 mg/kg SC
and ivermectin at 0.2–0.3 mg/kg PO daily to every other
day. Cats should be monitored for side‐effects such as
neurotoxicity. The off-label use of the oral isoxazoline
fluralaner (Bravecto) for the treatment of demodicosis
has been reported in cats. A single oral dosage of 28 mg/kg
resolved D. cati in one case report. No side‐effects were
noted. Topical fluralaner, which is available for cats, may
cause vomiting and diarrhea, decreased appetite, or
lethargy. It may also cause alopecia or crusting. While a
single topical treatment has been shown to be efficacious
for the treatment of Otodectes cynotis in cats, there are

1453

VetBooks.ir

1454

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

currently no studies evaluating it’s use in the treatment
of feline demodicosis. Independent of the parasiticidal
chosen, treatment should be continued for 30 days past
two consecutive negative skin scrapings performed 4–6
weeks apart.
Options for D. gatoi include the above treatment
protocols described for amitraz or lime sulfur dips.
­
Treatment ­typically is needed for 6–8 weeks. In‐contact
cats should be treated as well. Application of a moxidectin/imidacloprid (Advantage Multi for cats; BayerDVM)
spot‐on product every week to two weeks for up to three
months has been anecdotally reported to work well in
some cases. It has also been shown to be efficacious in
one case report, applied weekly for 10 doses. Also, ivermectin at 0.2–0.3 mg/kg PO every 24–48 hours may be
effective. The extra-label use of oral fluralaner (Bravecto)
at 26–34 mg/kg given once has recently been shown to
be another efficacious treatment option.
No specific treatment recommendations exist for the
unnamed mite, but concurrent daily ivermectin at
0.3 mg/kg PO and 8 oz/gal of diluted lime sulfur rinses
twice weekly for 6–8 weeks has been used. Also, SC ivermectin at 0.6 mg/kg daily for four weeks has been used.
For all types of feline demodicosis, isoxazolines may
prove to be efficacious. Also, topical fluralaner may be a
viable option as opposed to oral administration. More
studies are needed in this area.
Prognosis

The prognosis of feline demodicosis varies, especially in
cases of D. cati where underlying systemic disease is likely
present. Overall, prognosis varies from good to guarded.

Description of mite characteristics is important in differentiating canine scabies from the feline Sarcoptidae
mite, Notoedres cati. Sarcoptes scabei mites are ovoid
and small, with two anterior pairs of short legs with long
unjointed stalks and suckers. There are two pairs of
­rudimentary posterior legs that do not extend beyond
the body wall of the mite (Figure 165.7). The anus is
terminal.
Research suggests that young dogs of any breed and of
both sexes are more likely to become infested with the
mites, suggesting that age‐related immunity plays a role
in pathogenesis. Nutritional status and oxidative stress
also play a role in development of infestation. Specifically,
alterations in the oxidant and antioxidant balance and
greater apoptosis of peripheral leukocytes may contribute to a dog’s susceptibility to infestation.
History and Clinical Signs

Scabies causes an intense pruritus. It is important to
question if other pets or humans in the same household
are also pruritic as this is a valuable diagnostic clue.
However, some dogs can be asymptomatic carriers. As
previously mentioned, this mite typically affects specific
body regions but any body region can be affected.
Corticosteroids may be beneficial in some patients at the
beginning of therapy to reduce pruritus.
Early signs include papules and scales. Excoriations
may also be present. With chronicity, self‐induced alopecia, hyperpigmentation, hyperkeratosis or keratinous
crusts, and lichenification may develop. The crusts
may become thick and yellow (Figure 165.8). Peripheral
lymphadenopathy may be present. Some dogs only
­
develop erythema and excoriations.

­Scabies
Canine Scabies
Etiology/Pathophysiology

Sarcoptes scabei var. canis causes canine scabies, or
­sarcoptic mange. This is a highly contagious mite that is
transmitted between dogs as well as foxes and coyotes.
Fomites can also be a source of transmission. The female
burrows into the stratum corneum to lay eggs. The l­arvae
travel to the skin surface and develop into nymphs, which
may live on the skin surface or in the molting pocket that
may also be inhabited by larvae. The mites prefer areas
with less hair, so they are more commonly found on the
pinnae, elbows, hocks, and ventrum. They typically live
17–21 days. Depending on the humidity and temperature,
females and nymphs can survive 4–21 days away from the
host. These mites can cause disease at any time of year.
Other animals including cats, humans, and foxes can be
affected. Humans are usually only transiently affected.

Figure 165.7 Adult Sarcoptes scabei var. canis.

VetBooks.ir

165 Parasitic Skin Diseases

Figure 165.8 Alopecia and thick yellowish crusts covering the ear
margin of a dog with scabies.

Cats that become infested with Sarcoptes scabei var.
canis can develop dermatitis of the face and pinnae.
Papules and crusts are present. Dermatitis of the paws as
well as claw abnormalities may develop. Some cats may
also develop crusting and scaling over the body. Pruritus
is a variable finding. Such infestations are uncommon
and rare cases have been noted in indoor cats not co‐
habiting with dogs.
Diagnosis

Infestations with this mite are often diagnosed based on
history, clinical signs, and response to therapy. Multiple
superficial skin scrapings are required for diagnosis.
Unfortunately, as few as 20% of skin scrapings may reveal
mites or eggs. Finding even one is diagnostic of canine
scabies. It is suggested to scrape the aforementioned
areas that are generally affected even in the absence of
lesions, as well as areas with papules and yellow crusts.
Large numbers of mites are typically found on scrapings
from cats infested with Sarcoptes scabei var. canis.
An additional supportive test is to demonstrate the
pinnal‐pedal reflex. This test entails scratching the
­pinnal edge with a resultant ipsilateral leg making a
scratching motion. Most dogs with scabies mites have
this reflex (sensitivity of 81.8%); however, it can be rarely
positive in other diseases (specificity of 93.8%).
Laboratory testing utilizing an enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is available in certain countries.
This test has high specificity and sensitivity, but false‐
negative results are possible.
Therapy

Affected as well as in‐contact dogs should be treated.
Area treatments containing pyrethrins, permethrins or a
combination of these are available for use in the home
environment, keeping in mind that high concentrations

of permethrins (>0.1%) are toxic to cats. Discarding
­bedding is advised. In the United States, a licensed treatment is selamectin (Revolution® for dogs, Zoetis) applied
topically every 30 days for two doses; however, for better
results most dermatologists recommend administering it
every two weeks for 3–4 treatments. Lime sulfur dips at a
2–3% concentration every week for 4–6 weeks is another
option. Ivermectin at 0.2–0.4 mg/kg can be given PO
every seven days or SC every 14 days for 4–6 weeks.
Milbemycin given orally at 2 mg/kg every week for 4–6
treatments has been shown to be effective. An imidacloprid/moxidectin combination product (Advantage Multi)
is approved for the treatment of scabies in dogs and is
applied topically every 30 days for two doses. Amitraz
(Mitaban) solution at 0.025–0.03% applied over the whole
body every two weeks for three treatments or weekly for
4–6 treatments should be effective. Fipronil spray applied
to the entire body every two weeks for three applications
is another treatment option. Doramectin can be given at
0.2–0.6 mg/kg SC every seven days for 4–6 weeks.
Many of these patients have secondary infections
which should also be identified and addressed.
Isoxazolines have been shown to effectively treat scabies
as well. One dose of fluralaner (Bravecto) at a minimum
of 25 mg/kg orally or topically has been shown to eliminate scabies mites. Afoxolaner (Nexgard) given at a minimum dosage of 2.5 mg/kg PO for 1–2 monthly doses
should also eliminate these mites. Sarolaner (Simparica)
can also be used at approximately 2 mg/kg PO for two
monthly doses. There are no current publications relating to lotilaner (Credelio) and scabies mites, but the
author suspects it, too, would be efficacious at resolving
sarcoptic mange. Antiinflammatory doses of corticosteroids given for approximately one week may also help in
alleviating the pruritus caused by the mites.
The treatment protocols detailed under “Feline
­scabies” are also recommended for cats infested with
Sarcoptes scabei var. canis. However, three applications
of the moxidectin/imidacloprid (Advantage Multi)
­compound product applied every two weeks has been
shown to be more efficacious in five cats with sarcoptic
mange than weekly ivermectin at 0.2 mg/kg SC for four
weeks or selamectin (Revolution) administered every
two weeks for two treatments.
Prognosis

Most dogs with scabies are cured with treatment. Rare
cases have been noted to be refractory to ivermectin and
selamectin. The selamectin cases may have been related
to poor application on densely coated dogs. In some
cases, the author finds it beneficial to keep the patient on
monthly selamectin or an isoxazoline (unless it is fluralaner which is given every 3 months) when reinfestation is considered possible.

1455

VetBooks.ir

1456

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

Feline Scabies
Etiology/Pathophysiology

Feline scabies or notoedric mange is caused by Notoedres
cati. This mite can also affect foxes, dogs, rabbits, and
humans. The lesions on humans are transient. It commonly affects other cats in multiple cat residences as it is
very contagious. This mite typically occurs epizootically
in endemic areas.
Notoedres cati follows the same life cycle as Sarcoptes
scabei var. canis. Morphologically, it is similar to the
canine scabies mite but is smaller, the unjointed stalk is
of medium length, more striations are present on the
body, and the anus is dorsally oriented.
History and Clinical Signs

Notoedres cati causes intense pruritus predominantly of
the facial region. The skin becomes thickened with folds
(Figure 165.9). Crusts are yellowish and tightly adherent.
Excoriations and partial alopecia may develop. Lesions
begin on pinnal edges and spread over the face and neck.
The paws and perineum may be affected and peripheral
lymphadenopathy may occur.
Diagnosis

Microscopy of superficial skin scrapings of affected cats
typically reveals several mites. Diagnosis is also achieved
by identifying the eggs or fecal pellets.
Therapy

sulfur dips for 4–8 weeks are beneficial. Treatment should
continue until negative skin scrapings and resolution of
lesions are obtained. Ivermectin at 0.2–0.3 mg/kg may be
given PO or SC every 1–2 weeks for 3–4 treatments.
Doramectin can also be given at a dose of 0.2–0.3 mg/kg
SC once. Selamectin (Revolution) applied topically once or
twice every 14–30 days is another option. The moxidectin/­
imidacloprid (Advantage Multi) topical product has been
shown to be effective after one application.

­Cheyletiellosis
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Cheyletiella, also known as walking dandruff, is a mite
that generally results in a dermatitis of varying severity.
Cheyletiella parasitovorax, C. blakei, and C. yasguri are
the species of most concern in dogs and cats, with C. yasguri more likely to be found on dogs and C. blakei more
likely to be found on cats, although these species are not
entirely host specific. All species are contagious, and
humans in contact with animals carrying the mite can
become transiently affected.
These nonburrowing mites produce ova that attach to
the dog or cat hairs. They are large mites that live in the
keratin on the surface of the skin. They have four pairs of
legs with combs and their mouthparts have characteristic hooks (Figure 165.10).

Affected and in‐contact cats should be treated. Safety must
be considered in choosing treatments. Weekly 2–3% lime

Figure 165.9 Thick crusts on the convex aspect of the pinna of a
cat with chronic notoedric mange. Source: Courtesy of Dr Clarissa
Pimentel de Souza.

Figure 165.10 Cheyletiella yasguri mite; note the characteristic
hooks of the accessory mouthparts.

VetBooks.ir

165 Parasitic Skin Diseases

The mites complete their life cycle on the host but
mites and eggs attached to the hair shaft can contaminate the environment, creating a source for reinfestation.
The adult females can also live off the host for approximately 10 days.
History and Clinical Signs
This mite infestation may result in varying levels of pruritus and severity of clinical signs. Any breed may be
affected, but an increased incidence in cocker spaniels
and boxers has been anecdotally reported. The resultant
dermatitis manifests as dry scales along the dorsum
(Figure 165.11). This often worsens over time with hair
loss and an increase in pruritus. Cats can also develop
miliary dermatitis.
Diagnosis
To diagnose Cheyletiella, material is collected from
affected areas by acetate tape impressions, flea combings, or superficial skin scrapes. This material can be
directly examined by visual inspection (often utilizing a
magnifying glass) or using a microscope. If available,
evaluate material in a Petri dish in mineral oil utilizing a
dissecting microscope. Fecal examinations may also
reveal the mite as many pruritic animals will ingest the
offending parasite in the process of licking, biting or
chewing the affected areas. Two other means of garnering material for examination include a vacuum sample of
the affected area or performing a trichoscopy of affected
hairs. Some dermatologists find that scraping papules
(which are usually rare or absent) and microscopically

examining the sample with mineral oil increases the
chances of finding the mite. However, none of these
diagnostic tests is 100% sensitive so a treatment trial may
be necessary to confirm a presumptive diagnosis.
Therapy
Fortunately, cheyletiellosis typically responds well to
therapy. Options include weekly applications of lime
­sulfur or amitraz (Mitaban) dips, or pyrethrin shampoos
and sprays for 3–4 treatments. However, amitraz and
especially permethrins are not generally recommended
for cats due to drug sensitivities. Fipronil in the spray
form every two weeks for 3–4 treatments or topical concentrated solution every 30 days for three treatments are
other options. Selamectin (Revolution) can be applied
monthly or every two weeks for 4–6 weeks. Ivermectin at
0.2–0.3 mg/kg can be given PO weekly for 3–6 ­treatments
or by SC injection every 14 days for three treatments.
Doramectin is an option at 0.2–0.4 mg/kg SC every seven
days for 4–6 weeks. One other treatment is milbemycin
oxime (Interceptor) given at 2 mg/kg PO weekly for 3–4
doses. Because this is a highly contagious mite, all
­animals in the home should be treated.

­Lynxacarus radovsky
Etiology/Pathophysiology
This mite, otherwise known as the cat fur mite, is found
worldwide, typically in warm humid climates, such as in
Australia, Brazil, and Puerto Rico. In the United States, it
has been reported in Hawaii, Florida, and Texas. This
mite is specific to the cat, but has been found on a dog.
Cats acquire this mite through direct contact, but fomites
must also be considered.
History and Clinical Signs
Clinical signs include a dull, unkempt coat giving the hair
a “salt‐and‐pepper” appearance (Figure 165.12). Lesions
may include alopecia, papules, and crusting and are
typically present along the dorsum. Heavily infested cats
or those with a long‐term infestation can have exfoliative lesions. Pruritus is not typically present and when
noted, a search for fleas or other external parasites is
warranted.
Diagnosis

Figure 165.11 Cocker spaniel with cheyletiellosis showing
excessive scaling along the dorsum.

Diagnosis of L. radovsky infestation is accomplished by
identifying the mite with microscopy. Trichoscopy and
tape impressions are the ideal diagnostic methods. The

1457

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

VetBooks.ir

1458

Figure 165.12 Cat with Lynxacarus radovsky infestation showing a
“salt‐and‐pepper” hair coat appearance. Source: Courtesy of
Dr Clarissa Pimentel de Souza.

mites have a long body and ventrally oriented head.
Sternal extensions attach to the host’s hair and the legs
have terminal suckers (Figure 165.13). These mites are
visualized attached to the hairs (Figure 165.14).
Therapy
Most parasiticidal treatments are effective. More efficacious options include lime sulfur dips or insecticidal
sprays such as fipronil, applied weekly to biweekly for

Figure 165.14 Trichoscopy from a cat with Lynxacarus radovsky
infestation. Note multiple mites attached to the hair shaft. Source:
Courtesy of Dr Clarissa Pimentel de Souza.

3–4 treatments. Ivermectin or doramectin can also be
given at 0.2–0.3 mg/kg SC every 1–2 weeks for 3–4 treatments. Ivermectin can also be given at this dosage orally.
Fluralaner (Bravecto) given off-label at a single dosage of
25–50 mg/kg PO or two topical applications of moxidectin/imidacloprid (Advantage Multi for cats) spot‐on
product two weeks apart has been shown to eradicate
the mites. Care must be taken when treating cats with
certain parasiticidal topicals, especially those that contain >0.1% permethrin, as this compound is toxic to cats.
It is suggested that in‐contact cats also be treated.

­Dermanyssus gallinae
Etiology/Pathophysiology
This mite primarily affects poultry but is contagious to
other animals including dogs, cats, and humans. It is a
vector of many significant diseases. Other names are the
poultry mite or red mite. These mites spend most of
their life span off the fowl host, residing in cracks, crevices, and nests within the poultry house. They feed at
night and once fed and engorged, they develop the red
coloration. Poultry mites are resilient and can survive up
to eight months away from fowl.
History and Clinical Signs

Figure 165.13 Lynxacarus radovsky mite. Source: Courtesy of
Dr Clarissa Pimentel de Souza.

Dogs and cats can be attacked by these mites when in
contact with poultry houses or from wild birds that enter
and nest in houses. This mite can cause severe pruritus
along with papules and crusts. Most cases present with
lesions on the limbs and dorsum.

VetBooks.ir

165 Parasitic Skin Diseases

Diagnosis
Finding the mite is best achieved by performing skin
scrapings. Mites may also be visualized microscopically
on samples collected with cellophane tape impressions.
Therapy
These mites generally respond well to almost all parasiticidal treatments. It is also recommended to treat the
­surrounding premises to prevent reinfestation.

­Pediculosis
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Pediculosis refers to a dermatitis caused by lice. Two
types affect dogs, Anoplura, or sucking lice, and
Mallophaga, or chewing lice. Linognathus setosus is the
sucking louse of dogs and Trichodectes canis the chewing
louse. Cats are parasitized only with a chewing louse,
Felicola subrostratus. The eggs are deposited on the hairs
of the host. The lice typically stay on one host but can be
transmitted by close contact. They are species specific.
The chewing lice survive primarily on epidermal debris
and hair but some species also take blood. The canine
chewing louse may carry Dipylidium caninum, or tapeworms. Sucking lice solely feed on the blood of the host
and can result in severe anemia.
History and Clinical Signs
Pediculosis is relatively uncommon, but more likely to be
noted in young and uncared‐for animals. Chewing lice
on the dog typically affect the dorsum, head, and tail and
can cause severe pruritus. In the cat, the face, ears, and
back are most commonly affected. Lesions on the dog
typically consist of trauma‐induced alopecia, seborrhea,
and excoriations. Papules and crusts may also be present.
Cats can present with no clinical signs or have intense
pruritus. The coat may be matted with scale, crust, and
alopecia. Sucking lice are primarily present on the pinnae and dorsum, and can result in weakness from the
ensuing anemia. Pruritus with resultant excoriations and
alopecia may also occur.
Diagnosis
Lice can be distinguished based on the morphology of
the head and associated mouthparts. Sucking lice have
an elongated, narrow head, whereas chewing lice have a
broader head with mouthparts adapted for chewing.
They can sometimes be found with direct visualization

of the mite or the nit (egg). Microscopy can be utilized to
view acetate tape impressions of hair and scale.
Therapy
Treatment should target the affected animals as well as
those in contact. Clipping of matted hairs is recommended. Topical sprays and soaks such as lime sulfur can
be utilized twice two weeks apart. However, most insecticidal therapies are efficacious. These include but are not
limited to ivermectin at 0.2 mg/kg PO or SC twice two
weeks apart, selamectin (Revolution) every two weeks for
2–4 treatments, or spot‐on fipronil (Frontline®) or spray
every two weeks. One application of fipronil or selamectin may work as well for chewing lice. Doramectin can
also be used at 0.2–0.4 mg/kg SC weekly for 3–4 weeks.
Imidacloprid (Advantage) spot‐on alone for one application to treat chewing or sucking lice or the combination
with moxidectin (Advantage Multi) applied t­opically
once for chewing lice should be effective. Fluralaner
(Bravecto) given once PO has been shown to eliminate
Linognathus setosus. Appropriate supportive care may be
required for anemic animals. Premises should be treated
as lice can survive 1–2 days off the host.

­Trombiculosis
History and Clinical Signs
Trombiculosis is a dermatitis caused by chigger mites.
The larval forms can cause infestation of dogs and cats.
Eutrombicula alfreddugesi, a mite found in the southeast and south central United States, and Neotrombicula
autumnalis, a mite more commonly found in Europe, are
notably orange‐red in coloration (Figure 165.15). They
typically affect patients in late summer and fall. The
­larval forms attach to the skin.
Lesions often occur in body regions that contact the
ground. However, in cats they are most commonly noted
around the eyes, mouth, and base of the pinnae. The
­larvae pierce the skin and produce pruritic papules and
crusts. Scaling and alopecia may also be present. Some
animals are asymptomatic.
Walchia americana is a chigger mite that has been
reported in cats. It has been found in the southwestern
and eastern United States. These mites preferentially
affect the ventrum, dorsum, and ears but have been
noted on the medial legs and interdigital spaces. Reported
lesions include nodules, papules, and wheals with scales
and yellow exudate. Swollen paws and cracked claws
have been noted.
Straelensia cynotis has been noted on dogs in some
European countries. It too causes infestation primarily in

1459

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

in that it shows a pseudoepitheliomatous follicular
hyperplasia and perifollicular mucinosis.

VetBooks.ir

1460

Therapy

Figure 165.15 Eutrombicula alfreddugesi larva. Source: Courtesy of
Dr Erica Toledo.

late summer and early autumn. This mite is found in the
follicular ostia. It causes papules and nodules typically
over the dorsum and head. Alopecia, scale, and erythema
have been noted. Pruritus appears to be dependent on
the presence of secondary infections.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis can be made with visualization of the reddish
colored mite attached to the skin. Definitive diagnosis
can be made by placing the mites obtained by skin
scraping on mineral oil and examining the sample
­
microscopically.
Diagnosis of Walchia americana is generally made
with skin scrapes. Biopsy can be helpful as well.
Unfortunately, skin scrapings are unrewarding with
Straelensia cynotis. The mite can be found within the
hair follicle on biopsy. Also, the histopathology is unique

Treatment of Eutrombicula or Neotrombicula usually
consists of 1–2 applications of topical parasiticidal agents
or dips. Otic products that have parasiticidal properties
can also be efficacious. Studied products include 0.25%
fipronil spray applied to the entire body monthly for 1–4
months. Another evaluated option is a permethrin‐
pyriproxyfen topical spray or spot‐on for dogs for 1–2
treatments. Systemic glucocorticoids may be indicated
to alleviate pruritus and antibiotics may be of benefit if
secondary superficial pyoderma is present.
Treatment of Walchia americana consists of the same parasiticidal products used for the treatment of Eutrombicula
and Neotrombicula. Treatment of Straelensia cynotis has
been suggested with macrocyclic lactones or fipronil.

­Ticks
Ixodid (hard) ticks and argasid (soft) ticks both can affect
cats and dogs. The ixodid ticks, which have a chitinous
shield, can serve as vectors of rickettsial, protozoal, and
viral diseases. They may also cause a hypersensitivity
reaction from their bite, and can sometimes result in tick
paralysis. The types of ixodid ticks of importance will
not be elaborated on in this section.
Argasid ticks do not have the chitinous shield, or
s­ cutum. Otobius megnini can inhabit the ear canal in
dogs and cats. The larvae and nymphs of this tick can
lead to otitis externa. They can cause a severe irritation.
Treatment includes manual removal of the ticks. Oil‐
based ear treatments may smother the tick. Prevention is
key to help reinfestation. Many topical and oral parasiticidal treatments offer tick prevention.

­Further Reading
Becskei C, de Bock F, Illambas J, et al. Efficacy and safety of
a novel oral isoxazoline, sarolaner (Simparica™), for the
treatment of sarcoptic mange in dogs. Vet Parasitol
2016; 222: 56–61.
Beugnet F, de Vos C, Liebenberg J, Halos L, Larsen D,
Fourie J. Efficacy of afoxolaner in a clinical field study in
dogs naturally infested with Sarcoptes scabiei. Parasite
2016; 23: 26.
Beugnet F, Halos L, Larsen D, de Vos C. Efficacy of oral
afoxolaner for the treatment of canine generalized
demodicosis. Parasite 2016; 23: 14.

Bowden DG, Outerbridge CA, Kissel MB, Baron JN,
White SD. Canine demodicosis: a retrospective study
of a veterinary hospital population in California,
USA (2000–2016). Vet Dermatol 2018; 29(1):
19–e10.
Duangkaew L, Hoffman H. Efficacy of oral fluralaner for
the treatment of Demodex gatoi in two shelter cats.
Vet Dermatol 2018; 29(3): 262.

VetBooks.ir

1461

166
Bacterial Pyodermas
Jennifer R. Schissler, DVM, MS, DACVD
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Pyodermas are bacterial infections of the skin and commonly involve coagulase‐positive staphylococci. Indeed,
staphylococcal pyoderma is one of the most common
conditions treated in clinical practice. For this reason,
this chapter is focused exclusively on staphylococcal
pyodermas. Staphylococcal infection opportunistically
arises secondary to dermatologic or systemic diseases
that prompt cutaneous physical or immunologic function insults. These may include hypersensitivity, endocrine, conformational, and keratinization disorders, as
well as an immunocompromised status. Clinical presentations are diverse, and mimic a multitude of other
dermatopathies. In the current era of antimicrobial
­
resistance, optimal outcomes for staphylococcal pyoderma are achieved via correct diagnosis, rational treatment and follow‐up, and management of the inciting
cause(s).
Staphylococcus pseudintermedius, previously identified as Staphylococcus intermedius, is the most common
etiologic agent in canine pyoderma. Staphylococcus
aureus, Staphylococcus schleiferi subsp. coagulans, and
coagulase‐negative staphylococci such as Staphylococcus
schleiferi subsp. schleiferi are isolated at a lesser frequency on healthy or inflamed skin.
Staphylococcal pyoderma is less prevalent in cats
than dogs. Feline keratinocyte adhesion of S. aureus
and S. pseudintermedius is inferior compared to human
and dog keratinocytes, perhaps a reflection of inferior
host adaptation. S. pseudintermedius, S. schleiferi, and
S. aureus are most frequently isolated; S. aureus is isolated at a higher frequency than in dogs.

­Pyoderma Classifications
and Presentations
Pyodermas are often categorized based on the depth of
infection (surface, superficial or deep) and the site
involved, particularly when describing a pyoderma
that affects a specific body region (e.g., interdigital
pyoderma, nasal pyoderma). These categorizations are
useful, particularly the depth of infection because
it dictates the methods and duration of therapeutic
interventions.
Surface Pyodermas
Acute Moist Dermatitis

Acute moist dermatitis, also known as pyotraumatic dermatitis and commonly referred to as a “hot spot,” is characterized by the rapid development of a focal, erythematous,
erosive, and exudative lesion that develops due to intense
pruritus and self‐trauma (Figure 166.1).
Acute moist dermatitis is typically initiated by hypersensitivity disorders, including cutaneous adverse food
reaction, atopic dermatitis, and flea bite hypersensitivity,
or pruritogenic parasitic diseases such as pediculosis,
sarcoptic mange, and cheyletiellosis. Surface staphylococcal overgrowth is concurrently present in nearly all
cases of acute moist dermatitis. Cytology of exudate
obtained via surface impression smear reveals neutrophils and intracellular and extracellular cocci. Superficial
bacterial folliculitis lesions (see “Superficial bacterial folliculitis” section below) observed at the periphery of the
self‐trauma suggest a longer duration of staphylococcal
involvement and that the staphylococcal folliculitis itself

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

VetBooks.ir

1462

Figure 166.1 Acute moist dermatitis in a golden retriever dog
with atopic dermatitis and superficial staphylococcal folliculitis.

may be the inciting cause of the acute moist dermatitis.
This scenario is termed “pyotraumatic folliculitis.”
Patients may present on an emergency basis due to
rapid, severe progression. Lesions can be painful. Sedation
may be required prior to clipping of the coat for optimal
examination and initial topical treatment. A thorough
examination of the entire coat and obtaining a detailed
history are critical, as diagnosis and appropriate management of the underlying pruritic disease are very important, particularly in recurrent cases.
Initial treatment involves cleansing of the lesion
with an antimicrobial. A 2% aluminum acetate solution
(Domeboro® solution, Bayer) may be used as a topical
nonirritating drying and antimicrobial agent. At‐home
therapy involves daily application (1–3 times/day) of a
topical antimicrobial and/or drying agent; use of a topical anesthetic (e.g., pramoxine, lidocaine) or corticosteroid may be additionally beneficial. Limit daily topical
corticosteroid use to no more than one week to avoid
cutaneous side‐effects, such as demodicosis, comedones,
cutaneous atrophy, and ulceration.
Application of an Elizabethan collar or breathable
physical barrier is recommended in the first 3–7 days of
treatment to prevent self‐trauma. Oclacitinib (Apoquel®,
Zoetis), lokivetmab (Cytopoint®, Zoetis), or systemic
corticosteroid treatment is often required to provide
rapid relief of pruritus, and, for severe presentations,
may be required for several days before topical therapy
is attempted at home. Concurrent systemic antimicrobial therapy is required for pyotraumatic folliculitis
(see also “Treatment of pyodermas” section below).
The patient should be rechecked in 7–14 days to assess
response to antimicrobial and antiinflammatory
therapies.
Intertrigo

Increased warmth and humidity of the environment, friction, and the protected cutaneous microenvironments

of skinfolds are predisposing factors for staphylococcal
intertrigo. The aforementioned factors result in surface
maceration of the stratum corneum and bacterial overgrowth, predominantly with staphylococci. Concurrent
Malassezia overgrowth is common, and gram‐negative
bacteria may also contribute. It is largely a condition in
dogs, particularly in the context of hypersensitivity, and
is rare in cats. Intertrigo is typically pruritic. Locations
affected include abdominal, inguinal, vulvar, lip, tail, and
facial folds, with the latter two locations overrepresented
in English bulldogs and pugs. Moist erythematous skin,
purulent exudate, and in advanced cases ulcerative dermatitis are observed (Figures 166.2, 166.3, and 166.4).
Cytology of exudate obtained via surface impression
smear confirms the presence of cocci and may also
involve yeast and rods. Neutrophils are variably present.
Topical antimicrobial and drying agents are indicated.

Figure 166.2 Mildly erythematous and greasy Staphylococcus
and Malassezia nasal fold dermatitis with crusting staphylococcal
folliculitis in a pug with atopic dermatitis.

Figure 166.3 Dorsal interdigital moist erythema with Malassezia
and Staphylococcus overgrowth in a 5‐year‐old Rottweiler with
atopic dermatitis.

166 Bacterial Pyodermas

VetBooks.ir

Superficial Bacterial Folliculitis

Figure 166.4 Severe, purulent tail fold intertrigo with mixed
bacterial overgrowth and crusting staphylococcal superficial
bacterial folliculitis in an English bulldog with atopic dermatitis.
Surgery was ultimately required for control of the dermatitis.

Superficial bacterial folliculitis is the most common
presentation of pyoderma and, as stated previously,
opportunistic S. pseudintermedius is the most common
etiologic agent. Infection of the hair follicle and epidermis produces characteristic follicular‐oriented papules,
pustules, and epidermal collarettes (Figure 166.5) progressing to crusts, “moth‐eaten” alopecia, and hyperpigmentation (Figures 166.6 and 166.7).
In short‐coated dogs, well‐demarcated areas of raised
hair resemble urticaria from afar. Papular crusting dermatitis (i.e., miliary dermatitis) is most frequently observed
in cats. Distribution is dependent on cause, and pruritus is
variable.
Differential diagnoses for folliculitis include, but are
not limited to, dermatophytosis, demodicosis, pemphigus foliaceus, and, in cats, hypersensitivity syndromes.
Systemic and topical treatment is indicated for patients

Surgical correction of redundant folds may be indicated
for severe, recalcitrant presentations.
Superficial Pyodermas
Impetigo

Impetigo, also referred to as “puppy pyoderma,” occurs
in puppies and juveniles less than 1 year old. It is typified
by subcorneal, often grossly large, pustules caused by
staphylococci, most commonly S. pseudintermedius. The
pustules do not necessarily involve the hair follicles and
are typically located in the axillary and inguinal areas.
The pustules progress to crusts and epidermal collarettes. Patients are not typically pruritic nor painful.
Cytology of pustules reveals degenerated neutrophils
and intracellular cocci.
Impetigo is often idiopathic in otherwise healthy puppies. It may also occur in immunocompromised patients
suffering from parasitic or infectious diseases, or suboptimal nutrition and housing conditions.
Impetigo is expected to self‐resolve in otherwise
healthy patients. Use of topical antimicrobial therapy
may hasten resolution and may be required for resolution in immunocompromised patients. Treatment
options include daily to alternate‐day shampoo treatment with a nondrying, antimicrobial shampoo including chlorhexidine or ethyl lactate. Alternatively, for focal
lesions, consider convenient antimicrobial wipes, sprays,
foams, and ointments/creams applied once or twice
daily. Continue topical therapies until lesion resolution.
For severe cases or cases that do not respond to topical
therapy, systemic antibiotics are indicated. Systemic
antimicrobial treatment should continue for one week
past resolution of lesions. Resolution of lesions is
expected to occur within 14 days.

Figure 166.5 Epidermal collarettes with macular erythema and
hyperpigmentation on the abdomen of a terrier mix with
superficial staphylococcal folliculitis, atopic dermatitis, and
iatrogenic hypercortisolism.

Figure 166.6 Well‐circumscribed partial alopecia, crusting and
moist erythematous skin of the periocular and perioral regions
due to superficial staphylococcal folliculitis in a 7‐year‐old
domestic shorthair cat with atopic‐like dermatitis.

1463

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

VetBooks.ir

1464

Figure 166.7 Hyperpigmentation and well‐circumscribed
“moth‐eaten” alopecia caused by superficial staphylococcal
folliculitis in a 10‐year‐old redbone coonhound.

with regional or generalized superficial pyoderma.
Focal, mild presentations may resolve with daily topical
therapy alone.
Diagnosis is achieved via cytology of exudate
obtained by rupture of a pustule or avulsion of crusts.
The presence of extracellular cocci or phagocytosed
cocci confirms the diagnosis. If cytology is negative,
culture and/or histopathology are required to make a
definitive diagnosis. Superficial pyoderma is commonplace, so it is rational to empirically treat cytology‐negative cases of folliculitis to assess for response,
particularly if demodicosis and dermatophytosis have
been ruled out.
Mucocutaneous Pyoderma

Mucocutaneous pyoderma, a crusting, erosive and depigmenting condition of the canine nasal planum and lip
margins, may be an inflammatory response to staphylococci, although the etiopathogenesis remains unknown
(Figure 166.8). It may occur alone or in the context of
cutaneous hypersensitivity.
Less commonly, lesions may involve the prepuce/
vulva, anus, or eyelids. Of note, the German shepherd
dog is overrepresented. Differentials for this condition
include discoid lupus erythematosus, pemphigus foliaceus, and epitheliotropic lymphoma. Mucocutaneous
pyoderma may occur secondary to these conditions, and
the histopathologic findings of mucocutaneous pyoderma are similar to that of discoid lupus erythematosus.
Thus, diagnosis of mucocutaneous pyoderma is typically
made via clinical response to antimicrobial therapy;
cytology of exudate may not confirm the presence of
cocci. Treatment involves antimicrobial systemic and
topical therapy. Empirical or culture‐based antimicrobial
for a minimum of three weeks prior to biopsy of the
aforementioned lesions is recommended to assess for

Figure 166.8 Mucocutaneous pyoderma with multifocal labial
and perioral depigmentation and erythema with multifocal
depigmentation and erosions of the nasal planum in a German
shepherd dog.

responsiveness and optimize likelihood of a diagnostic
biopsy reflective of the primary disease process.
Canine Chronic, Recurrent Pyoderma

Recurrent pyoderma is characterized by the chronic
reemergence of superficial bacterial folliculitis after successful treatment and confirmed clinical and cytologic
resolution. This syndrome is most commonly associated
with atopic dermatitis, cutaneous adverse food reaction
and hypothyroidism, and is typically pruritic when
lesions are present. Treatment of this syndrome includes
not only topical and/or systemic antimicrobial therapy to
treat active infection, but also identification and control
of the underlying dermatosis to prevent recurrence.
Patients with idiopathic recurrent pyoderma are
euthyroid, fail to respond to a proper elimination diet
trial, and have no other signs of atopic or cutaneous disease other than pyoderma typically associated with pruritus. Such patients may be managed via use of frequent
application of antimicrobial shampoos, wipes, or sprays
to limit chronic use of systemic antibiotics. The immune
response to staphylococci, perhaps a true hypersensitivity, may play a role in idiopathic recurrent pyoderma,
and in canine patients with atopic dermatitis. Indeed,

VetBooks.ir

166 Bacterial Pyodermas

subcutaneously injected commercial S. aureus phage
lysate antigens (Staphage Lysate®, Delmont Laboratories)
may be used as maintenance therapy to reduce or eliminate recurrence of pyoderma. This treatment is indicated
in patients with idiopathic or atopic recurrent pyoderma
cases failing to respond to topical maintenance therapy.
Deep Pyodermas
Generalized Deep Pyoderma

Generalized deep pyoderma arises due to furunculosis
(follicular rupture) and foreign body response directed
at the liberated hair shafts in the dermis. Lesions include
nodules, hemorrhagic bullae, ulcers, draining tracts and
crusts with variable pain and pruritus (Figures 166.9
and 166.10).
In cats, deep pyoderma most commonly presents in
the context of chin acne. In short‐coated breeds with

atopic dermatitis or cutaneous adverse food reaction,
cystic hemorrhagic, bullous lesions are often observed
on the chin and interdigital areas. Staphylococci represent the predominant organism but deep pyoderma
may also be accompanied by infection with Enterococcus,
Pseudomonas, and Proteus species as well as Escherichia
coli. Differentials include dimorphic and opportunistic
mycoses, pythiosis, lagenidiosis, neoplasia, foreign
body, sterile pyogranulomatous dermatitis, and other
bacterial etiologies, including species in the genera
Mycobacterium, Actinomyces, and Nocardia. Cytologic
presence of numerous extracellular cocci or phagocytosed cocci supports the diagnosis. Given the diverse
clinical differentials and requirement for prolonged
treatment, bacterial culture (aerobic and anaerobic)
and sensitivity, fungal culture, and histopathology are
recommended for definitive diagnosis and appropriate
treatment.
Canine Acne

Figure 166.9 Nonblanching, hemorrhagic, nodular, deep
staphylococcal pyoderma in a 5‐year‐old Rottweiler with
atopic dermatitis.

This disease is typified by deep folliculitis and furunculosis affecting the chin and perioral margin, and is a
focal form of deep pyoderma. Chin acne usually manifests in young dogs between 3 and 12 months of age
although it often persists throughout adulthood and
may be complicated by concurrent atopic dermatitis or
cutaneous adverse food reaction. Breeds with a short,
coarse hair coat are predisposed, including boxers,
English and French bulldogs, and Boston terriers.
Lesions consist of papules and nodules that often
become erosive and ulcerative with resultant draining
tract formation. Hemorrhagic bullae are also common
(Figure 166.11).
Demodicosis should be ruled out by performing deep
skin scrapes. Juvenile cellulitis is a differential diagnosis;
however, classic submandibular lymphadenopathy as well

Figure 166.10 Erythematous nodules with ulcers due to deep
Pseudomonas pyoderma on the lateral hindlimb of a 3‐year‐old
Rottweiler mix.

Figure 166.11 Nodular, ulcerative, and purulent deep
staphylococcal pyoderma on the chin of a cane corso dog
with atopic dermatitis.

1465

VetBooks.ir

1466

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

as generalized muzzle, periocular, and pinnal involvement clinically differentiate it from chin acne in many
cases (see Chapter 164 for a more thorough discussion of
juvenile cellulitis). Chin acne is supported by the presence of cocci and a mixed population of inflammatory
cells on cytologic evaluation.
Treatment involves systemic antimicrobial therapy,
ideally based on aerobic culture and sensitivity testing
(see “Treatment of pyodermas” section below), with adjunct
topical antimicrobial therapy. Benzoyl peroxide gel, silver
sulfadiazine cream, clindamycin cream, and mupirocin
(reserved for resistant staphylococcal infections), are
often well tolerated when applied to the facial area.
Because furunculosis and subsequent deep pyoderma are
frequently present, treatment for a minimum of six weeks
may be required. Treatment should be continued for two
weeks past clinical and palpable resolution.
Interdigital Pyoderma

Interdigital pyoderma has a diversity of presentations and
therefore terms commonly used include canine pododermatitis, pedal folliculitis/furunculosis, and interdigital
“cysts.” Lesions may include interdigital erythema, salivary staining of hairs, papules, nodules, hemorrhagic bullae, and draining tracts. Clinical signs may include licking
and biting of the feet, and lameness. Staphylococci are
common bacterial etiologic agents of pododermatitis and
infection often occurs concurrently with Malassezia and
gram‐negative bacterial organisms. Interdigital pyoderma is a multifactorial disorder consisting of predisposing abnormal conformation, primary etiologies, and
secondary infections that perpetuate the dermatitis.
Abnormal weight bearing as a result of abnormal conformation, musculoskeletal disease, and/or obesity are
predisposing factors for the development of interdigital
pyoderma. In such cases, rather than generalized interdigital involvement, focal dorsal or ventral dermatitis is
often recurrent in one or several interdigital spaces.
Short‐coated dogs such as Labradors and English bulldogs appear to be predisposed.
Hypersensitivity, autoimmune, and inflammatory conditions are primary etiologies; secondary bacterial and
yeast surface overgrowth and/or bacterial folliculitis perpetuate the dermatitis. Occasionally, hypothyroidism
and hypercortisolism may result in interdigital bacterial
or yeast overgrowth.
A conformation‐related disorder involving ventrally
oriented cystic follicles, primarily on the forelimbs, has
been described. These dilated follicles may be grossly visible as comedones and milia. The cystic follicles rupture
in the dermis. The subsequent foreign body response
clinically manifests as dorsal interdigital nodules, hemorrhagic bullae, and edema (Figure 166.12). Draining tracts
and deep secondary bacterial infection frequently ensue.

Figure 166.12 Dorsal interdigital nodule with hemopurulent
exudate due to furunculosis and deep staphylococcal pyoderma
in a cairn terrier.

Treatment of this condition may include multiple carbon
dioxide (CO2) laser ablations of the ventral cystic lesions
in addition to antimicrobial therapy as described subsequently in this chapter (see “Treatment of pyodermas”).
Diagnosis involves obtaining a thorough history and
performing a physical examination to identify possible
primary causes. Deep skin scrapes or hair plucks for
demodicosis must be performed, as demodicosis may
demonstrate all the aforementioned clinical manifestations. In some cases of pododemodicosis, biopsy may be
required for diagnosis.
Perform multiple surface cytologic preparations of
erythematous interdigital spaces to confirm the presence
of bacterial organisms as well as Malassezia. Consider
aspiration of nodules and hemorrhagic bullae to assess
for secondary bacterial infection and other causes of
nodular dermatitis, including neoplasia. Consider the
possibility of a foreign body, particularly in the context of
a solitary nodular lesion with mixed inflammation.
Culture and sensitivity of tissue biopsies or aspirates of
nodular lesions should ideally be performed with confirmed or suspected bacterial involvement, as such
lesions indicate deep pyoderma and require prolonged
therapy. Avoid culture of draining tracts as they may not
be reflective of the relevant bacterial organisms within
the tissue.
Pedal pruritus (licking and biting of the feet) with generalized dorsal or ventral interdigital involvement persisting despite resolution of secondary infection is
suggestive of cutaneous adverse food reaction or atopic
dermatitis.
Topical antimicrobial therapy is ideal for secondary surface bacterial and yeast overgrowth. Chlorhexidine, benzoyl peroxide, or ethyl lactate‐based shampoos may be
used as a soak, particularly for painful feet, every 24–48
hours initially. Aluminum acetate solution (Domeboro)

VetBooks.ir

166 Bacterial Pyodermas

may be similarly used as a foot soak for drying and antimicrobial effects. Antimicrobial wipes and sprays may be
considered, but acid‐ and alcohol‐based products should
be avoided in erosive and ulcerative presentations (see
“Treatment of pyodermas” section for additional treatment recommendations).
Focal nodular staphylococcal or mixed bacterial lesions
may be treated with silver sulfadiazine cream, clindamycin ointment, or mupirocin ( reserved for resistant staphylococcal infections). Application of dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO) just before or after application of the topical
antimicrobial may improve its penetration and provide
additional antiinflammatory effects. Topical corticosteroid treatment (as the sole ingredient or a combination
product) may be helpful for additional antiinflammatory
benefits, particularly for hypersensitivity. Topical corticosteroids should be avoided in the presence of comedones and milia, as they may exacerbate these lesions.
Systemic antimicrobial therapy is indicated for nodules,
draining tracts or severe bacterial surface pyoderma (see
“Treatment of pyodermas” section). Deep pyoderma
(draining nodules, crusts, ulcerations) typically require a
minimum of six weeks of systemic antimicrobial therapy,
and should be continued four weeks beyond cytologic
and clinical resolution (including palpation).
Acral Lick Dermatitis

Although commonly encountered in canine practice, acral
lick dermatitis (ALD) is a challenging condition to manage
given its multifactorial genesis and chronic nature.
Optimal control is achieved via identification and control
of contributing factors. Acral lick dermatitis is characterized by repetitive licking, typically of the distal limbs.
Lesions, commonly known as lick granulomas, take the
form of erosive to ulcerative nodules or plaques with
purulent and/or hemorrhagic exudates (Figure 166.13).

Figure 166.13 Acral lick granuloma with erosive surface on the
carpus of a 9‐year‐old Labrador mix; deep staphylococcal
pyoderma and atopic dermatitis were contributing factors.

The most common primary factors are atopic dermatitis and cutaneous adverse food reaction, as well as
concurrent behavioral etiologies. Importantly, the
most common perpetuating factor is secondary deep
staphylococcal pyoderma. This must be treated to
reduce lesion size and severity. Common bacterial genera concurrently isolated from ALD lesions include
Pseudomonas and Enterobacter. Importantly, methicillin‐resistant and multidrug‐resistant staphylococcal
infections are common in ALD. Cultures obtained
from the surface of the lesions do not accurately represent the organisms within the lesion. Thus, tissue
biopsy for culture and sensitivity is indicated to select
antibiotic therapy, as treatment required is typically in
excess of eight weeks.

­Methicillin‐Resistant and Multidrug‐
Resistant Staphylococci
Antimicrobial resistance in veterinary medicine has
­rapidly evolved in recent years from a mere theoretical
possibility to an unwelcome reality. Of concern, methicillin‐resistant (MR) and multidrug‐resistant (MDR)
staphylococci pose a risk of difficult‐to‐treat nosocomial infections and, to a lesser extent, zoonotic infection. To best serve our community and patients in
the present era of antimicrobial resistance, critical
examination of infection control and antimicrobial
­prescribing practices as individuals and as a profession
is essential.
Methicillin‐resistant staphylococci possess the mecA
genetic element, encoding penicillin binding protein
2a (PBP2a). Beta‐lactam antibiotics cannot bind to
PBP2a, rendering them ineffective. The mecA gene is
present within staphylococcal chromosomal cassettes
(SCCs) that are also horizontally transferred amongst
Staphylococcus spp. Staphylococcal chromosomal cassettes may contain other antimicrobial resistance genes,
imparting multidrug resistance in nearly all strains of
MR staphylococci encountered in veterinary practice. Of
note, beta‐lactam antimicrobial use selects for survival
of MR staphylococci, but does not create, de novo, spontaneous resistance.
Cutaneous MR staphylococcal infection and colonization are a worldwide phenomenon, recognized in the
dog, cat, horse, cattle, and swine. In years past, MR
staphylococcus appeared to be very rare to absent in
the canine and feline population but a remarkable
increase in frequency of methicillin resistance in the
canine and feline population was noted early in the
21st century. The rapid rise of MR staphylococcal
infection in veterinary patients is thought to have

1467

VetBooks.ir

1468

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

occurred via acquisition of the mecA gene from human
staphylococci and subsequent selection of resistant
strains via widespread use of beta‐lactam antimicrobials. Methicillin‐resistant canine and feline cutaneous
infections and colonization have been subsequently
reported worldwide, with MR S. pseudintermedius
most commonly seen. Prevalence varies by geographic
location.
Frequent antimicrobial treatment is a risk factor for
canine MR staphylococcal pyoderma and carriage of MR
staphylococci in healthy dogs and cats. Risk factors associated with MR S. aureus infection in the dog and cat
include frequent antimicrobial courses, frequent veterinary visits, multiple days of hospitalization, and the presence of surgical implants.
Recognition of Methicillin Resistance
Methicillin‐resistant and MDR staphylococcal pyoderma cases do not typically possess unique clinical
features. Rather, the first indication of resistance is
lack of response to empirical antimicrobial therapy.
Therefore, to ensure appropriate response, all patients
must be reexamined prior to conclusion of antimicrobial treatment. If resistance is suspected, perform a
cytologic evaluation to assess for the presence of cocci,
as well as bacterial culture and sensitivity. A sterile needle is used to rupture a pustule or lift the edge of an
epidermal collarette or crust to reveal exudate. The
sample is collected with a sterile swab. For cases of papular or nodular pyoderma, punch biopsies are recommended for culture.
Although “methicillin resistance” is the accepted term,
the more stable oxacillin is used as a surrogate in the
laboratory for methicillin susceptibility. Resistance to
oxacillin is a strong indicator of mecA acquisition and
resistance to all beta‐lactam antibiotics. Upon interpreting antibiograms, it is important to recognize that oxacillin‐resistant staphylococci may show in vitro sensitivity
to other beta‐lactams. Thus, interpretation of staphylococcal antibiograms should first involve noting oxacillin
susceptibility, rather than simply searching for reported
susceptible antimicrobials. If a bacterial strain is resistant to oxacillin, it should be considered resistant to all
beta‐lactam antibiotics.
Direct the laboratory to perform extended antimicrobial panels for suspected resistance. Additionally, species
identification of staphylococci is useful, as MR S. aureus
has a more significant zoonotic implication given that it
is host‐adapted to humans. Methicillin‐resistant, coagulase‐negative staphylococci, including S. schleiferi subsp.
schleiferi, are clinically significant and should not be
disregarded.

­Treatment of Pyodermas
Appropriate management of staphylococcal pyoderma is
an active area of investigation, which may result in future
changes in systemic antimicrobial dose and duration.
Systemic Therapy
Systemic antimicrobial therapy is indicated for regional,
generalized or severe superficial bacterial folliculitis,
mucocutaneous pyoderma, and forms of deep staphylococcal pyoderma. For milder presentations, expected
time of resolution with systemic therapy is 14–28 days.
Duration of therapy may be longer and treatment for one
week beyond clinical resolution is recommended. For
deep pyoderma, treatment may take 6–12 weeks to
achieve visual and palpable resolution. For severe presentations of deep pyoderma, consider continuation of
antimicrobial therapy four weeks beyond palpable resolution to prevent relapse. Importantly, all patients receiving antimicrobial therapy for staphylococcal pyoderma
must be periodically rechecked (every 2–4 weeks) prior
to conclusion of antimicrobial treatment to ensure
appropriate response.
Empirical and Culture‐Based Therapy

Rational antibiotic options for empirical treatment of
staphylococcal pyoderma include cephalexin (22–30 mg/
kg PO q12h), amoxicillin/clavulanate (13.75 mg/kg PO
q12h), cefpodoxime (5–10 mg/kg PO q24h), and cefovecin (8 mg/kg SC q14 days). Lincomycin (15–25 mg/kg
PO q12h) and clindamycin (5.5–10 mg/kg PO q12–24h)
are considered first‐line choices, but their conservation
is recommended as some MR and MDR staphylococcal
strains retain susceptibility to these antimicrobials. For
cases of resistant pyoderma, clindamycin should be used
with reservation if the laboratory has not tested for
inducible resistance (D‐test). This test should be
requested if erythromycin resistance is present. If this
test is not available and the bacterial strain is resistant to
erythromycin but susceptible to clindamycin, do not
prescribe the latter.
Culture and sensitivity‐based selection of a systemic
antimicrobial is indicated for patients that fail to clinically respond to empirical therapy, have evidence of deep
pyoderma, or have a chronic history of antimicrobial use
with unknown or lackluster response. Empirical treatment is not recommended in these cases as staphylococcal antimicrobial resistance patterns are unpredictable.
Dwindling rational systemic treatment options for MDR
staphylococcal pyoderma present a global practical challenge. A 2010 study examining 103 isolates of MRSP in
North America reported that nearly 90% of isolates were

VetBooks.ir

166 Bacterial Pyodermas

resistant to ciprofloxacin, clindamycin, erythromycin,
and trimethoprim sulfa (TMS); 69.9% were resistant to
tetracycline and gentamicin, and 57.3% were resistant to
chloramphenicol.
If resistant superficial bacterial folliculitis is present
with limited therapeutic options, consider daily topical
therapy prior to use of amikacin, rifampin, or chloramphenicol, as this may be sufficient to resolve the problem with minimal risk to the patient. Chloramphenicol
may be used with success in resistant cases, but vomiting and diarrhea can be frequent, and transient bone
marrow suppression is possible but apparently rare.
Reversible weakness (often seen in the hindlimbs) may
occur in dogs. Clients must also wear gloves to prevent
rare but fatal aplastic anemia of humans. At present,
resistance to rifampin is rare. Although it is often stated
that a secondary antimicrobial is required with use of
rifampin, successful treatment with monotherapy has
been documented with S. aureus and, therefore, this
long‐held concept may not apply to treatment of staphylococcal pyoderma. Hepatotoxicity can be life‐threatening and biochemistry values must be monitored every
seven days during administration. Given the potential
for renal failure, amikacin is reserved for patients with
severe, deep, resistant pyoderma with no other rational
systemic treatment options. When used, frequent urinalysis and monitoring for casts are recommended.
Although susceptibility to vancomycin, linezolid,
synercid (quinupristin/dalfopristin), and teicoplanin
may be provided in antibiograms, use of these antibiotics
is strongly discouraged. These are drugs of last resort
used for human MRSA patients with life‐threatening
infections and selection for further resistance must be
avoided.
Topical Therapy
Adjunct topical therapy is indicated in all forms of pyoderma and may be used as the sole treatment for surface
pyodermas such as acute moist dermatitis and intertrigo,
as well as with superficial pyodermas, including impetigo and superficial bacterial folliculitis. The use of topical therapy may shorten the duration of systemic therapy,
and thus reduce antibiotic selective pressures. The
choice of topical ingredient(s) and formulation is
dependent upon lesion location, distribution, type, and
compliance of the client and the animal.
Shampoo therapy is ideally performed 2–3 times
weekly as an adjunct for all forms of pyoderma. Active
ingredients include chlorhexidine 2–4%, benzoyl peroxide 2.5%, and ethyl lactate 10%. Benzoyl peroxide can
be drying and is best used for patients with greasy or
purulent dermatitis. A contact time of 5–10 minutes is

generally recommended. When instituted as a sole
therapy for superficial bacterial folliculitis, daily use is
recommended.
Wipes and sprays are convenient for frequent use,
and are a convenient sole therapy for intertrigo. These
preparations may include acids, such as acetic acid 2%
or boric acid 2%, and alcohols for antimicrobial and
drying effects. These drying ingredients are particularly helpful for intertrigo, but are painful if applied to
ulcerative lesions. Chlorhexidine (2–4%) is commonly
found in wipe and spray preparations, and nisin is
found in wipe preparations. Of note, chlorhexidine is
appropriate for both gram‐positive and gram‐negative
bacteria, whereas nisin is most appropriate for treatment of staphylococci alone. For sole therapy, apply
every 12–24 hours; for adjunct therapy, application
every 24–72 hours is appropriate.
Hypochlorous acid is available in a convenient, commercial spray formulation (Vetericyn VF®, Innovacyn). It
can be used solely once to twice daily for localized
superficial and deep pyoderma or as an adjunct to other
topical and systemic therapies for more generalized
conditions. Hypochlorous acid is the sodium salt of
­
sodium hypochlorite (household bleach). Dilute bleach
rinse solutions (0.005–0.01%) are used by human and
veterinary dermatologists, particularly for treatment of
allergy‐induced recurrent and resistant staphylococcal
pyoderma. The author uses a dilution of 2 tablespoons of
household bleach per gallon of water as a rinse. This
effective and affordable therapy can be used after bathing or applied directly to a focal area as frequently as
daily as a sole therapy or as infrequent as twice weekly as
an adjunct therapy. The patient is patted dry. Note that
this solution must be reconstituted daily. It is nonirritating, and there are some data to suggest it is antiinflammatory as well.
Creams, ointments, and gels are most appropriate
for focal presentations. Many commercial antibiotic
preparations (neomycin, polymyxin B, gentamicin) are
available combined with antifungal and corticosteroid
ingredients. Concurrent use of a topical corticosteroid
may obscure interpretation of antimicrobial response,
and chronic use may result in cutaneous atrophy and
ulceration. Creams and ointments containing an antimicrobial as the sole ingredient are therefore preferred.
Active ingredients include silver sulfadiazine, benzoyl
peroxide, fusidic acid, hydrogen peroxide, and mupirocin. Of note, mupirocin ointment should not be used
routinely, as mupirocin resistance has been documented, and it is used for decolonization of methicillin‐resistant S. aureus of humans. For sole therapy,
apply every 12–24 hours; for adjunct therapy, application every 48–72 hours is appropriate.

1469

VetBooks.ir

1470

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

Staphylococcus aureus Phage Lysate Therapy
Subcutaneously injected commercial S. aureus phage
lysate antigens (Staphage Lysate) may be used as maintenance therapy to reduce or eliminate recurrence of pyoderma in canine patients with idiopathic recurrent
pyoderma or atopic dermatitis, and can be used in combination with maintenance topical therapy once active
pyoderma has been resolved.

Subcutaneous injection of 0.5 mL is administered
twice weekly for a trial period of 10–14 weeks. Topical
and/or systemic antimicrobial therapy is required at the
initiation of treatment if an active bacterial infection is
present. If beneficial, frequency may be tapered to the
least frequent administration required to increase the
interval between recurrences or prevent recurrences,
typically every 7–14 days.

­Further Reading
Banovic F, Olivry T, Baumer W, et al. Diluted sodium
hypochlorite (bleach) in dogs: antiseptic efficacy, local
tolerability and in vitro effect on skin barrier function
and inflammation. Vet Dermatol 2018; 29(1): 6–e5.
Fadok VA, Irwin K. Sodium hypochlorite/salicylic
acid shampoo for treatment of canine staphylococcal
pyoderma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2019; 55(3):
117–23.
Greco I, Emborg AP, Jana B, Molchanova N, et al.
Characterization, mechanism of action and optimization
of activity of a novel peptide‐peptoid hybrid against

bacterial pathogens involved in canine skin infections.
Sci Rep 2019; 9(1): 3679.
Hillier A, Lloyd DH, Weese JS, et al. Guidelines for the
diagnosis and antimicrobial therapy of canine superficial
bacterial folliculitis (Antimicrobial Guidelines Working
Group of the International Society for Companion Animal
Infectious Diseases). Vet Dermatol 2014; 25(3): 163–75.
Wilson A, Allers N, Lloyd DH, Bond R, Loeffler A.
Reduced antimicrobial prescribing during autogenous
staphylococcal bacterin therapy: a retrospective study in
dogs with pyoderma. Vet Rec 2019; 184(24): 739.

VetBooks.ir

1471

167
Otitis
Sue Paterson, MA, VetMB, DVD, DECVD, FRCVS
Veterinary Dermatologicals, Altrincham, Cheshire, UK

­Otitis Externa
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Otitis externa is inflammation of the external ear canal.
The microscopic structure of the external ear canal is
similar to that of the interfollicular epidermis of the skin.
It is a stratified cornified epithelium with adnexal organs
such as hair follicles and their associated sebaceous and
ceruminous glands. The epidermis lining the canal is
only a few layers thick and is punctuated by hair follicles.
Therefore, any disease that affects the skin can also affect
the external ear canals. Those diseases that cause otitis
externa are referred to as primary causes, the most
important of which are listed in Box 167.1.
It is crucially important that the primary cause is
­identified and managed adequately in all cases of otitis
externa. Failure to do so leads to recurrence of the
­problem and progression of the disease to produce a
chronically damaged ear. Primary disease initially causes
inflammation within the canal which leads to an increase
in epidermal turnover and hyperplasia of the canal wall
with narrowing of the lumen. As the disease process progresses, sebaceous glands become hyperplastic, often
with dilation of their ducts. This is followed more chronically by dramatic changes in the ceruminous glands and
ducts which become enormously enlarged, leading to
further loss of lumen diameter. Chronic change drives
the disease process once it has been established, causing
perpetuation of the otitis. Where this is not resolved,
effective therapy is difficult and disease perpetuation or
recurrence is inevitable. Where the disease process
becomes chronically irreversible, the lumen may be
completely obliterated and in some of these cases, ossification of the soft tissue may also take place. Once the
damage to the ear has become this extensive, medical
therapy is rarely effective. Progressive pathologic changes

lead to alterations in the microclimate within the
­external ear canal, causing an increase in temperature
and humidity, surface maceration, and an increase in
microbial colonization within the ear (Figure 167.1).
Infection is secondary to the inflammatory process
and although effective therapy is essential, if other ­factors
are not managed, recurrence is likely.
Signalment
Age

In young dogs, allergy, especially atopic dermatitis, is the
most common trigger of otitis. In cats, especially kittens,
Otodectes cynotis is more important, accounting for
about 80% of all cases of feline otitis externa. Otic
demodicosis is an uncommon cause of ear disease in
the dog and is very rare in the cat. Juvenile‐onset disease
is seen in animals less than 3 years of age. Adult‐onset
disease is seen in those older than 3 years.
Other examples of primary causes affecting young animals include primary idiopathic seborrhea and immune‐
mediated diseases such as juvenile cellulitis. In older
animals, systemic disease such as canine hypothyroidism
is important although hepatic, renal, and pancreatic
­diseases may also predispose animals to otic infection.
Rare primary causes for otitis externa that can occur in
animals of any age include keratinization disorders such
as sebaceous adenitis and autoimmune diseases such as
pemphigus foliaceus and discoid lupus erythematosus.
Breed

Primary disease triggered by atopic dermatitis is most
commonly seen in the West Highland white terrier,
Staffordshire bull terrier, Labrador retriever, German
shepherd dog, and boxer. Otitis due to cutaneous
adverse food ­reactions is most common in the Labrador

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1472

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

Box 167.1 Primary causes for otitis externa

Box 167.2 Predisposing factors in otitis externa

Allergy – atopic dermatitis, cutaneous adverse food
reaction, contact allergy
Endocrine disease – hypothyroidism (dog), hyperthyroidism (cat), hyperadrenocorticism (dog and cat)
Ectoparasites – Otodectes cynotis, Demodex spp.,
Otobius megnini
Autoimmune/immune-mediated disease – pemphigus
discoid lupus erythematosus, erythema
foliaceus, ­
­multiforme, juvenile cellulitis, drug reactions, vasulitis
Keratinization disorders – sebaceous adenitis, zinc‐
responsive dermatosis, primary idiopathic seborrhea
Foreign bodies – grass awns, ceruminoliths
(­accumulations of cerumen due to failure of epithelial
migration)

Conformation of the ear – narrowed canal (shar‐pei),
hairy external ear canal (spaniels, poodles), hairy
­concave pinna (spaniels), large pendulous pinnae
(­basset hounds, bloodhounds)
Inappropriate cleaning, irritant treatment – use of
astringent, low‐acidity topical products or potent
­ceruminolytic cleaner when not appropriate
Wetting of the ear – swimming dogs, water‐based
cleaners, topical medication mixed in water
Obstructive ear disease – polyps, ceruminous gland
adenomas, other neoplasia

Box 167.3 Perpetuating factors in otitis externa
Chronic changes – epidermal and glandular hyperplasia, stenosis, failure of epidermal migration, calcification of ear canals, ulceration
Otitis media

pendulous pinnae such as spaniels, basset hounds, and
bloodhounds are predisposed to disease, as are breeds
such as the shar‐pei which have narrowed canals.
History and Clinical Signs

Figure 167.1 Ulcerated ear canal in a case of Pseudomonas otitis.

retriever. Juvenile‐onset demodicosis is frequently seen
in the shih tzu, American Staffordshire terrier, English
bulldog, and boxer. Hypothyroidism is commonly recognized in giant breeds such as the dogue de Bordeaux and
Newfoundland, as well as hunting dogs such as spaniels
and retrievers. Keratinization disorders are often breed
linked (e.g., sebaceous adenitis in the akita and standard
poodle; primary seborrhea in the cocker spaniel and
Persian cat; zinc‐responsive disease in the Siberian husky
and malamute).
There are many breed characteristics that predispose
to the development of disease. Dogs with hairy ear
canals, such as the cocker spaniel which has compound
hair follicles within its canals, are at increased risk of
developing disease. Other dogs with hirsute canals
include the poodle and old English sheepdog. Dogs with

The key aims of history taking are to try to establish the
primary cause for the otitis and any predisposing, perpetuating or secondary factors that may be contributing
to the disease. Primary causes (see Box 167.1) should be
identified in all cases of otitis. Successful management of
these triggers is particularly important in chronic disease. Predisposing factors, which are listed in Box 167.2,
contribute to ear disease but do not cause it. Perpetuating
factors, listed in Box 167.3, and secondary factors which
are infections, listed in Table 167.1, are those that drive
the process once it has been established. They need to be
managed to ensure a complete resolution of disease is
achieved without danger of relapse.
In order to identify the primary causes and the other
contributory factors, a carefully taken history should
include all aspects of the dog’s general health and lifestyle. Dogs with atopic dermatitis usually demonstrate a
seasonal exacerbation of otitis, pollen‐allergic dogs being
worse in the spring and summer and house dust mite‐
allergic dogs being worse in the fall and winter. Allergic
dogs that swim commonly develop signs of “swimmer’s
ear.” Hypothyroid dogs may have more generalized
­systemic signs such as lethargy and a poor exercise tolerance. Where otitis has an acute onset and the disease
progresses rapidly to become severe, immune‐mediated

VetBooks.ir

167 Otitis

Table 167.1 Secondary causes in otitis externa
Infectious organism

Bacteria (most
common isolates)

Acute disease

Chronic disease

Gram‐positive bacteria

Staphylococcus spp.
Streptococcus spp.

Enterococcus spp.
Corynebacteria spp.

Gram‐negative bacteria

Uncommon

Pseudomonas spp. Proteus spp.
Escherichia coli

Anaerobic bacteria

Uncommon

Bacteroides spp.

Malassezia
pachydermatis

Malassezia pachydermatis

Yeast
(most common isolate)

disease such as drug eruptions and autoimmune
­disease should be considered. Contact irritant or hypersensitivity should be considered when signs of otitis
become worse after commencement of topical therapy.
Contact reactions may be to one of the active ingredients
in the topical product such as an antibiotic, antifungal
or glucocorticoid, or can be to the vehicle (e.g., propylene glycol).
Examination of each case should include a full physical
and dermatologic inspection before examining the pinnae and ear canal. A physical examination may reveal
signs, for example of bradycardia in a hypothyroid dog.
Accompanying signs of more generalized disease may
provide useful clues. Dogs with atopic dermatitis or
adverse food reaction may have pedal salivary staining
due to foot licking, or recurrent ventral pyoderma.
Dogs with endocrine disease may have seborrhea, a poor
hair coat or bilaterally symmetric alopecia which
­typically spares the face and distal extremities. Where
keratinization disorders cause otitis, lesions may be
more generalized (e.g., diffuse thinning of the coat with
prominent follicular casts on hairs in cases of sebaceous
adenitis). Dogs that shake their heads or traumatize their
pinnae without signs of otitis may be in the early stages
of allergy or may have disease that principally affects
the pinnae. These diseases include those caused by
ectoparasites such as Sarcoptes scabiei, Notoedres cati,
lice and the rabbit flea (Spilopsyllus cuniculi), and
immune‐mediated diseases such as vasculitis and
­dermatomyositis. The pinna is an excellent area to view
primary lesions, which tend to be better preserved at
this site due to the difficult accessibility. Pustular lesions
on the pinna may be seen with sterile autoimmune disease such as pemphigus foliaceus or, rarely, with pyoderma. Papular eruptions are most commonly seen with
ectoparasites, and ulcers with immune‐mediated disease
such as vasculitis.
Examination of the ear canal may be undertaken with
either a hand‐held or a video otoscope (Figure 167.2).
The latter obviously has the advantage of better
­illumination and magnification and allows for superior

Figure 167.2 Video otoscopic image of the external ear canal and
tympanic membrane of a dog.

visualization of the canal and tympanic membrane.
Assessment of the canal is important to decide which
predisposing and perpetuating factors are present.
Predisposing factors such as neoplasia, stenosis of the
canal, or the presence of a large amount of hair need to
be addressed as part of the overall management of the
otitis (Figure 167.3).
Identifying and treating perpetuating factors such as
chronic changes and otitis media are important to prevent relapse of the otitis. The degree of pathologic change
present helps the clinician decide if the otitis can be
treated medically or whether surgical intervention is
more appropriate. Assessment of the tympanic membrane can help in making a diagnosis of otitis media if
the structure is abnormal or ruptured.
Diagnosis
Predisposing and perpetuating factors, and to some
degree primary and secondary causes, can be recognized

1473

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

VetBooks.ir

1474

Figure 167.3 Ceruminous gland adenomas in the ear of a dog
illustrating a predisposing factor of otitis externa.

by a history and clinical examination. Diagnostic investigations allow a more definitive identification of primary
and secondary factors. Where a history suggests a primary cause then appropriate diagnostic tests may include
food trials, in vitro or in vivo allergy tests, ectoparasite
assessment, endocrine function tests or skin biopsy.
Secondary infection can be identified by cytology of
­exudate and, where necessary, culture and susceptibility.
Samples should be collected, if possible, before cleaning
is performed using a shielded cotton swab (sample is
taken by inserting the swab down an alcohol‐cleaned otoscope cone) from the horizontal canal and rolled onto a
clean glass slide. Both unstained (to identify ectoparasites
such as Demodex spp. and Otodectes cynotis) and stained
(to identify inflammatory cells, bacteria, and yeast) samples should be examined. Samples to be stained should be
heat fixed before staining with a ­modified Wright’s stain
such as Diff‐Quik (Figures 167.4 and 167.5).
Cytologic findings and interpretation are shown in
Table 167.2. Cytology is often all that is needed to institute therapy in otitis externa. However, where rods are
found with cocci on cytology (Figure 167.6), where cocci
are identified but have failed to respond to rational
­therapy or where otitis media is suspected, culture and
susceptibility is advised as bacterial sensitivity patterns
may be unpredictable.
Therapy
Therapy can be divided into two parts; the first is the
selection of an appropriate cleaner and the second is
dealing with the pathologic process, which may be treating infection and/or reversing pathologic change within
the ear canal. Assessment of the otic discharge allows the
clinician to select the best cleaning product (Table 167.3).

Figure 167.4 Ear cytology stained with Diff‐Quik showing
Malassezia organisms and anucleated squamous epithelial cells.

Figure 167.5 Ear cytology stained with Diff‐Quik showing
degenerate neutrophils and phagocytosed cocci.

Where the discharge is thick and waxy (e.g., keratinization disorders, hypothyroidism and Malassezia infection) then the cleaner needs to be able to break up the
wax (i.e., ceruminolytic activity). Where an inflammatory infiltrate is present and the discharge is more purulent or mucopurulent (e.g., gram‐negative infection),
then an aqueous‐based flush is better.
Examples of agents with good ceruminolytic properties
include dioctyl sodium or calcium sulfosuccinate, carbamide peroxide, triethanolamine polypeptide oleate condensate, hexamethyltetracosane, and squalene. Propylene
glycol and mineral or vegetable oils are less potent ceruminolytics. Aqueous‐based flushing agents include ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA)‐tris, 0.2% chlorhexidine,
and 2% acetic acid. Although the main function of an ear
cleaner is to clean, many contain components that have
antibacterial or antiyeast activity. Such actives include

VetBooks.ir

167 Otitis

Table 167.2 Cytologic findings and interpretation
Finding

Normal ear

Abnormal ear

Cerumen

Low numbers of
anucleate corneocytes

Larger numbers of anucleate and nucleated corneocytes

Malassezia

Low numbers adherent
to corneocytes

Peanut‐shaped organisms >5–10/high power field (hpf ) considered significant

Bacteria

Low numbers adherent
to corneocytes

Large cocci in pairs, fours or clumps usually Staphylococci spp. Smaller cocci
in chains usually Streptococci spp.
Rods cannot be differentiated from each other and may be Proteus spp.,
Escherichia coli or Pseudomonas spp.

Inflammatory cells

Absent

Neutrophils only in acute disease, neutrophils and macrophages in chronic
disease. Neutrophils are seen in all bacterial skin infections, neoplasia, and
irritant and allergic dermatitis

Acantholytic cells

Absent

Seen in autoimmune disease (e.g., pemphigus foliaceus)

Neoplastic cells

Absent

Uncommon. Some neoplasms may shed cells into cerumen; fine needle
aspirates are more useful

Ectoparasites – Otodectes
cynotis, Demodex spp.

Absent

Eggs, immature stages, and adults can be found in cerumen

Figure 167.6 Ear cytology stained with Diff‐Quik showing
numerous rod‐shaped bacteria consistent with Pseudomonas
spp. intermixed with cocci.

EDTA‐tris, lactic acid, salicylic acid, isopropyl alcohol,
parachlorometaxylenol (PCMX), and microbial adhesion‐
blocking carbohydrates. EDTA‐tris has been shown to
have antibacterial potentiating activity and will render bacteria more sensitive to topical antibiotic therapy with aminoglycosides or fluoroquinolones when the ear is presoaked
with this product 10 minutes before antibiotic application.
The cleaning solution should be used to flood the ear canal
and then gently massaged to dissolve debris before an
absorbent pad is used to remove excess material.
Antiparasitic agents are found in many different
ear preparations. Active ingredients with antiparasitic
actions include ivermectin (0.01%), pyrethrins (0.05–

0.15%), rotenone (0.12%), piperonyl butoxide (1.5%),
milbemycin oxime (0.1%), and thiabendazole (4%). All
products have activity against Otodectes cynotis. In addition, ivermectin and milbemycin applied topically would
be expected to have some activity against Demodex spp.
Products with generalized effects such as topical
selamectin and moxidectin may also be used to treat ear
mites. Finally, excellent results have been reported for
orally and topically administered, long-acting, systemic
parasiticides of the isoxazoline class for the treatment of
O. cynotis and demodicosis in dogs and cats.
Antibiotic therapy may initially be based on cytology.
However, where rods or mixed infection are seen on
cytology or where cocci are identified and the case has
not responded to previous therapy, culture and susceptibility should be performed. Antibiotics can be considered as first, second or third line for topical therapy of
otitis externa and indeed for otitis media (Table 167.4).
Glucocorticoids are useful in the therapy of otitis externa.
They reduce swelling, pruritus, inflammation, and glandular secretions. They can also help to open up the ear canal
to allow adequate penetration of topical drugs. They may
be given systemically or topically (Table 167.5).
The more potent topical steroids, such as mometasone
furoate and hydrocortisone aceponate, produce more
marked antiinflammatory effects than dexamethasone
or betamethasone, which are both more potent than
prednisolone.
Antiyeast drugs are rarely needed systemically. The
azole antifungals miconazole, clotrimazole, and posaconazole as well as nystatin are available in a range of licensed
veterinary ear drops in the United States and Europe.

1475

VetBooks.ir

1476

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

Table 167.3 Selection of ear cleaner based on the type of discharge present

Type of
discharge

Typical
findings

Thick and waxy

Moderately waxy/
purulent

Mildly waxy/
purulent

Mucopurulent/
hemorrhagic

Sterile ceruminous otitis

Malassezia otitis

Gram‐positive otitis

Gram‐negative otitis

The waxier the discharge, the greater the ceruminolytic properties of the ear cleaner to emulsify the wax

The more mucopurulent the discharge, the more aqueous the cleaner to break down mucus and flush the ear

Table 167.4 Topical antibiotic therapy for use in otitis externa and media
Order of use

Drug

Indications

Safety in otitis media

First‐line drugs

Framycetin

Gram‐positive and many
gram‐negative bacteria

Unsafe

Neomycin

Gram‐positive and some
gram‐negative bacteria

Unsafe

Fusidic acid

Gram‐positive bacteria

Unsafe

Florfenicol

Gram positive bacteria

Unsafe

Gentamicin (may be
used as first line where
neomycin unavailable)

Gram‐positive and many
gram‐negative bacteria

Proprietary veterinary products unsafe;
aqueous solutions appear safe at
2.0–4.0 mg/mL

Polymyxin

Excellent Gram‐negative activity

Unsafe

Enrofloxacin

Fluoroquinolones have excellent
Gram‐negative and ‐positive
activity. Their use is best
reserved for gram‐negative
infection

Proprietary veterinary products unsafe;
aqueous solution mixed with EDTA‐tris
appears safe. Enrofloxacin used at
0.5–1.0 mg/mL. Marbofloxacin used at
0.1–0.3 mg/mL

Silver sulfadiazine

Broad spectrum; excellent
activity against Pseudomonas
spp.

Safety of veterinary product unknown;
1% cream mixed with sterile water
diluted 1:10 appears safe

Amikacin

Resistant gram‐negative bacteria

Ototoxic – off‐license use of aqueous
solution of 30–50 mg/mL

Tobramycin

Resistant gram‐negative bacteria

Ototoxic – off license use of aqueous
solution of 8 mg/mL

Carboxypenicillins

Resistant gram‐positive bacteria

Ototoxic – off‐license use of aqueous
solution of 10 mg/mL

Second‐line drugs

Ciprofloxacin
Marbofloxacin
Orbifloxacin

Third‐line drugs best
reserved for severe
gram‐negative
infection on the
basis of culture and
sensitivity

All aqueous solutions constitute off‐license use of these drugs.

All therapeutic protocols should include regular
follow‐up examinations every 7–14 days. Cytology
­
should be performed at each visit and antimicrobial
therapy should be continued until a complete clinical

and cytologic resolution of the infection has been
achieved. Long‐term management should include regular ear cleaning with an appropriate product and therapy
of the underlying primary cause.

VetBooks.ir

167 Otitis

Table 167.5 Systemic glucocorticoid therapy for use in otitis
externa and media
Glucocorticoid

Dosage (mg/kg)

Comments

Prednisolone

1.0–2.0 PO q24h

Methylprednisolone

0.8–1.8 PO q24h

Triamcinolone
acetonide

0.1–1.8 PO q24h

Should be
reduced to an
alternate‐day
regime after two
weeks then
completely
tapered

Dexamethasone

0.1–0.2 IV

Given as a single
treatment at the
time of ear flush;
may be repeated
at subsequent
rechecks after
7–10 days if
other
glucocorticoids
are not being
used

PO, by mouth (per os).

­Otitis Media
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Otitis media is inflammation of the middle ear and
is often bacterial in origin. The organisms most commonly isolated are Staphylococcus pseudintermedius,
Pseudomonas spp., Escherichia coli, Proteus spp., and
Enterococcus faecalis. Occasionally, Malassezia pachydermatis may be involved. In most cases, infectious otitis
media is secondary, resulting from a descending infection as an extension of otitis externa, rather than an
ascending infection from the oropharynx or a result of
hematogenous infection. Other causes of otitis media
include primary secretory otitis media (PSOM) principally recognized in the Cavalier King Charles spaniel,
foreign bodies, nasopharyngeal polyps seen most commonly in cats and neoplasms such as squamous cell carcinomas and lymphoma.
Secondary otitis media is caused by the drainage of
exudate and infectious organisms into the tympanic
bulla from the external ear canal. This causes inflammation to the lining epithelium, the mucoperiosteum, which
forms a pseudostratified columnar epithelium containing increased numbers of secretory cells and glands. As a
result of ongoing inflammation, granulation tissue forms
within the bulla. With more chronic disease, this develops into dense connective tissue and, with time, bone
spicules may develop within this dense tissue.

Figure 167.7 Nasopharyngeal polyp in a cat.

Signalment
When otitis media occurs as an extension from otitis
externa, it most commonly affects middle‐aged or older
dogs. Occasionally, younger dogs may be affected. Breeds
that are predisposed to otitis externa will also be susceptible to developing otitis media. Nasopharyngeal polyps
can be seen in any age of cat, including very young
k­ ittens (Figure 167.7).
Primary secretory otitis media can be seen in young to
middle‐aged Cavalier King Charles spaniels.
History and Clinical Signs
Approximately 50–80% of all dogs with otitis externa of
more than six months duration will have otitis media.
Owners often report that dogs shake their heads and are
reluctant to open their mouths to, for example, carry a
ball, yawn, bark or eat hard food. This is generally due to
pain in the region of the temporomandibular joint. Owners
may complain that their dog’s hearing has deteriorated,
which may be due to conductive changes in hearing as a
result of fluid within the middle ear or cochlear damage if
infection has spread to the inner ear. Neurologic signs in
the form of ataxia or nystagmus are more suggestive of otitis interna than otitis media. Cranial nerve dysfunction
which can be seen with otitis media includes Horner syndrome, especially in cats, facial nerve paralysis and keratoconjunctivitis sicca which can occur due to damage to the
parasympathetic innervation of the lacrimal gland.
Diagnosis
The principal steps in diagnosis are otoscopy, myringotomy, and diagnostic imaging. Otoscopy is an insensitive modality for diagnosing otitis media. Where the

1477

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

VetBooks.ir

1478

Figure 167.8 A swab being passed through a sterile otoscope
cone, which guards the swab from discharge and contaminants
present in the vertical ear canal during cytologic sampling.

Figure 167.9 Videootoscopic image of a normal tympanic
membrane in a dog. Black arrow indicates the recommended site
of myringotomy in the caudoventral quadrant of the pars tensa.

­tympanic membrane can be visualized and can be seen
to be ruptured or intact but abnormal, suggesting previous damage, then a diagnosis of otitis media is possible. If the tympanic membrane is ruptured, samples
may be taken from the middle ear. A clean otoscope
cone or videootoscope head should be inserted as far
into the horizontal canal as possible and a fine catheter
or microswab may be inserted through the tube or
working channel to “guard” it from discharge in the
external canal (Figure 167.8). Material can be gathered

onto the swab or suctioned up the catheter to sample
the middle ear.
If the tympanic membrane is intact but appears
abnormal, it is possible a previous defect in the tympanum has healed in the presence of ongoing otitis media.
In these cases, myringotomy should be performed to
take samples from the middle ear. Direct visual observation (ideally with a video otoscope) in a carefully
cleaned ear canal is important to avoid damage to sensitive structures. The myringotomy should be performed by an experienced clinician using a diode or
carbon dioxide (CO2) laser or manually using a sterile
rigid polypropylene catheter cut to an angle of 60°. A
small hole made in the pars tensa in the caudoventral
quadrant to avoid the pars flaccida and the manubrium
of the malleus (Figure 167.9) allows for collection of
material from the middle ear, which can be examined
cytologically and submitted for culture and sensitivity.
Cytology in otitis externa is useful but in otitis media,
the presence of mucus from the middle ear can make
identification of bacteria difficult. Where cytology
reveals signs of an inflammatory infiltrate and infectious organisms, a definitive diagnosis of otitis media
can be made. Where cytology is unremarkable, cultures are necessary and are probably best undertaken
in all cases.
Advanced imaging is useful in otitis media. Radiography
is only diagnostic in chronic disease. The open‐mouthed
view, which allows for comparison of both sides, and the
lateral oblique view provide the most information.
Changes on radiography that are consistent with otitis
media are increased density of the air‐filled bulla, thickening, lysis or irregularity of the tympanic bulla wall, or
formation of new bone. Computed tomography (CT) and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are more ­sensitive
modalities, picking up subtle changes such as granulation
tissue or fluid or mucus within the middle ear.
Therapy
Therapy of otitis media may be divided into several
stages:
flushing the bulla
infusion of topical medication(s) into the bulla
●● reduction
of inflammation with glucocorticoids
(­topical or systemic)
●● administration of systemic antibiotics
●● reassessment every 7–10 days
●●
●●

Continue therapy until negative cytology and cultures
have been achieved and the ear appears clinically
normal.

VetBooks.ir

167 Otitis

Flushing the bulla is the most important part of
treatment. This is best achieved in an anesthetized
animal, which should be intubated and the endotracheal cuff fully inflated to avoid the risk of inhalation
of any flush solution. An aqueous‐based flush helps
hydrate the mucous within the bulla and aid removal
by suction. Suitable flushes include water, sterile saline,
dilute chlorhexidine solution (<0.2%), and EDTA‐tris.
All have a high degree of middle ear safety.
Ceruminolytics are generally not necessary in otitis
media due to the nature of the discharge, and only
squalene has been shown to be safe in the dog. The
cat’s middle ear appears to be more sensitive to ototoxic effects and only water, sterile saline, and EDTA‐
tris are considered safe.
Once the ear has been cleaned, medication can be
administered. No medication is licensed for the therapy of otitis media so in each case, a careful assessment should be made of the risks of topical drugs
causing signs of ototoxicity versus the benefits in
resolving the infection. The safest antibiotics for infusion into the tympanic bulla are aqueous solutions of
fluoroquinolones (ciprofloxacin, enrofloxacin, marbofloxacin) and aqueous gentamicin. Other aminoglycosides such as tobramycin and the semisynthetic
penicillin ticarcillin have been a­ ssociated with severe
hearing loss when used to treat otitis media. Antifungal
drugs that are considered safe are clotrimazole,
miconazole, nystatin, and tolnaftate, although the
author has seen temporary deafness caused by both
clotrimazole and miconazole that resolved when topical medication was withdrawn. Drugs that are infused
directly into the bulla are thought to stay trapped
within this structure for several days, providing high
local levels of the drug.
Therapy with glucocorticoids is important to reduce
the inflammation and exudation in middle ear disease
and to help reduce the formation of granulation tissue.
Many different protocols are available for therapy. The
author’s preference is to administer intravenous dexamethasone (2 mg/mL) at a dose of 0.1–0.2 mg/kg at the
time of the ear flush and then follow with antiinflammatory doses of prednisolone at 1–2 mg/kg daily PO for two
weeks. Alternative systemic glucocorticoids are listed in
Table 167.5. Aqueous dexamethasone, fluocinolone, and
a commercial product containing dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO) and fluocinolone (Synotic®, Fort Dodge Animal
Health) are recognized as having low ototoxic potential
and can be infused by catheter into the bulla after
flushing.
The use of systemic antibiotics in otitis media is a
subject of debate. The levels of systemic antibiotics

Table 167.6 Systemic antibiotic therapy for use in otitis media
Drug

Dosage (mg/kg)

Comments

Difloxacin

5.0–10.0 PO q24h

Enrofloxacin

5.0–20.0* PO q24h

Marbofloxacin

2.0–5.0 PO q24h

Higher dose rates
constitute
off‐license usage

Orbifloxacin

5.0–12.5 PO q24h

Gentamicin

6.0–8.0 SC q24h

Amikacin

15.0–20.0 SC q24h

Ticarcillin‐
clavulanic acid

15.0–25.0 IV q8h

Renal function
must be assessed
(urine analysis and
blood samples)
before starting
and during
aminoglycoside
therapy
Use can be
justified only
under exceptional
circumstances

* Doses higher than 5.0 mg/kg in cats can cause retinal damage which
can lead to blindness.
IV, intravenous; PO, by mouth (per os); SC, subcutaneous.

achieved in the tympanic bulla can never approach the
levels achieved by topically administered drugs.
However, where topical therapy cannot reach the middle ear due to, for example, stenosis of the external ear
canal or where the ear is so severely ulcerated or painful that the dog will not tolerate topical therapy, then
systemic medication may be the only option. All oral
drugs should be prescribed on the basis of culture and
susceptibility. Oral fluoroquinolones are the most
appropriate first‐line drugs in otitis media; aminoglycosides and ticarcillin‐clavulanic acid may be used
systemically but only where all other drug options
have been explored. Drug doses are found in
Table 167.6.
Follow‐up appointments are important in otitis media
and should be undertaken every 7–10 days. If necessary,
the dog should be readmitted to permit further flushing
of the tympanic bulla under anesthesia. Topical and systemic therapy may be adjusted on the basis of culture
and sensitivity results. Antiinflammatory therapy may
be reduced as the disease improves. The author will generally reduce prednisolone to an alternate‐day dosage
after two weeks and then taper, aiming to withdraw it
after a further two weeks. Therapy should be continued
until the ear appears clinically, cytologically, and culturally normal. Maintenance therapy should include regular ear cleaning and maintenance of any underlying
causes.

1479

VetBooks.ir

1480

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

­Further Reading
Burrows A, Hobi S, Albert R. Challenges in otitis. In:
Torres SM, Frank LA, Hargis AM, eds. Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology, vol. 7. Oxford: Wiley Blackwell,
2012, pp. 298–304.
Gotthelf LN. Diagnosis and treatment of otitis media. In:
Small Animal Ear Diseases: An Illustrated Guide,
2nd edn. St Louis, MO: Elsevier/Saunders, 2005,
pp. 275–303.

Harvey RG, Paterson S. Otitis Externa: An Essential Guide to
Diagnosis and Treatment. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2014.
Miller WH, Griffin CE, Campbell KL. Diseases of eyelids,
claws, anal glands and ears. In: Muller and Kirk’s Small
Animal Dermatology, 7th edn. St Louis, MO: Elsevier,
2013, pp. 741–68.
Paterson S, Tobias K. Atlas of Ear Diseases of the Dog and
Cat. Oxford, UK: Wiley Blackwell, 2013, pp. 87–124.

VetBooks.ir

1481

168
Cutaneous Manifestations of Systemic Disease
Kinga Gortel, DVM, MS, DACVD
Tri Lake Animal Hospital and Referral Centre, Lake Country, BC, Canada

The skin can manifest myriad changes associated with
systemic diseases. Some, such as the cutaneous manifestations of hyperadrenocorticism, are so well recognized
and characteristic that they provide obvious clues about
the underlying etiology. Others are more subtle or rare.
In addition to the diseases described in this chapter, the
skin can directly exhibit symptoms of bleeding disorders
(petechiae, ecchymoses, bruising), icterus, dehydration,
and cachexia. Changes in the skin can be a direct result
of a multisystemic disorder (e.g., vasculitis affecting multiple organs) or result from disease occurring in another
organ (e.g., superficial necrolytic dermatitis associated
with liver disease). The skin is an easier site to sample
compared to other organs, and skin biopsies (or in some
cases cytologic examination or cultures) can be essential
to facilitating the diagnosis of the underlying disease.
Although internal diseases are relatively uncommon as
a cause of skin disorders, their likelihood increases when
certain findings are present. Internal disease is more
likely in patients exhibiting unexpected changes in
weight, activity level, appetite, thirst, or urine production, and these signs should be investigated as part of the
history collection. Patients presenting with skin disease
for the first time at an advanced age without a readily
identifiable cause also warrant further work‐up for internal disease.

­Hormonal and Metabolic Disorders
Causing Cutaneous Manifestations
Canine and Feline Hypercortisolism
Hypercortisolism (i.e., Cushing disease, Cushing syndrome) is common in dogs and causes both nonspecific
and fairly distinct dermatologic changes. The signs are

similar whether endogenous or exogenous glucocorticoids are the cause. The most common but nonspecific
change occurs in the hair coat, with a lack of luster and
density, slower growth, and often a lightening of the
color. Hair is progressively lost, resulting in alopecia that
spares the head and distal extremities and predominantly
affects the trunk, typically in a symmetric pattern.
More specific signs include thinning skin and resultant
prominent blood vessels, as well as comedones, milia,
and calcinosis cutis. Easy bruising, seborrhea, slow
wound healing, and striae are also seen. Generalized
demodicosis can occur, and iatrogenic or spontaneous
hypercortisolism is an important consideration in adult‐
onset disease. Lesions of superficial bacterial pyoderma
are commonly seen in dogs with hypercortisolism.
Naturally occurring and iatrogenic hypercortisolism
are rare in cats. Cutaneous signs include alopecia and
thin skin. Skin fragility, described below, occurs in over
50% of cases, and may be more common in cats with adrenal neoplasia. A unique finding reported only in iatrogenic hypercortisolism is medial curling of the pinnae.
Calcinosis Cutis
Calcinosis cutis refers to the various forms of calcification of the skin. It most commonly occurs in association
with iatrogenic or spontaneous hypercortisolism in dogs.
It appears to be more common in large‐breed dogs. It is
more rarely seen with systemic fungal infections such as
blastomycosis, with diabetes mellitus, and with various
other diseases. Rarely, calcinosis cutis affecting multiple
footpads or the interdigital skin has been seen in dogs
and cats in association with chronic renal disease
(Figure 168.1). This site is not typically affected in dogs
with hypercortisolism, so renal failure should be considered in a patient with calcinosis affecting multiple feet.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

VetBooks.ir

1482

Figure 168.1 Calcinosis cutis affecting multiple feet in a young
cat with chronic renal disease.

Figure 168.3 Feline acquired skin fragility in a geriatric cat.
Extensive tearing of the very thin skin following minor trauma.

Feline Skin Fragility Syndrome

Figure 168.2 Calcinosis cutis. Firm, coalescing erythematous
papules on the lateral thorax of a mature bulldog with iatrogenic
hypercortisolism.

Calcinosis cutis often starts as erythematous papules
that coalesce into very characteristically firm plaques
(Figure 168.2). The lesions can ulcerate and become
­pruritic. The axilla, groin, and dorsal trunk are commonly affected. The diagnosis is made on the basis of
characteristic clinical features and histopathology, and
investigation for the underlying cause is warranted in
all cases.
The treatment of calcinosis cutis relies on identification and removal of the underlying metabolic problem
and if this can be achieved, it is associated with a good
prognosis. Correction of hypercortisolism usually allows
calcinosis cutis to resolve within several months, but
some lesions can undergo osseous metaplasia and persist
indefinitely.

Feline acquired skin fragility syndrome is a rare condition characterized by extremely thin skin that tears and
bruises easily (Figure 168.3). It is associated with spontaneous or iatrogenic hypercortisolism and seems to be
more common with adrenal tumors. It can also result
from excessive levels of progestational compounds,
either administered therapeutically or secreted from
adrenal tumors. The syndrome has also been reported in
association with diabetes, cholangiohepatitis, hepatic
lipidosis, neoplasia (e.g., pancreatic and intestinal carcinoma), and other diseases.
Cats with acquired skin fragility syndrome may
­present for spontaneous skin tears following minimal
handling or trauma. They have extremely fragile, thin
skin that tears very easily during restraint. The skin is not
hyperextensible and bleeds minimally upon tearing.
The diagnosis is usually made by the very characteristic
clinical findings, although histopathology is confirmatory.
Affected cats have a poor prognosis.
Canine Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism is a common endocrine disorder of
dogs. Dermatologic changes occur in 60–80% of cases,
but can be subtle. Cutaneous signs of hypothyroidism
include progressive alopecia in areas of wear, including
the dorsal and distal tail (“rat tail” appearance), ventral
and lateral trunk, the upper limbs (typically caudal
thighs), and often the dorsal aspect of the muzzle. The
pattern of alopecia is somewhat different from the
­classic bilaterally symmetric alopecia sparing the head in
hypercortisolism. Some hypothyroid dogs maintain a

VetBooks.ir

168 Cutaneous Manifestations of Systemic Disease

normal hair coat. The loss of guard hairs, leaving behind
the finer undercoat, can lead to the appearance of a
“puppy coat.” The hair coat can also lighten due to longer
retention of hair and subsequent bleaching. Recurrent
pyoderma and otitis externa are common. Pruritus is not
a feature of hypothyroidism but can be seen if secondary
pyoderma, Malassezia dermatitis, or otitis externa are
present. Advanced cases can present with thick, puffy
skin (myxedema) due to accumulation of dermal glycosaminoglycans. This is a rare manifestation as most
hypothyroid dogs are diagnosed and treated before
­progressing to this stage.
The diagnosis of hypothyroidism relies on history,
examination findings, complete blood count and serum
biochemistry findings, thyroid hormone (total T4 and
free T4) and thyrotropin (TSH) measurements, and
occasionally skin biopsies. The total T4 is often assayed
in dogs with dermatologic disease. Because it is lowered
by multiple nonthyroidal factors (e.g., drugs and severe
nonthyroidal illness), it is easy to mistakenly diagnose
hypothyroidism using this measurement alone.
Confirmatory testing should be performed before
initiating treatment. Although a response to thyroid
­
­supplementation is sometimes used as a diagnostic tool,
treatment with thyroxine can result in temporary
improvement of many dermatologic conditions by stimulating hair growth. This can lead to false confirmation
of an incorrect diagnosis of hypothyroidism.
Treatment of hypothyroidism is usually very rewarding and most of the cutaneous abnormalities can be corrected. However, during the initial few weeks of therapy,
there can be increased scaling as well as profound hair
loss as telogen hairs are replaced due to a coordinated
initiation of the new hair cycle.
Sex Hormone Dermatoses
These uncommon dermatoses can be associated with
gonadal and adrenal disorders. They most often present
with truncal alopecia. Hyperestrogenism can occur in
intact male dogs with functional testicular tumors
(see section on Neoplastic and Paraneoplastic Disorders
Affecting the Skin at the end of this chapter), or in intact
female dogs with cystic ovaries or, more rarely, with
functional ovarian tumors.
Hyperandrogenism in male dogs is rare. It can be
idiopathic or associated with testicular neoplasia. In
­
the idiopathic form, young dogs exhibit hypersexual
behavior and sometimes aggression, as well as seborrhea
oleosa and truncal hair loss. Hyperandrogenism due
to testicular neoplasia results in hyperplasia of the
circumanal glands and the tail gland, which appear
­
­thickened and universally enlarged. Macular hyperpigmentation can also be seen. The diagnosis of these

conditions can be made with endocrine testing and
­
ultrasonography.
Superficial Necrolytic Dermatitis
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis, sometimes called hepatocutaneous syndrome, is most often seen in dogs with a
characteristic idiopathic hepatopathy. It can also be seen
with anticonvulsant medications and pancreatic tumors.
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis has been rarely reported
in cats. This condition is described in detail in
Chapter 169.
Xanthomas
Xanthomas are rare granulomatous skin lesions that
occur in association with an abnormality in lipid metabolism. Most have been associated with diabetes mellitus
or with the feeding of high‐fat foods. An underlying
hereditary defect of lipid metabolism has also been
reported. The lesions occur most commonly on the head
(particularly the preauricular area or ears), distal limbs,
and bony prominences, and consist of small white or
­yellow papules, nodules, or plaques. Histopathology is
needed to make the diagnosis.
The treatment of xanthomas relies on the correction of
the underlying metabolic problem and if this can be
accomplished, the prognosis is favorable. Xanthomas in
cats with idiopathic hypertriglyceridemia can undergo
regression with a low‐fat diet.
Amyloidosis
Amyloidosis refers to a diverse group of diseases featuring the extracellular deposition of protein fibrils with
characteristic staining properties (amyloid). In dogs and
cats, most cases of amyloidosis show systemic involvement, affecting the kidneys and less commonly other
organs. Skin lesions are seen in some patients.
Amyloidosis can also be limited to the skin. In this form,
dermal or subcutaneous nodules can be seen anywhere,
but most commonly on the ear. Purpuric macules have
also been reported. The diagnosis is made by histopathology. Solitary nodules can be excised but no effective
treatment is reported for more widespread lesions.
Other hormonal disorders that can sometimes cause
cutaneous manifestations include the most common
endocrine diseases of the cat. Diabetic cats sometimes
develop seborrheic skin disease, thin skin, and alopecia.
Hyperthyroid cats can exhibit an increased rate of claw
growth, excessive shedding and matting, alopecia due to
excessive grooming, and occasionally other changes.
Although pruritus is a well‐documented complication
of hepatobiliary disease in humans, it is not typically

1483

VetBooks.ir

1484

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

recognized in companion animals. One case report
­
described pruritus in a puppy with a portosystemic shunt
whose pruritus resolved upon correction of the vascular
abnormality.

­Systemic Infectious Disease Causing
Cutaneous Manifestations
Feline Herpesviral Dermatitis
Feline herpesvirus‐1 (FHV‐1) can cause a characteristic
facial dermatitis in cats. The condition is most common
in adult cats, and not all cases exhibit the ocular or respiratory signs typical of this viral infection. There can be
a recent history of an upper respiratory tract infection in
the weeks preceding development of the lesions in some
cats. The lesions consist of inflamed and often ulcerated
areas near the nares. They most often affect the nasal
planum, dorsal aspect of the muzzle, and periocular skin
(Figures 168.4 and 168.5). The lesions do not appear pruritic even though eosinophils typically predominate. The
clinical appearance and eosinophilic inflammation can
lead to an inappropriate diagnosis of an eosinophilic
plaque or mosquito bite hypersensitivity, with inappropriate treatment using corticosteroids, which can lead to
marked worsening of the disease.
The diagnosis of feline herpesviral dermatitis is made
by the fairly striking clinical appearance of the facial
form, histopathology, and either immunohistochemistry
or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing for FHV‐1
on biopsy samples. Viral inclusion bodies are difficult to
find on histopathology, so this condition should be considered in biopsies consistent with eosinophilic plaques
located on the face.

Figure 168.4 Feline herpesviral dermatitis and rhinitis in an adult
cat. Small crusts and a loss of the cobblestone architecture of the
nasal planum are seen.

Treatment of FHV‐1 infection with oral famciclovir is
effective for cutaneous, ocular, and respiratory symptoms. It can be more effective than other therapeutic
strategies. The drug appears to be well tolerated in cats
but there is some uncertainty about the dose and duration of treatment, with recent recommendations reflecting higher doses than had been used previously. In some
cats, the skin lesions can become recurrent or chronic.
Feline Leukemia Virus and Feline
Immunodeficiency Virus Infection
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV) usually causes skin lesions
by its immunosuppressive actions, although it can also
induce skin tumors. The cutaneous symptoms are quite
nonspecific. Affected cats are susceptible to a number of
secondary infections including recurrent abscesses, pyoderma, dermatophytosis, demodicosis, and paronychia.
Multiple cutaneous horns of the footpads are sometimes
seen in cats infected with FeLV. Giant cell dermatosis is a
histologically unique and rare manifestation causing
pruritus and crusting of the face and often other areas of
skin. Although feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) is
more commonly associated with recurrent or chronic
oral disease, some cats also exhibit skin infections. The
signs of these two immunosuppressive viral diseases are
very similar. The diagnosis is made by serologic testing.
Canine Distemper
Canine distemper virus infection in dogs can be
manifested by a combination of respiratory, ocular,
­
­gastrointestinal, neurologic, and cutaneous signs that

Figure 168.5 Feline herpesviral dermatitis in an adult cat. Extensive
unilateral eosinophil‐rich ulceration is present on the face.

VetBooks.ir

168 Cutaneous Manifestations of Systemic Disease

appear simultaneously or sequentially. The classic but
uncommon cutaneous manifestation of canine distemper is “hard pad disease” – footpad and nasal hyperkeratosis. The footpads are thickened, fissured, and unusually
hard. The centers of the footpads can feel surprisingly
hard even when they appear minimally affected.
Widespread impetigo can also be seen in puppies.
The diagnosis is often made on the basis of clinical
signs in a dog with an inadequate vaccination history.
Histopathology and immunohistochemistry on affected
skin can also be useful to confirm the diagnosis.

The ideal diagnostic method for systemic or localized
mycoses is identification of the fungal organism by
cytologic and histopathologic examination of affected
tissues. Serology is useful as a noninvasive diagnostic
test for cryptococcosis and can also be used to monitor
response to therapy. A sensitive urine or serum antigen
test is currently available for the diagnosis of blastomycosis when organisms are not found on cytology
or ­histopathology. Sampling of the affected tissue for
a definitive mycotic rhinitis typically requires
rhinoscopy.

Systemic Mycoses

Leishmaniasis

Cutaneous lesions consisting of papules, nodules, ulcers,
abscesses, and draining tracts are seen in many systemic
mycoses. They are seen most commonly in blastomycosis (20–50% of cases) and feline cryptococcosis (40%),
and result from hematogenous spread of the fungus to
the skin. Sporotrichosis is generally transmitted by
­cutaneous inoculation of fungal spores, in most cases
resulting in cutaneous or cutaneous lymphatic signs.
However, cats with sporotrichosis have a high frequency
of upper respiratory and lung lesions, suggesting that the
inhalatory mode of infection also plays a role in this species, and the hematogenous route is important in the
cutaneous dissemination of the disease.
Nasal mycotic rhinitis in dogs (most commonly aspergillosis) is usually associated with profuse mucopurulent
nasal discharge and can cause crusting and ulceration of
the nasal planum (Figure 168.6). Depigmentation of the
nasal planum ventral to the nares is a characteristic
finding.

Leishmania organisms are protozoa of several species
that cause a spectrum of clinical disease in dogs and
other mammals, including cats. Leishmaniasis varies in
its clinical presentation from focal to generalized
­cutaneous disease to disseminated internal disease. The
severity varies from asymptomatic to fatal. Leishmania
protozoa are usually vector borne by sandflies, but vertical transmission and direct horizontal transmission are
likely important in certain populations of dogs.
Leishmaniasis has a worldwide distribution but is
endemic in parts of Europe (most commonly in the
Mediterranean basin) and South and Central America. It
was considered to be of minimal importance in North
America until the early 2000s, when Leishmania was
found in multiple foxhound kennels.
Leishmaniasis in dogs most frequently combines
­cutaneous and internal disease. The most common sign
is a nonpruritic exfoliative dermatitis with alopecia
that is generalized but most pronounced on the head
(Figure 168.7). A characteristic feature is adherent silvery‐white scale. Mucocutaneous ulcerations, alopecia,
and erythema can also be seen. Less commonly, nodular
skin disease is present.
The diagnosis of leishmaniasis can be made by cytology (from skin, lymph nodes, bone marrow aspirates),
histopathology, PCR testing of blood and other tissues,
and antibody serology testing.
Lagenidiosis

Figure 168.6 Mild nasal mycotic rhinitis in a mature dog with
nasal aspergillosis.

Lagenidiosis is a rare disease caused by a fungus‐like,
aquatic, “water mold” oomycete of the genus Lagenidia.
It occurs most often in dogs living in the southeastern
United States and has been reported in cats. The disease
is sometimes limited to the skin and local lymph nodes,
but often also causes lesions at distant sites, including the
great blood vessels, r­ espiratory tract, and mediastinum.
The systemic form is universally fatal. The diagnosis is
made by histopathology, which is similar to histopathology from tissues ­originating from dogs with pythiosis or

1485

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

VetBooks.ir

1486

Figure 168.8 Zinc‐responsive dermatosis (syndrome I) in an adult
Siberian husky. Crusting, erythema, alopecia, and
hyperpigmentation of the periocular skin are present.

Figure 168.7 Two‐year‐old boxer with visceral leishmaniasis
caused by Leishmania chagasi. The skin lesions are generalized and
characterized by erythema and thick scales adhered to the skin
surface and hair shafts. Source: Courtesy of Dr Romeika Reis Lima.

zygomycosis. More specific tests include serology for
anti‐Lagenidium antibodies, culture, and PCR testing.
The prognosis for dogs with systemic lagenidiosis is
grave. For dogs with only cutaneous lesions, aggressive
resection can be curative and amputation can be considered for those with distal limb lesions affecting one leg.
Radiography of the thorax and ultrasonography of the
abdomen is recommended prior to surgery because of
the frequency of systemic dissemination. Medical therapy with antifungal drugs is typically ineffective alone but
has been described as an adjunct to surgical resection.
Many other infectious diseases can present with
cutaneous manifestations. This list includes canine
­
herpesvirus infection, pseudorabies, feline infectious
­
peritonitis, feline calicivirus infection, toxoplasmosis,
neosporosis, brucellosis, pythiosis, entomophthoromycosis, and rickettsial and ehrlichial infections in dogs.

­Nutritional Disorders Causing
Cutaneous Manifestations
Zinc‐Responsive Dermatosis
Zinc‐responsive dermatosis is an uncommon skin disease in dogs. It includes syndromes caused by nutrient
deficiency, nutrient imbalances, and the inability
to absorb or utilize zinc. Absolute nutritional zinc

­deficiency is unlikely in a patient eating a well‐balanced
diet. Relative deficiencies can be seen in dogs when zinc
absorption is impaired by excessive amounts of other
nutrients.
Syndrome I zinc‐responsive dermatosis occurs in dogs
eating a well‐balanced diet and has been reported most
commonly in Siberian huskies and Alaskan malamutes.
A more severe form has been reported in a litter of
pharaoh hounds. Skin lesions usually begin in early
­
adulthood and consist of early erythema followed by
crusting, scaling, lichenification, and alopecia. The distribution is typically around the mouth, chin, eyes, and
ears (Figure 168.8). An inability to absorb zinc from
the gastrointestinal tract has been shown in some
malamutes.
Syndrome II zinc‐responsive dermatosis has been
reported predominantly in large‐breed puppies or young
adult dogs eating diets deficient in zinc or diets that
interfere with zinc absorption (e.g., excessively high in
calcium, other minerals and vitamins, or phytates). Dogs
with this syndrome have extensive crusting and fissuring
of the footpads and nasal planum, and generalized crusting plaques. Very similar but more severe clinical signs
have been seen in generic dog food dermatosis, which
was seen in North American in the 1980s but was
virtually eliminated with the reformulation of these
­
foods. In this syndrome, a deficiency of multiple nutrients is likely and more severe systemic signs are present.
The diagnosis of zinc‐responsive dermatoses is made
by clinical signs, dietary history, and histopathologic
findings.
The treatment of syndrome I zinc‐responsive dermatosis consists of oral zinc supplementation. Most cases
respond well within 4–6 weeks, but require ongoing

VetBooks.ir

168 Cutaneous Manifestations of Systemic Disease

treatment to maintain remission. Zinc methionine is a
commonly used veterinary preparation. The dose of elemental zinc is 2–3 mg/kg per day. The addition of low‐
dose corticosteroids has also been reported to benefit
patients not responding adequately to zinc supplementation. The intravenous administration of zinc sulfate has
been described in patients with a poor response. Young
dogs with syndrome II zinc‐responsive dermatosis show
a dramatic response to zinc and dietary correction, but
do not require lifelong supplementation.
Feline Pansteatitis
This rare condition has been reported in cats eating diets
high in polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) such as red
tuna, without adequate vitamin E consumption. PUFAs
increase oxidative stress through free radical production.
Affected cats show inflammation and necrosis of subcutaneous and intraabdominal fat resulting in firm, painful
nodules. They are often lethargic, anorexic, febrile, and
painful with movement and palpation.
The diagnosis is made by histopathology coupled with
a suggestive dietary history. Vitamin E supplementation
and a dietary change can be used, but the prognosis for
severe cases is poor.

­Immune‐Mediated Systemic Diseases
Causing Cutaneous Manifestations
Panniculitis
Panniculitis in dogs and cats can be due to myriad
etiologic factors, such as infectious agents, drug
­
reactions, and immune‐mediated diseases (systemic
­
lupus erythematosus, polyarthritis, or others). Patients
with panniculitis should be evaluated for pancreatic
­disease, as panniculitis has been associated with pancreatitis and pancreatic tumors. The reader is referred
to Chapter 164 for a more detailed discussion of
panniculitis.
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE)
This multisystem autoimmune disease shows highly variable signs affecting various organs. It is rare in dogs and
very rare in cats. Circulating autoantibodies directed
against a wide variety of tissue antigens are present. The
estimated frequency of skin lesions is 20–50% of affected
dogs and cats. The lesions can consist of mild alopecic
scarring, scaling, and crusting, to widespread ulcers
involving the skin and oral mucosa. Lesions of the nasal
­planum more typically seen with discoid lupus erythematosus may be present. Some patients exhibit lesions in

hairless areas exposed to light. In addition to skin d
­ isease,
other manifestations include polyarthritis, hematologic
changes, protein‐losing nephropathy, and other signs.
German shepherd dogs are predisposed to SLE.
The diagnosis of SLE can be difficult. Criteria for the
diagnosis of canine SLE include the presence of a positive antinuclear antibody (ANA) titer as well as a number
of other clinical and laboratory findings. The reader is
referred to other sections within this book for a more
thorough discussion of these criteria. Skin biopsies can
be helpful but although the classic changes of SLE are
quite suggestive, the histopathologic findings in SLE are
variable. Direct immunofluorescence or immunohistochemistry can be used to demonstrate immunoglobulin
and complement at the dermoepidermal junction.
The prognosis for dogs with SLE is guarded, but some
patients can be controlled effectively for years. The
disease is highly variable in its severity, which can
­
also wax and wane. Corticosteroids are used most often,
frequently with the addition of steroid‐sparing agents.
Vascular Diseases
A variety of diseases affecting the cutaneous blood vessels can result in skin lesions. Vasculitis refers to vascular
diseases in which blood vessels appear to be the target of
an inflammatory response. Although many cases are idiopathic, vasculitis can be initiated by myriad factors
including drugs, rabies vaccination, infectious diseases,
and food allergy. Thus, the term vasculitis describes a
cutaneous reaction pattern rather than an etiologic
diagnosis.
Lesions are often found on the pinnal apex. The footpads are also commonly affected with central or m
­ arginal
ulcers. More widespread lesions can also be seen, consisting of purpura, erythematous plaques, hemorrhagic
bullae, and ulcers. The skin is often the only organ
affected but in some cases, other organs are concurrently
affected. For example, cutaneous and renal vasculopathy
of greyhounds is associated with renal disease.
Canine Uveodermatologic Syndrome
This rare syndrome consists of granulomatous uveitis
and concurrent depigmenting dermatitis. A genetic basis
is present, with akita dogs reported most frequently. The
uveitis is usually bilateral and acute in onset, with the
skin lesions occurring later in most cases. Depigmentation
is seen on the skin of the nasal planum, lips, eyelids, and
occasionally elsewhere. The diagnosis can be made tentatively based on the unique combination of clinical
signs, and definitely using skin biopsies.
Other systemic diseases with an immune‐mediated
etiology that cause cutaneous lesions include erythema

1487

VetBooks.ir

1488

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

multiforme, toxic epidermal necrolysis, cryoglobulinemia
and cryofibrinogenemia, graft‐versus‐host disease, acute
eosinophilic dermatitis (Wells‐like syndrome), acute
­neutrophilic dermatitis (Sweet‐like syndrome), familial
canine dermatomyositis, and hypereosinophilic syndrome.

­Neurologic Disorders Causing
Cutaneous Manifestations
Canine Chiari‐Like Malformation
Canine Chiari‐like malformation has been reported
most frequently in young Cavalier King Charles spaniels.
It can be found in other breeds, and brachycephalic
small‐breed dogs are predisposed to the condition.
Chiari‐like malformation is a developmental abnormality leading to hypoplasia of the occipital bone and thus a
reduced volume of the caudal fossa, the part of the skull
that accommodates the cerebellum and brainstem. The
cerebellum variably herniates through the foramen magnum, crowding the spinal cord and altering the flow of
cerebral spinal fluid in that region with resultant syrinx
formation. It is easily mistaken for a dermatologic condition, as it often causes persistent unilateral or bilateral
scratching at the cervical and shoulder regions. A characteristic feature is that some dogs do not actually make
contact with the skin when exhibiting the scratching.
The presence of pruritus in this area, particularly if it is
unilateral and not accompanied by skin lesions, should
increase the suspicion of canine Chiari‐like malformation. Neck pain is a common feature and is found in most
affected dogs on physical examination.
The diagnosis can be made by the very characteristic
clinical signs in a predisposed breed, but definitive diagnosis requires magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The
reader is referred to the neurology section for a more
comprehensive discussion of Chiari‐like malformation.
Sensory Neuropathies
Both inherited and acquired sensory neuropathies can
result in cutaneous manifestations. A sensory neuropathy of English pointers, German short‐haired pointers,
English springer spaniels, and French spaniels results in
severe paw licking and chewing progressing to further
mutilation of the limbs and autoamputation. This condition has also been reported in one miniature pinscher.
Canine ganglioradiculitis is an inflammatory disease of
the cranial and spinal ganglia and nerve roots. Affected
dogs develop sensory deficits and mutilation/hyperesthesia. Cauda equina syndrome can cause lumbosacral
hyperesthesia, pruritus, and/or self‐inflicted lesions of
the hindlimb(s).

­Neoplastic and Paraneoplastic
Disorders Affecting the Skin
Male Feminizing Syndrome Secondary
to Testicular Neoplasia
Dermatologic manifestations of canine testicular tumors
are rarely encountered in parts of the world where neutering is common. Male feminization occurs most often
with Sertoli cell tumors, affecting 24–57% of dogs with
these tumors. Cryptorchid testes are at greatly increased
risk for development of neoplasia. The syndrome is
thought to be related to estrogen secretion from the
tumor, but other factors may play a role as elevated estrogen levels are not always found. Bilaterally symmetric
alopecia beginning in the perineal, inguinal, and flank
regions is most common in affected dogs. Seborrhea,
comedones, and hyperpigmentation of the skin, particularly in the inguinal and perianal areas, can also be seen
in more advanced cases. Gynecomastia, nipple enlargement, and a pendulous prepuce can be present. A characteristic clinical feature is linear preputial dermatosis: a
line of erythema with variable hyperpigmentation or
comedones extending from the opening of the prepuce
along its ventral aspect to the scrotum. Affected male
dogs may attract other male dogs.
The tumor may be palpable in the affected testicle,
and the nonneoplastic testicle can atrophy. However,
­testicular palpation is not universally abnormal and is
not possible in cryptorchid dogs. Affected dogs can also
exhibit myelosuppression. Approximately 20% of these
tumors are malignant and roughly 10% will metastasize
to the lungs and abdominal lymph nodes.
Although skin histopathology, estrogen levels
particularly estradiol‐17‐beta), ultrasonography and
(­
sometimes general bloodwork can be suggestive, the
­
constellation of characteristic clinical signs, histologic
confirmation of testicular neoplasia, and response to
castration are diagnostic for the syndrome.
Feline Paraneoplastic Exfoliative Dermatitis
Feline exfoliative dermatitis is a paraneoplastic syndrome seen in old and middle‐aged cats with thymomas.
Skin lesions usually precede systemic signs such as
­dyspnea and weight loss. Affected cats show generalized
erythema and severe scaling, often beginning on the
head and neck but progressing to widespread lesions.
The scales can become quite large, sometimes in excess
of 1 cm in diameter. Alopecia is a common finding. Some
patients also exhibit crusting, and brown keratosebaceous material can be present around the eyes and
mouth, in the ear canals, and in the interdigital spaces.
Pruritus is absent to mild unless secondary infections are

VetBooks.ir

168 Cutaneous Manifestations of Systemic Disease

present. Secondary Malassezia dermatitis and bacterial
overgrowth can occur.
The pathogenesis of the cutaneous syndrome is not
well understood, but is thought to be a cell‐mediated
immunologic reaction secondary to the underlying thymoma. A mediastinal mass can be detected in most
patients by radiography or ultrasonography and fine needle aspirates can be diagnostic. Surgical removal of the
thymoma induces regression of the skin lesions. Median
overall survival time after surgery in one small study was
1825 days, with a three‐year chance of ­survival of 74%.
Feline Paraneoplastic Alopecia
Feline paraneoplastic alopecia is a highly visually distinct, bilaterally symmetric progressive alopecia in which
the skin appears unusually thin and shiny (Figure 168.9).
The majority of affected patients are older cats with
pancreatic carcinoma, but the condition has also been
reported with biliary carcinoma. The pathogenesis of the
cutaneous lesions is poorly understood but is thought to
be induced by the cytokine milieu released by the tumor.
The alopecia typically begins on the ventral abdomen
and thorax, with progression to the head and medial
extremities. The hair epilates easily, revealing smooth,
shiny, glistening skin that is not fragile. Some affected
cats have scaly or fissured footpads that can be painful.
The condition is not always pruritic but affected cats
may groom excessively, especially if the skin disease is
complicated by secondary Malassezia dermatitis. The
onset is typically quite acute and rapidly progressive.
Affected cats are systemically ill and exhibit weight loss.
The clinical appearance is visually striking and distinctive. Histopathology confirms the diagnosis. Routine
hematology and serum biochemical profiles are typically

not helpful. Ultrasonography can be useful in finding the
underlying neoplasm, but often fails to reveal a mass.
Unfortunately, this disease carries a poor to grave prognosis as many tumors are not resectable and metastasis
is common.
Nodular Dermatofibrosis
Nodular dermatofibrosis is a syndrome of multiple cutaneous nodules of collagenous origin occurring in conjunction
with
renal
cystadenocarcinomas
or
cystadenomas in dogs. This syndrome most commonly
occurs in German shepherd dogs and their crosses, and
the renal disease is almost always bilateral. The disease is
typically diagnosed in middle age. In addition to the
renal tumors, intact females can develop uterine leiomyomas. In the German shepherd dog, an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance is suspected. Molecular studies
have suggested that nodular dermatofibrosis is not a
paraneoplastic syndrome but a genetic disease linked to
a mutation in the gene encoding folliculin. It is analogous
to Birt–Hogg–Dubé syndrome in humans. Rarely, nodular dermatofibrosis has been found in other breeds in the
absence of internal tumors.
Nodules are typically most numerous on the head and
limbs, including the feet, but can occur on other areas of
the skin, generally in a symmetric fashion. They are firm,
localized in the dermis or subcutaneous layer, mobile,
and covered by intact epidermis that can sometimes
ulcerate, causing lameness. The nodules range in size but
can be up to 5 cm in some cases. The disease has a protracted clinical course, with the appearance of renal failure or metastasis occurring months or more often years
from the time that the lesions are first noticed. The mean
time from first observation of nodular dermatofibrosis
to death is about 2.5 years.
The diagnosis of nodular dermatofibrosis is generally
made by histopathology of the skin masses combined with
abdominal ultrasonography. When skin biopsies are collected, the presence of multiple lesions and the suspicion
of this condition should be conveyed to the pathologist.
There are currently no reported effective treatment
options and because bilateral renal disease is virtually
always present, surgery is not an option. The cutaneous
nodules should be monitored and excised if they become
ulcerated or infected leading to patient discomfort or if
they disturb patient mobility due to their size or location.
It is important to relay the fairly slow progression of the
disease to owners of affected dogs.
Feline “Lung‐Digit” Syndrome

Figure 168.9 Feline paraneoplastic alopecia in an adult cat with
pancreatic carcinoma. Source: Courtesy of Dr Edward Clark.

Feline “lung‐digit syndrome” describes an unusual
­pattern of metastasis that is seen with various types of

1489

VetBooks.ir

1490

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

primary lung tumors, particularly bronchial and bronchoalveolar adenocarcinoma. This syndrome warrants
mention because affected cats are most often presented
for their skin disease rather than for pulmonary disease.
Multiple digits on multiple feet are commonly involved.
The most commonly recognized clinical signs on presentation include swelling of the distal digits, ulceration
of the skin of the digit or nailfold, purulent discharge, as
well as constant extrusion, deviation, or loss of the nail.
The diagnosis is made by radiography of the digits,
which reveals osteolysis of the third phalanx, by thoracic
radiography, and by digital biopsy. Clinical signs and
radiography can provide a high index of suspicion for
“lung‐digit” syndrome. The prognosis for affected cats is
grave, with a median survival time of 67 days after presentation in one study.
Paraneoplastic Pemphigus
Paraneoplastic pemphigus is a very rare blistering disease involving the skin, mucocutaneous junctions, and
mucosal surfaces. It has been reported in two dogs, one

in association with thymic lymphoma and one with
splenic spindle cell sarcoma. Only one case has been
reported in a cat, in association with lymphocytic
thymoma. Autoantibodies develop as a result of the
­
neoplastic process which targets epithelial adhesion
­
molecules, mainly of the plakin family, leading to loss of
cellular cohesion.
Clinically, the disease is severe and very similar to
pemphigus vulgaris in which vesicobullous and erosive
to ulcerative lesions predominate in the skin and mucosal
surfaces. Histologically, it bears some of the same features of pemphigus vulgaris but also features of erythema
multiforme and the diagnosis is made on the basis of skin
biopsies and investigation for underlying neoplasia.
Other cancers are sometimes associated with skin
lesions. Superficial necrolytic dermatitis, although most
commonly associated with liver disease, has also been
found in dogs with pancreatic glucagonoma, in a cat with
a pancreatic tumor, and recently in a cat with primary
hepatic neuroendocrine carcinoma. One of the underlying causes for generalized adult‐onset demodicosis is
neoplasia, particularly indolent lymphoma.

­Further Reading
Goldfinch N, Argyle DJ. Feline lung‐digit syndrome:
unusual metastatic patterns of primary lung tumours in
cats. J Feline Med Surg 2012; 14(3): 202–8.
Gross TL, Ihrke PJ, Walder EJ, Affolter VK. Skin Diseases of
the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis,
2nd edn. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing, 2005.
Malik R, Lessels NS, Webb S, et al. Treatment of feline
herpesvirus‐1 associated disease in cats with famciclovir
and related drugs. J Feline Med Surg 2009; 11(1): 40–8.

Miller WH, Griffin CE, Campbell KL. Muller and Kirk’s
Small Animal Dermatology, 7th edn. St Louis, MO:
Elsevier, 2013.
Outerbridge CA. Cutaneous manifestations of internal
diseases. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2013;
43(1): 135–52.
www.caninechiariinstitute.org/ – this site contains very
useful information on canine Chiari‐like malformation
(accessed July 18, 2019).

VetBooks.ir

1491

169
Superficial Necrolytic Dermatitis
Mitchell D. Song, DVM, DACVD
VETMED Specialty Referral and 24‐Hour Emergency Care Veterinary Hospital, Phoenix, AZ, USA

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis (SND), also known as
hepatocutaneous syndrome and metabolic epidermal
necrosis, is an uncommon, generally fatal, crusting and
scaling skin disease, which is similar to necrolytic migratory erythema in humans. It has been described in dogs,
cats, and black rhinoceroses. For the purposes of this
chapter, the remaining discussion will be confined to the
disease in dogs.
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis is an external manifestation of an internal disease, most commonly advanced
hepatopathy, but it has also been associated with glucagonoma, ingestion of mycotoxins or long‐term phenobarbital and phenytoin treatments. There is a recent case
report describing SND associated with an insulin‐ and
glucagon‐producing pancreatic carcinoma. Diabetes
mellitus can be a complication of this disease.
The exact etiopathogenesis of SND is currently unknown.
Several studies investigating the serum amino acid profile of
dogs with SND have found profound hypoaminoacidemia,
indicating that this may participate in the development of
skin lesions because amino acids are necessary to maintain
cellular integrity in the epidermis. In one study, glutamic
acid, phenylalanine, tryptophan, and ornithine were not significantly different but all other amino acids were 60% or less
than the mean reference values for normal dogs. In 72%
of the dogs studied, either glutamine or arginine was the
most diminished plasma amino acid. Deficiencies in
cutaneous essential fatty acids, zinc, and biotin have also
been suggested to play a role in skin lesion development.

­Signalment
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis is a disease of older
dogs, with an average age of 10 years. Currently, there are

not enough reported cases to enable accurate determination of breed or sex predilection, though one paper
reported a predilection towards Shih tzus.

­Clinical Signs
Skin lesions are mostly associated with those areas on the
body where trauma naturally occurs, including the footpads, muzzle, and mucocutaneous junctions (periocular,
perioral, anal and genital regions). It is not uncommon for
lesions to also develop on the elbows, hocks, and margins
of the pinnae. The development of cutaneous lesions is
often the reason for owners to seek veterinary advice. The
footpads typically become thickened, crusted, and fissured which often leads to pain and lameness (Figure 169.1).
The elbows, hocks, and prepuce may be alopecic, erosive
to ulcerated, erythematous, crusty, and scaly (Figure 169.2).
Secondary bacterial and fungal (often yeast) infections
occur frequently and aggravate the cutaneous lesions
associated with SND.
In cases where there is severe liver disease, dogs may
have jaundice of the sclera and/or mucous membranes.
In cases associated with diabetes, dogs may be polydipsic
and polyuric.
There are many laboratory abnormalities associated
with SND, which may vary according to the individual case and underlying disease. Those that have
been reported include mild to severe normocytic,
­normochromic, nonregenerative anemia, microcytosis,
hyperglycemia, glucosuria, and possibly ketonuria if the
patient has developed diabetes mellitus. Urine amino
acids including lysine, proline and 1-methylhistidine
are increased. Increases in liver enzymes, hypoalbuminemia, decreases in creatinine and phosphorus, and
increases in cholesterol and t­ riglycerides have also been
reported. It should be noted that there is no clinical

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

VetBooks.ir

1492

Figure 169.1 Shih tzu with superficial necrolytic dermatitis.
Pawpads are inflamed and hyperkeratotic.

pallor which could result in an erroneous diagnosis of
zinc‐responsive dermatosis. Epidermal pustulation,
cleft formation, necrosis, erosions, and ulcers may also
be seen. In the dermis, there may be a mild superficial
perivascular lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate, edema with
vascular ectasia, and congestion.
Abdominal ultrasound of dogs with hepatic disease
and SND reveals a liver with a slightly irregular s­ urface.
There are variable sized hyperechoic regions (strands)
present diffusely throughout the parenchyma. The strands
encompass round to oval hypoechoic areas. The result is a
“Swiss cheese” or “honeycomb” appearance to the liver.
Biopsies taken from the liver display a vacuolar hepatopathy with parenchymal collapse. Pancreatic tumors may be
visualized with ultrasound; however, if not visualized and
the liver ultrasound is normal, glucagon levels should be
assayed to rule out a glucagonoma.

­Therapy

Figure 169.2 Crusty lesion covering an inflamed and eroded
lesion localized to the hock of a dog with superficial necrolytic
dermatitis. Note that the lesion extends to the ventral aspect of
the metatarsus. Source: Courtesy of Sheila Torres.

correlation between the severity of the liver pathology
and the severity of the skin lesions.

­Diagnosis
Skin biopsies of early lesions display very characteristic
histologic changes. The epidermis has moderate to
severe parakeratotic hyperkeratosis and acanthosis.
There is both intercellular and intracellular edema with
keratinocyte vacuolation in the upper half of the epidermis, which results in significant epidermal pallor. There
is basilar epidermal hyperplasia. Because of the eosinophilic superficial keratin accumulation coupled with
central pallor and basilar hyperplasia which stains deep
blue, skin biopsies taken from early lesions display a
striking “red” (eosinophilic), “white” (central pallor), and
“blue” (basophilic basilar hyperplasia) pattern. Biopsy
tissues taken from chronic lesions often lose the central

Treatment for dogs with SND is usually short‐lived
and largely unrewarding. Most cases are fatal, with life
expectancy ranging from 1.7 to 6.4 months. One
reported case survived for 32 months before being
euthanized.
Treatment should initially be directed at stabilizing
dogs with diabetes. Surgical resection can be beneficial
in cases associated with glucagonomas but it is important to keep in mind that glucagonomas typically
metastasize rapidly, so the improvement post surgery
may be temporary. In one reported case, metastasis
precluded surgery, and the dog was treated with subcutaneous octreotide (2 μg/kg twice daily), a somatostatin analog that inhibits glucagon release. Skin
lesions and systemic signs improved within five days.
The dosage was increased to nearly 3 μg/kg twice daily
and all clinical signs improved further within 10 days.
Anorexia was the main side‐effect. The dose (1–3.4 μg/
kg) and frequency of administration (2–3 times daily)
of the octreotide injections were adjusted to maintain
disease control with minimal side‐effects. The dog was
later euthanized due to progressive metastatic disease.
In another case report, adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells were infused in addition to intravenous amino acids, 46 times over a 30 month period.
Survival time was increased to 32 months after
diagnosis.
Many dogs with liver disease have been treated with
amino acids, either intravenously or orally. Amino acid
solutions which have been used include Aminosyn® 10%
solution (Abbott Laboratories), Procalamine® (B. Braun
Medical Inc.) and Travasol® 8.5% amino acid injection
(Baxter Healthcare) though no particular product has

VetBooks.ir

169 Superficial Necrolytic Dermatitis

been especially more beneficial than any other. Because
of the hyperosmolarity of the solutions, they should be
administered via a central venous catheter over an
extended period of time (6–12h) and are repeated every
1–2 weeks until improvement is noted. The infusions are
then repeated as necessary to help control relapses.
Various doses have been suggested including 25 mL/kg
or 500 mL per dog. Some dermatologists advocate
administering the infusions three days in a row followed
by once‐ to twice‐weekly treatments thereafter and
repeating as signs relapse. Clinical improvement may be
noted within 5–10 days. If there is minimal to no
response after four or more infusions, the therapy is
unlikely to be of benefit to the patient. One dog was
reported to survive for 24 months but was also treated
with intravenous lipid infusions (Intralipid®, Baxter
Healthcare) at 1.4 g/kg every 6.5 weeks. In that dog, it
was proposed that the addition of the lipids was responsible for the extended survival time.

Oral supplementation with egg whites (cooked), zinc
(e.g., zinc methionine 2 mg/kg PO q24h), powdered
amino acid commercial supplements, and essential fatty
acids has been used and may be of some benefit though
all efficacy so far has been anecdotal.
Many dogs are treated with corticosteroids but this
practice should be discouraged. The beneficial effects and
improvement of clinical signs are short‐lived and the corticosteroid may increase the patient’s risk for developing
diabetes mellitus. Secondary bacterial and/or fungal
infections should be treated with appropriate antibiotics
or antimycotics.

­Prognosis
The prognosis is grave, with most dogs dying or being
euthanized within a few months after the beginning of
clinical signs.

­Further Reading
Bach J, Glasser SA. A case of superficial necrolytic
dermatitis managed for 24 months with intravenous
amino acid and lipid infusions. Can Vet J 2013; 54(9):
873–5.
Cave TA, Evans H, Hargreaves J, Blunden AS. Metabolic
and epidermal necrosis in a dog associated with
pancreatic adenocarcinoma, hyperglucagonemia,
hyperinsulinemia and hypoaminoacidemia. J Small
Anim Pract 2007; 48(9): 522–6.
Hall-Fonte DL, Center SA, McDonough, et al.
Hepatocutaneous syndrome in Shih Tzus: 31 cases
(1996-2014). J Am Vet Med Assoc2016; 248(7): 802–13.
Isidoro‐Ayza M, Lloret A, Bardagi M, Ferrer L, Martinez J.
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis in a dog with insulin‐
producing islet cell carcinoma. Vet Pathol 2014; 51(4):
805–8.
Loftus JP, Center SA, Lucy JM, et al. Characterization of
aminoaciduria and hypoaminoacidemia in dogs with
hepatocutaneous syndrome. Am J Vet Res. 2017;
78(6):735–744.
Miller WH, Griffin CE, Campbell KL. Endocrine and
metabolic diseases. In: Muller and Kirk’s Small Animal

Dermatology, 7th edn. St Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2013,
pp. 501–53.
Nam A, Han SM, Go, D-M, et al. Long-term management
with adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells and
conventional treatment in a dog with hepatocutaneous
syndrome. J Vet Intern Med. 2017; 31(5): 1514–1519.
Oberkirchner U, Linder KE, Zadrozny L, Olivry T.
Successful treatment of canine necrolytic migratory
erythema (superficial necrolytic dermatitis) due to
metastatic glucagonoma with octreotide. Vet Dermatol
2010; 21(5): 510–16.
Outerbridge CA. Cutaneous manifestations of internal
diseases. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2013;
43(1): 135–52.
Outerbridge CA, Marks SL, Rogers QR. Plasma amino acid
concentrations in 36 dogs with histologically confirmed
superficial necrolytic dermatitis. Vet Dermatol 2002;
13(4): 177–86.
Papadogiannakis E, Frangia K, Matralis D. Superficial
necrolytic dermatitis in a dog associated with hyperplasia
of pancreatic neuroendocrine cells. J Small Anim Pract
2009; 50(6): 318.

1493

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1495

170
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
Lisa V. Reiter, DVM, DACVD1 and Sheila M.F. Torres, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVD2
1
2

McKeever Dermatology Clinics, Eden Prairie, MN, USA
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Minnesota, St Paul, MN, USA

­Sebaceous Adenitis
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Sebaceous adenitis (SA), also referred to as granulomatous SA, is an uncommon dermatosis that occurs in dogs
and rarely in cats. The cause and pathogenesis of SA currently remain unknown, but several etiologic speculations exist, including an immune‐mediated disorder
targeting the sebaceous gland, a primary keratinization
disorder that obstructs the sebaceous gland duct leading
to inflammation and ultimately glandular destruction, a
developmental, genetically inherited defect resulting in
an inflammatory reaction directed against the sebaceous
gland and, lastly, aberrant lipid metabolism and/or storage that eventually leads to sebaceous gland destruction.
Despite our lack of understanding of the pathomechanism, the endresult is inflammation and obliteration of the
sebaceous glands, which normally produce and cover the
skin with a protective layer of sebum. Sebum is instrumental in maintaining epidermal moisture and hydration and
also has antimicrobial properties. Thus, a predisposition to
secondary bacterial and/or Malassezia overgrowth or
infection develops. Otitis may also occur. In addition, the
inflammation that targets the sebaceous glands ultimately
affects the hair follicles, which leads to abnormal changes
in the quality of the hair coat, and eventually hair loss.
A genetic predisposition to develop the disease is known
in some breeds. In standard poodles and akitas, the disease
is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. The mode of
inheritance in the Havanese is currently being investigated.
Signalment
Most commonly, SA tends to afflict young adult to
­middle‐aged dogs, but dogs of any age may be affected.

The disease appears to be slightly more common in
males. Sebaceous adenitis has been reported in over 50
breeds of dogs although specific breeds have been overrepresented including standard poodles, vizslas, akitas,
springer spaniels, German shepherd dogs and their cross‐
breeds, Samoyeds, and Havanese. Possible increased
­frequency exists in chow chows, dachshunds, beagles,
Lhasa apsos, miniature pinschers, and retrievers.
History and Clinical Signs
The cutaneous changes of SA generally include varying
degrees of alopecia, hyperkeratosis, and excessive scaling, with follicular casts (i.e., scales surround a single
hair or group of hairs) being a consistent feature.
However, the clinical presentation is somewhat dependent on hair coat type and breed. In general, short‐coated
breeds seem to differ clinically from long‐coated breeds.
In short‐coated breeds such as viszlas and dachshunds,
the disease is manifested by symmetric to asymmetric,
“moth‐eaten,” annular to coalescing and serpiginous to
rarely diffuse areas of alopecia with fine, white scaling
affecting the head, pinnae, neck, and trunk. Follicular
casts are subtle and hairs are easily epilated. Pruritus is
typically absent. In long‐coated breeds, such as the
standard poodle, the lesion distribution and lack of pruritus are similar to those of short‐coated breeds, but diffuse alopecia is more common and obvious follicular
casting is present. The hairs are often dull and brittle and
may lose their typical architecture (i.e., the classic curly
hair coat of the poodle becomes wavy or straight). The
hair may also become lighter or darker in color. Groups
of hairs surrounded by scales (i.e., follicular casts) are
easily epilated (Figure 170.1).
Commonly, the lesions initially affect the head, pinnae,
and neck and progress caudally to the dorsal and lateral

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

VetBooks.ir

1496

Figure 170.3 A 4‐year‐old male castrated Havanese with marked,
fine white scaling associated with the medial and lateral aspects of
the pinnae extending into the aural orifice and external ear canal.

Figure 170.1 Examples of follicular casts from an adult black
standard poodle. Groups of hairs are ensheathed at their base by
keratosebaceous debris.

in weight loss. Cutaneous signs are also more severe.
Follicular casts and partial to generalized alopecia are
present, but akitas also tend to develop diffuse erythema,
greasy, generalized keratosebaceous scaling, and significant superficial and occasionally deep pyoderma.
In cats, few case reports exist describing the clinical
manifestations of SA. Generalized adherent scaling and
hypotrichosis has been described along with distinctive
dark brown periocular scales/crusts.
Diagnosis

Figure 170.2 Dorsum of an adult male castrated standard poodle
with a notably darker, wavy to straight hair coat in those areas
afflicted by SA. Scales and follicular casts are also present.

aspects of the trunk (Figure 170.2). In chronic cases, the
lesions may extend to the legs and tail. Secondary bacterial folliculitis and Malassezia dermatitis are common.
As excessive scale accumulates in the ear canal and aural
orifice, otitis externa may occur. In some cases, otitis and
excessive otic scale may be the sole manifestation of SA,
as is commonly observed in the Havanese. This has also
been reported in the vizsla, although the pinnal lesions
were erosive to ulcerative (Figure 170.3).
When secondary infections are present, pruritus tends
to intensify. Sebaceous adenitis in the akita may manifest
in a more severe form with accompanying systemic signs
such as fever, lethargy, and inappetence, which may result

Initially, a tentative diagnosis of SA can be made based
upon the signalment, history, and physical examination
findings. Differential diagnoses include demodicosis,
dermatophytosis, superficial bacterial folliculitis, keratinization disorders such as primary idiopathic seborrhea,
ichthyosis, and vitamin A‐responsive dermatosis,
­follicular dysplasia, zinc‐responsive dermatosis, endocrinopathies, such as hypothyroidism, and hair cycle
arrest (i.e., alopecia X). Autoimmune/immune‐mediated
differentials to consider include alopecia areata and
pseudopelade. Surface cytology and deep skin scrapes
should be performed in every case to evaluate for superficial bacterial folliculitis and Malassezia dermatitis, and
to rule out demodicosis. A dermatophyte culture should
be performed if clinically applicable. If an underlying
endocrinopathy is suspected, appropriate screening
tests, such as a complete blood count (CBC), serum
chemistry profile, and urinalysis (UA), as well as thyroid
function testing should be performed.
Biopsy and histopathology are needed in order to confirm the diagnosis of sebaceous adenitis. Multiple punch
biopsies (3–5) should be procured from lesions of varying appearance and chronicity to improve confirmation
of the diagnosis. It is important to include very early

VetBooks.ir

170 Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

lesions in order to identify the inflammatory reaction
targeting the sebaceous glands. These lesions will likely
be missed if only chronic, alopecic lesions are sampled.
The histopathologic changes will vary depending upon
the stage of the lesion sampled and include granulomatous to pyogranulomatous dermal inflammation targeting the sebaceous glands, to complete absence of
sebaceous glands along with perifollicular fibrosis and
varying degrees of follicular keratosis.
Therapy
As the pathomechanism of SA appears to be due to a
combination of an immune‐mediated inflammatory disease and a keratinization disorder, treatments have been
aimed at controlling these two aspects and involve a
combination of systemic and topical therapies to reduce
further sebaceous gland inflammation and destruction,
prevent secondary skin and otic infections, remove
excessive scale, promote moisturization and protection
of the skin, and improve the quality of the hair coat.
In mild cases of SA, topical therapy along with high
doses of oral essential fatty acids (which can be used in all
cases as an adjunctive therapy) can be effective. The suggested dose of omega‐3 fatty acid supplementation is
180 mg eicosapentaenoic acid and 120 mg of docosahexanoic acid per 10 lb of body weight per day combined with
omega‐6 fatty acid supplementation. In general, topical
therapy involves an initial bath using a keratolytic and
keratoplastic shampoo, followed by an emollient rinse or
oil treatment, and concluded with a final bath aimed at
removing any residual oil and scale. In the interim, as
often as daily to as infrequently as once‐weekly treatments
consisting of sprays and rinses, spot‐on formulations,
conditioners, and mousses with emollient, humectant,
antimicrobial, and barrier repair functions are utilized.
Shampoos, such as those containing sulfur and salicylic acid, should be selected. These shampoos are commonly formulated with antimicrobials such as benzoyl
peroxide (Oxiderm + PS®, Ceva Animal Health, Lenexa,
KS, USA; DermaBenSs®, Dechra, Overland Park, KS,
USA) or chlorhexidine (MPA Seba‐Hex®, Vetoquinol,
Forth Worth, TX, USA). Products containing benzoyl
peroxide also act as excellent degreasers. The shampoo
should be lathered well and allowed contact with the skin
for 10 minutes while gently massaging followed by a
fresh, lukewarm water rinse.
A variety of oil‐based treatment regimens have been
suggested to further assist in loosening and removing
scales, follicular casts and crusts, and to replenish the
skin barrier. These include a 50:50 mixture of water and
baby oil or bath oil, such as Eucerin® skin calming dry
skin body wash (Beiersdorf AG, Hamburg, Germany) or
Alpha Keri® bath oil (Novartis Consumer Health,

Parsippany, NJ, USA), or a mixture of 50–75% propylene
glycol in water. The oil or propylene glycol mixture is
allowed a contact time of 1–2 hours. Once soaking is
complete, another bath is performed with the previous
shampoo. Alternatively, a liquid dish‐washing detergent
can be used such as Dawn dish soap (Proctor and Gamble,
Cincinnati, OH, USA), but may be too drying for some
dogs. Frequency will depend on the severity of the disease, but it tends to be more frequent (1–3 per week) in
the beginning and reduced as the patient improves (every
1–4 weeks). Between the bathing/oil treatment regimens, sprays such as DermAllay® oatmeal spray conditioner (Dechra) and Douxo® seborrhea micro‐emulsion
spray (Ceva) can be utilized for their moisturizing and
humectant properties. Mousse formulations, such as
Douxo seborrhea mousse (Ceva), provide another
­convenient means of restoring the skin barrier. When
maintenance antimicrobial therapy is needed, Douxo
chlorhexidine PS micro‐emulsion spray or chlorhexidine
climbazole mousse (Ceva) can be used once to twice
daily to twice weekly for maintenance. For more refractory cases, daily application of 50–75% propylene glycol
can be beneficial. Topical spot‐on treatments, such as
Dermoscent® Essential 6 spot‐on (Bayer, Shawnee
Mission, KS, USA) which contains omega‐3/omega‐6
fatty acids and essential oils, are easy to apply and can be
efficacious. Initially, it is applied as directed once weekly
for eight weeks and then decreased to once every two
weeks. Another alternative is Douxo seborrhea spot‐on
(Ceva) which contains phytosphingosine, a natural component of the epidermis that plays a key role in barrier
function. Oil soaks may eventually be replaced by these
products if an acceptable response is noted. Finally, extra
virgin olive oil and coconut oil have been anecdotally
reported to be effective moisturizers. These products are
inexpensive and also have mild antimicrobial properties.
In more severe cases of SA, systemic treatments
should be utilized in conjunction with topical therapy
and essential fatty acid supplementation. Among the
systemic treatments, vitamin A, synthetic retinoids, a
combination of a tetracycline antibiotic and niacinamide, and ciclosporin have been used for the management of SA with variable success. Retinoids have
antiproliferative, antiinflammatory, and immunomodulatory effects and generally require 4–8 weeks before
response is seen, although maximal response may not be
appreciated until 3–4 months of therapy are achieved.
Oral vitamin A (retinol) can be tried for milder cases of
SA and appears to be a safe and efficacious form of
adjunctive therapy for some dogs. Doses range from 400
to 1000 IU/kg PO daily. For more severe or refractory
cases, synthetic retinoids such as isotretinoin or acitretin (1 mg/kg PO q12–24h) should be considered for a
trial period of at least 4–8 weeks. If a positive response is

1497

VetBooks.ir

1498

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

noted, the lowest effective dosage and frequency of
administration should be used as maintenance therapy
(i.e., 0.5–1.0 mg/kg PO q12–24h). These drugs are
expensive and can be difficult to obtain as they are
strictly regulated. Side‐effects include keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), polyuria and polydipsia due to xerostomia, vomiting, and diarrhea. Laboratory abnormalities
can include elevation of liver enzymes, hypercholesterolemia, and hypertriglyceridemia.
All retinoids are potent teratogens. Monitoring should
include pretreatment measurement of tear production
via a Schirmer tear test (STT) and a serum biochemical
profile at minimum. The authors typically repeat the
STT and serum chemistry profile in 1–2 months and if
no abnormalities are noted, then once to twice a year.
The use of tetracycline, doxycycline or minocycline
and niacinamide may be beneficial for the treatment of
SA, especially in short‐coated breeds, given the antiinflammatory and immunomodulatory actions that can be
gained when these drugs are utilized in combination. It
generally requires 4–8 weeks before response to this
therapy is seen, although maximal effect may not be
appreciated until 3–4 months of therapy are achieved.
Side‐effects include vomiting, diarrhea, and decreased
appetite. Hepatotoxicity is also possible, albeit rare.
Tetracycline and niacinamide are dosed at 250 mg for
dogs <10 kg and 500 mg for dogs >10 kg q8h. When doxycycline is utilized in place of tetracycline, a dosage of
5–10 mg/kg PO q12h is suggested and minocycline can
be dosed at 5–12.5 mg/kg PO q12h. The dosage of niacinamide remains at 250 mg for dogs <10 kg and 500 mg for
dogs >10 kg q8h. If a positive response is noted, the
­lowest effective dosage and frequency of administration
should be used as maintenance therapy.
Ciclosporin is currently the preferred treatment for SA,
especially in severe cases or those that have not responded
acceptably to topical therapy and/or other systemic treatments. Ciclosporin is a calcineurin inhibitor with a number of immune‐modulatory functions. Perhaps most
important in the case of SA is its ability to impair T lymphocyte function. Ciclosporin has also been shown to
increase the numbers of sebaceous glands. Ciclosporin
(Atopica®, Elanco US, Greenfield, IN, USA) can be administered at an initial dosage of 5 mg/kg PO q24h.
Ciclosporin has an extended lag time of 4–6 weeks before
clinical response may be seen. If a positive response is
noted, the lowest effective dosage and frequency of
administration should be used as maintenance therapy.
Side‐effects include vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia, gingival hyperplasia, papillomatosis, secondary infections
including opportunistic urinary tract infections,
­hirsutism, and involuntary shaking. More serious side‐
effects include nephropathy, hepatopathy, bone marrow
suppression, and lymphoplasmacytoid dermatosis

although these effects appear to be extremely rare with
daily doses of approximately 5 mg/kg/day. The authors
typically recommend a baseline CBC, serum chemistry
profile, UA, and urine culture. These tests are repeated
every six months to yearly to monitor for possible
side‐effects.
In general, response to corticosteroids is poor. They
can be tried as a last resort if there has been no response
to other therapeutic options or in cases where those
options are cost prohibitive. A starting dosage of 1 mg/
kg/day PO can be used and gradually reduced to the lowest dosage and frequency possible. There may be a more
favorable response in cases where the histopathology
findings reveal severe inflammation.
It is important to recognize and treat secondary
­infections, as they can greatly contribute to the patient’s
morbidity. The reader is referred to Chapters 158, 166
and 167 in this section regarding the diagnosis and treatment of pyodermas, Malassezia dermatitis, and otitis.
Prognosis
The prognosis of SA ultimately depends upon the severity and chronicity of the disease and the degree and
recurrence of secondary infections. The response to
therapy is quite variable from one patient to the next.
The disease in the akita can be particularly refractory.
There is no cure for SA and it has a chronic, often
­progressive nature which requires lifelong therapy. In
and of itself, SA is not a lethal disease but a clinically and
cosmetically acceptable response is not always obtained
and/or may be too expensive or labor intensive for the
owner. For these reasons, euthanasia may ultimately be
chosen.

­Eosinophilic Dermatitis
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Eosinophilic dermatitis, also known as eosinophilic dermatitis with edema and eosinophilic cellulitis, is an
uncommon syndrome that has been described in dogs
and has been compared to Wells syndrome in humans.
The disease is presumably multifactorial with myriad
possible triggers including allergic and parasitic diseases,
arthropod bites, immune‐mediated disease, stress, and
drugs, which culminates in an allergic hypersensitivity
and/or immune‐mediated reaction. In one study, more
than 50% of the dogs developed eosinophilic dermatitis
following treatment for vomiting and diarrhea. In a more
recent study that focused solely on the development
of eosinophilic dermatitis in dogs with signs of gastrointestinal disease, particularly vomiting, diarrhea and

VetBooks.ir

170 Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

­hematochezia, it was found that pancreatitis, inflammatory bowel disease, and adverse food reaction were the
most common triggers, although the cause of the gastrointestinal signs could not be documented for all dogs. In
some dogs, an adverse drug reaction was considered as a
possible trigger.
Signalment
Labrador retrievers and their crosses appear to be overrepresented, but the disease can occur in any breed. Age
and sex predilections have not been identified.
History and Clinical Signs
Eosinophilic dermatitis is a visually distinctive disease.
Lesions develop acutely and are characterized by arciform and serpiginous erythematous macules and plaques
with edema (Figure 170.4). The macules often have a
targetoid appearance although diffuse erythroderma may
be present. The ventral abdomen and thorax are commonly affected, as are the pinnae and face (Figure 170.5).
Edema may be generalized, affecting the face and limbs.
Often, patients are moderately to severely pruritic.
Lymphadenopathy may be present.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of eosinophilic dermatitis is based upon
its distinct clinical presentation and disease course along
with biopsy and histopathology. Differential diagnoses
include erythema multiforme, vasculitis, and sterile neutrophilic dermatosis. Multiple biopsies should be procured early on from several different‐appearing lesions.
Edematous areas, if present, should also be sampled.
Histopathologic findings are variable and include mild to
severe perivascular to diffuse eosinophilic dermatitis
with varying amounts of edema, which is often protein

Figure 170.5 Diffuse erythroderma and edema present on the
ventral abdomen and pelvic limbs of a 3‐year‐old female spayed
dachshund.

rich in severe cases. Flame figures (degranulating eosinophils associated with collagen fibers) may be noted
along with variable degrees of vascular damage. CBC
and serum chemistry abnormalities are not common.
Occasionally, peripheral eosinophilia and basophilia
may be documented. In cases associated with gastrointestinal disease, hypoalbuminemia is a common finding.
Therapy
Appropriate drug withdrawal is paramount when a cutaneous adverse drug reaction is suspected. In addition,
patients respond favorably to antihistamines and/or corticosteroids. Diphenhydramine or hydroxyzine may be
administered at a dosage of 2 mg/kg PO q8–12h. In a
recent study, cetirizine was the most commonly prescribed antihistamine with doses of 0.6–1.1 mg/kg PO
q24h. Cetirizine has several antieosinophilic effects that
may make it particularly effective for treating eosinophilic dermatitis. Reported starting dosages of prednisone include a range of 0.6–2.8 mg/kg/day. In milder
forms of the disease, therapy may not be required with
lesional self‐resolution occurring within a few weeks.
Topical glucocorticoid therapy with hydrocortisone,
­betamethasone, or triamcinolone may also be considered. However, the treatment duration should not extend
beyond two weeks given the risk of localized cutaneous
atrophy and other complications that may occur from
prolonged topical steroid application.
Prognosis

Figure 170.4 Abdomen of an adult male castrated Labrador
retriever with serpiginous erythematous macules and edematous
plaques.

Eosinophilic dermatitis usually carries a favorable prognosis. Disease resolution tends to be swift, especially
when underlying triggers are identified and removed

1499

VetBooks.ir

1500

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

(i.e., drugs). Typically, treatment duration varies from
one to four weeks, and only rarely will there be recurrences or a waxing and waning course.

­Sterile Neutrophilic Dermatosis
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Sterile neutrophilic dermatosis is a rare disease which
closely resembles acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis
(Sweet syndrome) in humans. The few documented cases
in the veterinary literature all involve dogs. In people, the
disease is typified by pyrexia and a neutrophilic leukocytosis along with painful papular to nodular skin lesions
that consist predominantly of a diffuse infiltration of
mature neutrophils within the dermis on histopathology.
Extracutaneous sites of neutrophilic inflammation and
concurrent disease processes have also been identified in
humans, including respiratory and gastrointestinal tract
infections, inflammatory bowel disease, arthritis, and
neoplasia, although many cases are idiopathic. Disease
development has also been associated with various drugs.
In dogs, the clinicopathologic abnormalities mirror
those observed in humans. Concurrent neutrophilic
inflammation has been reported to affect the lungs,
heart, esophagus, and various joints. Adverse drug reactions appear to be an important cause of the disease in
dogs. Several case reports have been associated with the
administration of carprofen. Firocoxib has also been
implicated in an additional case report. The pathogenesis is not completely understood, but is thought to
involve an immune‐mediated process.
History and Clinical Signs
There are currently no known breed, gender, or age predilections given the paucity of reported cases. Similar to
the disease in humans, extracutaneous signs are commonly associated with the cutaneous manifestations, but
not obligatory. Pyrexia is a key feature, although it is not
always documented. Other reported clinical abnormalities include anorexia, lethargy, weakness, lameness, and
lymphadenomegaly. A mature neutrophilia may be present. Other laboratory abnormalities may be present and
are reflective of the various underlying disease processes.
Cutaneous lesions include the acute development of
erythematous macules and papules as well as pustules
and plaques. Ulcerations of the oral cavity and the body
have been reported. The ventral aspect of the abdomen,
axillae, and groin are preferentially involved, although
the lesions may occur anywhere. Edema may be present
and can extend ventrally to involve the legs. Pruritus is
usually absent.

Diagnosis
The diagnosis of sterile neutrophilic dermatosis is based
upon recognition of the sudden onset of systemic signs
that precede or occur simultaneously with the cutaneous
lesions in conjunction with the presence of a neutrophilic
findings.
leukocytosis and compatible histopathologic ­
Differential diagnoses include infectious dermatitides,
superficial pyoderma, pemphigus foliaceus, sterile pustular erythroderma of miniature schnauzers, eosinophilic dermatitis and edema, erythema multiforme, and
cutaneous adverse drug reactions. The diagnostic work‐
up should include skin cytology, CBC, serum chemistry
profile, and UA. Titers for tick‐borne diseases should
also be considered, depending upon geographic locale
and potential for exposure. Thoracic radiographs and
abdominal ultrasound are also indicated to evaluate for
underlying diseases. Multiple skin biopsies should be
procurred and tissue cultures submitted. Histopathologic
findings that are supportive of sterile neutrophilic dermatosis include dermal edema with a moderate to severe
perivascular to diffuse neutrophilic infiltrate.
Therapy
Treatment of this disease includes the discontinuation of
potentially offending drugs, along with supportive care
and immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids. A positive response may be evident within 48 hours and remission has been documented to occur within a week in
some cases. In other cases, therapy may be slowly tapered
over the course of four weeks. In severe cases, intravenous or subcutaneous administration of dexamethasone
followed by a tapering course of prednisone may be
considered.
Prognosis
Sterile neutrophilic dermatosis has a fair to good prognosis depending upon the underlying etiology. It stands
to reason that in cases where the underlying disease is
severe and untreatable, the prognosis may be grave.

­Ichthyosis
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Canine ichthyosis is a rare hereditary cornification
­disorder recognized in various breeds such as Norfolk
terriers, Jack Russell terriers, golden retrievers, and
American bulldogs. The disease in dogs has been
­typically classified as either epidermolytic or nonepidermolytic based on histopathologic findings. With the
exception of Norfolk terriers and a Labrador cross, all

VetBooks.ir

170 Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

other breeds reported to date have had the nonepidermolytic form.
The disease is caused by the abnormal expression of
protein or lipid molecules that form the stratum corneum structure. Genetic studies have identified different
mutations of these molecules according to the breed
investigated as follows:
Norfolk terriers – a splice‐site mutation in keratin 10
(KRT10)
●● golden retrievers – a mutation in the PNPLA1 gene
that participates in lipid organization and metabolism
in the outer epidermis
●● American bulldogs– a mutation in the NIPAL‐4 gene
resulting in decreased expression of the protein icthyin
●● Jack Russell terriers – a loss‐of‐function mutation in
transglutaminase 1 (TGM1) which mediates calcium‐
dependent cross‐linking of proteins that form the
cornified envelope.
●●

A congenital ichthyosiform disease associated with keratoconjunctivitis sicca has been described in Cavalier
King Charles spaniels but a candidate gene has not been
identified to date.
More recently, a new variant of congenital ichthyosis
was described in 14 Great Dane puppies based on clinical, histopathologic, and transmission electron microscopy findings. Pedigree analysis of 13 of the 14 puppies
revealed that all dogs were related. The disease in these
puppies most resembles the congenital, autosomal recessive, nonepidermolytic, lamellar ichthyosis described in
the golden retriever. However, unique histologic differences were observed which have yet to be reported in
ichthyotic dogs. Of note, enlarged sebaceous glands that
were also composed of numerous degenerative sebocytes
containing an alcianophilic, lipid‐rich material within
the cytoplasm were documented. This same material was
also identified within dilated hair follicle lumina.
An autosomal recessive mode of inheritance has been
reported for all breeds where a pedigree analysis could
be performed thus far.

Golden Retriever

Affected dogs present with small to large, attached to
loose, white to gray scales localized primarily on the
neck, trunk, rump, and ventrum (Figure 170.6). A characteristic early sign is a dark, sandpaper‐like appearance
of the ventral glabrous skin (Figure 170.7). Pruritus is
typically not present but, may occur if secondary infections develop. Clinical signs may wax and wane with
periods of remission and exacerbation.
Norfolk Terrier

At birth, the disease is characterized by formation of
superficial bullae and erosions after mild mechanical

Figure 170.6 One‐year‐old golden retriever with ichthyosis.
Large, loose to adhered, white to gray scales localized to the
lateral trunk.

Signalment
As for most hereditary disorders, the clinical signs are
typically recognized early in life. The disease presents at
birth in Jack Russell terriers, Norfolk terriers, and
Cavalier King Charles spaniels. It is reported to ­manifest
before weaning in American bulldogs and has a variable
age of onset in golden retrievers (3 weeks to 3 years).
History and Clinical Signs
The disease phenotype can vary according to the breed and
this may be partially the result of different genetic mutations.

Figure 170.7 Eight‐month‐old golden retriever with ichthyosis.
The ventral abdomen is covered with adhered gray scales, giving a
hyperpigmented appearance. The skin has a sandpaper‐like
texture when gently palpated.

1501

VetBooks.ir

1502

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

trauma. In adulthood, the skin fragility persists but areas
of dark gray hyperkeratosis and hyperpigmentation will
develop and are worse in the intertriginous regions.
Pruritus has not been described and footpads, claws,
teeth. and hairs were reported to be normal.
Jack Russell Terrier

Affected dogs are born with thick, large, adherent, white
to dark scales in areas with sparse hair coat and loosely
adherent scales in other parts of the body. Footpads are
reported to be moderately hyperkeratotic and the nails
soft. Secondary bacterial and Malassezia infections may
be a complicating problem.

Great Dane

Clinically, Great Dane puppies present with generalized
fine, dry, white to yellow scaling along with a greasy,
leathery appearance to the axillary and inguinal regions.
Marked skin wrinkling is present on the head, muzzle
and distal limbs.
Other Breeds

Ichthyosis has been anecdotally reported in West
Highland white terriers and English springer spaniels.
An epidermolytic form was described in a Labrador
cross based on histopathologic findings. More recently,

American Bulldog

Shortly after birth, puppies present with a disheveled
hair coat and erythema associated with tightly adherent
tan scales localized to the hairless skin (axilla, abdomen,
groin) which acquires a wrinkled appearance. In adulthood, the hairless areas develop a reddish‐brown discoloration. Large, loosely adherent, white to tan scales are
present throughout the body (Figure 170.8). Foodpad
hyperkeratosis is a rare finding in adult dogs. Affected
dogs are very prone to developing Malassezia overgrowth which can be severe and result in pruritus
(Figure 170.9).
The clinical appearance of American bulldog ichthyosis is frequently misdiagnosed as atopic dermatitis which
can indeed co‐exist in some dogs.
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel

Figure 170.9 Same dog shown in Figure 170.8. Malassezia
overgrowth present on the flank and ventral abdomen resulting in
a brownish discoloration of the skin and hair coat.

Puppies are born with a rough and curly hair coat and as
they become older, the glabrous skin becomes hyperpigmented and hyperkeratotic, particularly around the
­nipples and inguinal region. Scales, footpad hyperkeratosis and abnormal nails, that may slough, develop at
about 6 months of age or older (Figure 170.10).
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca is noted as the puppies open
their eyes and can be mild to severe.

Figure 170.8 Two‐year‐old American bulldog with ichthyosis.
Loosely adhered scales localized throughout the trunk.

Figure 170.10 One‐year‐old Cavalier King Charles spaniel with
ichthyosiform disease showing severe footpad hyperkeratosis.

VetBooks.ir

170 Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

ichthyosis was documented in a goldendoodle dog based
on histopathologic findings and genetic testing, which
identified the PNPLA1 mutation found in golden retrievers, indicating that the disease was likely inherited from
its golden retriever predecessors.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis historically has been based on the characteristic history, clinical signs, and histopathologic findings. When performed, skin biopsies should be submitted
to a pathologist with experience in dermatology. A commercially available genetic test is now offered through
Optigen (www.optigen.com/) and is easily performed
using a venous blood sample and has become the authors’
primary means of confirming a diagnosis of ichthyosis in
breeds where testing is an option. Electron microscopy
and genetic studies are needed to characterize the
molecular abnormality and mode of transmission.
Therapy
The treatment goals should be to prevent/treat secondary
infections and reduce the excessive scaling, hyperkeratosis, and inflammation by restoring the stratum corneum
barrier. This may be achieved by various topical therapies
which should be tailored to the patient’s needs. Shampoos
with keratolytic and keratoplastic properties such as sulfur and salicylic acid, followed by a good moisturizer, can
be used 2–3 times weekly. Products containing lipids such
as phytosphingosine (Douxo seborrhea spot‐on or spray),
or fatty acids and essential oils (Dermoscent Essential 6
spot‐on) can be used after bathing. Combinations of oral
omega‐3 and omega‐6 fatty acids can be used as adjunctive therapy. Secondary infections should be treated
appropriately with topical and/or systemic antifungals or
antibiotics as required for each individual patient.

food reaction, atopic dermatitis, flea bite allergy or mosquito bite hypersensitivity, suggesting an immunologic
dysregulation. The role of bacteria in lesion development
is still questionable but certain lesions have improved
significantly or resolved with antibiotic therapy. Many
cases remain idiopathic and some cats may be genetically
predisposed to develop this condition. Cats can have a
single lesion, multiples of the same type or a combination of different ones. Lesions may be refractory to treatment, resolve with or without treatment and not return,
or be recurrent.
Signalment
There is no breed, sex or age predilection but linear
granuloma lesions typically develop in cats less than
2 years of age.
History and Clinical Signs
Lesions associated with the complex include eosinophilic
granuloma, eosinophilic plaque, and indolent ulcer.
Eosinophilic Granuloma

This is the only true granulomatous lesion of the complex
and has various clinical presentations such as nodules,
papules or linear plaques. They can be single or multiple
and develop anywhere on the body, including the lips
(pouting lip), chin (fat chin), oral cavity, footpads, pinnae,
caudal aspect of thighs or other areas (Figure 170.11).

Prognosis
Clients have to understand that ichthyosis is a noncurable condition and the prognosis to achieve disease control is generally fair. Veterinarians should become familiar
with the different clinical presentations and breed‐related
disease severity and educate clients on what to expect.

­Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Feline eosinophilic granuloma complex is a group of
lesions that affect the skin, mucocutaneous junctions,
and oral cavity. They can develop in cats with adverse

Figure 170.11 A cat with eosinophilic granuloma localized to the
feet. The digits of the right hind foot are swollen and
erythematous. The footpad of the third digit is also swollen and
has a focal area of erosion to ulceration.

1503

VetBooks.ir

1504

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

Lesions are often erythematous and those localized in
the oral cavity and footpads are more likely to erode or
ulcerate and have pale foci of necrosis. Pruritus is variable and circulating eosinophilia may be present.
Eosinophilic Plaque

Plaque lesions are typically multiple and coalescing,
eroded to ulcerated and more often localized to the ventral abdomen and medial thighs (Figure 170.12). Pruritus
is typically present and cats with eosinophilic plaques
often have an underlying allergic disease. Peripheral
­lymphadenopathy and circulating eosinophilia may be
present.
Indolent Ulcer

This is also known as eosinophilic ulcer or rodent ulcer.
It is characterized by a well‐demarcated ulcer which has
an elevated border and a center that is pinkish to yellowish. The lesion is typically localized to the upper lip and
can be very extensive and span the philtrum or be adjacent to the upper canine tooth (Figure 170.13). Pruritus
is not present.
Diagnosis
Typically, diagnosis is based on the history and clinical
appearance of the lesions. A biopsy will confirm the diagnosis and should be performed when lesions develop in
older cats to exclude neoplasia, are refractory to treatment or have an unusual presentation. Cytology is important to determine the presence of bacterial infection. The
presence of intracellular cocci indicates an infection but
extracellular rods suggest oral contamination. Eosinophils
may not be found on cytologic samples.

Figure 170.12 Five‐year‐old domestic longhair cat with
eosinophilic plaques. Coalescing erythematous plaques with an
eroded and moist surface are localized to the caudal‐ventral
abdomen and inner thigh.

Figure 170.13 One‐year‐old cat with an eosinophilic ulcer. This
cat also has eosinophilic granuloma lesions localized to the oral
cavity.

Therapy
Identifying and controlling the underlying disease is an
important part of the treatment regimen as it may
­prevent recurrences. Most cases respond well to oral
glucocorticoid therapy such as prednisolone (2.2–4.0 mg/
kg), methylprednisolone (2.0–3.0 mg/kg), triamcinolone
(0.2–0.3 mg/kg) or dexamethasone (0.3–0.6 mg/kg), all
administered daily until remission and then every other
(prednisolone and methylprednisolone) or every third
day (triamcinolone and dexamethasone) as maintenance.
Injection of methylprednisolone acetate should only be
considered if the cat cannot receive oral therapy. The
recommended dose is 4.0–5.0 mg/kg subcutaneously
(SC) or intramuscularly (IM) given every 2–4 weeks until
remission. Cats are more prone to develop diabetes
mellitus with long‐acting, injectable glucocorticoids.
­
Ciclosporin at 5.0–7.5 mg/kg/day can be used in refractory cases or cases that cannot tolerate glucocorticoid
therapy. The lowest possible maintenance dosage should
be tried. Chlorambucil at 0.1–0.2 mg/kg/day until remission and then tapered to every other day can be used in
recalcitrant cases. A small number of cats have responded
to interferon‐alpha at 300–1000 units/day PO or SC for
30 days.

VetBooks.ir

170 Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

Radiotherapy, cryosurgery, surgical excision, and laser
therapy are options for single lesions refractory to medical therapy. Eosinophilic ulcers are most likely to benefit
from these treatment modalities but recurrences are
common.
Prognosis
Most lesions respond well to treatment but some are
quite refractory. In addition, recurrences are common
and a triggering cause for lesion development is often
not determined.

­Symmetric Lupoid Onychitis
(Symmetric Lupoid Onychodystrophy)
Etiology/Pathophysiology
The cause of symmetric lupoid onychitis (SLO) is
currently unknown but the predisposition of some
­
breeds to develop the disease suggests that genetics plays
a role. Moreover, the risk of developing SLO in the
Gordon setter has been associated with the dog leukocyte antigen (DLA) class II alleles.

Figure 170.14 Seven‐year‐old Labrador retriever with symmetric
lupoid onychitis. The claw of the fifth digit is showing onycholysis
(i.e., separation of the claw structure).

Signalment
Most dogs develop the disease between 2 and 6 years of
age but it can occur at any age. Gordon setters, English
setters, and German shepherd dogs appear to be predisposed but SLO has been recognized in various breeds.
There is no sex predilection.
History and Clinical Signs
Onychomadesis (sloughing of claws), onycholysis (separation of claw structure distally and progressing proximally), and paronychia (inflammation of claw folds),
causing the dog to lick the paws, along with lameness, are
typically the initial clinical presentation (Figure 170.14).
It may start in one or more claws of a single paw but
within weeks, it spreads to involve most, if not every,
claw of all four paws. Regrown nails are short, misshapen,
dry, and brittle (Figure 170.15). Secondary infection
associated with purulent exudate is common. The disease
only affects the paws.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is generally based on the history and characteristic clinical presentation but a claw biopsy (onychectomy and submission of the entire third phalanx) may
be needed to rule out other causes of nail disorders and

Figure 170.15 Four‐year‐old mixed‐breed dog with symmetric
lupoid onychitis. Claws are misshapen, short, and brittle.

confirm the histopathologic changes expected with SLO.
Cytology of exudate is necessary to determine the presence of bacterial infection and culture and susceptibility
should be considered based on the cytologic findings
and the dog’s history of antibiotic therapy.
Therapy
No single treatment is universally effective in SLO. High
doses of omega‐6/omega‐3 essential fatty acids combined
with a tetracycline antibiotic (e.g., doxycycline at 5.0–
10.0 mg/kg q12h) and niacinamide (250 mg for dogs
<10 kg and 500 mg for dogs >10 kg q8h) are commonly
used as the initial therapy. Pentoxifylline at 15–20 mg/kg
q12h to q8h can be added to the treatment regimen. More

1505

VetBooks.ir

1506

Section 12 Skin and Ear Diseases

severe cases may require other immunomodulatory drugs
such as oral prednisolone (1.0–2.0 mg/kg/day), azathioprine (2.2 mg/kg/day) or ciclosporin (5 mg/kg/day).
Remission should be expected in two weeks with the
prednisolone and 4–6 weeks with the ciclosporin and azathioprine; therefore, taper the dose to avoid undesirable
side‐effects or discontinue treatment if no improvement.
Amputation of the third phalanx should be considered in
cases that are refractory to medical therapy.
An expected response to therapy translates to
cessation of onycholysis and onychomadesis and
­

­resolution of pain. In these cases, affected claws will
regrow but will have an abnormal structure. It may
take months before any significant improvement can
be noted.
Prognosis
Prognosis is poor for cure and fair for disease control.
Owners have to understand that claws will appear abnormal despite satisfactory improvement of the claw
disorder.

­Further Reading
Harley C, Donaldson D, Smith KC, et al. Congenital
keratoconjunctivitis sicca and ichthyosiform dermatosis
in 25 Cavalier King Charles spaniel dogs – part I: clinical
signs, histopathology, and inheritance. Vet Ophthalmol
2012; 15(5): 315–26.
Hoffmann A, Metzger J, Wohlke A, et al. Congenital
ichthyosis in 14 great dane puppies with a new
presentation. Vet Pathol 2016; 53(3): 614–20.
Mauldin EA, Palmeiro BS, Goldschmidt MH, et al.
Comparison of clinical history and dermatologic
findings in 29 dogs with severe eosinophilic dermatitis: a
retrospective analysis. Vet Dermatol 2006; 17(5):
338–47.

Simpson A, McKay L. Applied dermatology: sebaceous
adenitis in dogs. Compend Contin Educ Vet 2012;
34(10): E1–7.
Tamamoto‐Mochizuki C, Banovic F, Bizikova P, et al.
Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis due to
PNPLA1 mutation in a golden retriever‐poodle cross‐
bred dog and the effect of topical therapy. Vet Dermatol
2016; 27(4): 306–e75.
Voie KL, Campbell KL, Lavergne SN. Drug hypersensitivity
reactions targeting the skin in dogs and cats. J Vet Intern
Med 2012; 26(4): 863–74.
Ziener ML, Bettenay SV, Mueller RS. Symmetrical
onychomadesis in Norwegian Gordon and English
setters. Vet Dermatol 2008; 19(2): 88–94.

VetBooks.ir

1507

Section 13
Diseases of Bone and Joint

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1509

171
Skeletal Development and Homeostasis
Matthew J. Allen, VetMB, PhD1 and Gert J. Breur, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVS2
1
2

Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA

­Skeletal Development and Growth
Skeletal Development
The first evidence of the developing axial and appendicular skeleton is seen during the embryonic period (day 19–35
after fertilization) when mesenchymal cells condense in
the areas of the future bones. The mesenchymal model
transforms into a cartilage model (the anlage), which then
enlarges and transforms into mature bone both pre‐ and
postnatally. The enlargement of the cartilaginous bones
occurs by formation of new cartilage in diaphyseal and epiphyseal growth centers and growth plates. The newly
formed cartilaginous bones transform into mature bone
via the processes of endochondral and intramembranous
ossification (see later). Joints cavities between the developing bones are formed by the processes of segmentation
and cavitation. The formation of the joint surfaces (see
later) and intraarticular structures follows thereafter.
Most of the longitudinal growth of long bones is contributed by the growth plates (approximately 75–80%)
and epiphyseal growth centers (approximately 20–25%),
with a minor contribution by the diaphyseal growth
center. In dogs, most bone length growth occurs when
the animal is between 12 and 26 weeks of age. This
period is characterized by the most rapid rate of bone
length growth and endochondral ossification, both in
epiphyseal growth centers and growth plates, that a dog
will experience during its entire lifetime. In addition,
growth and mineralization of many epiphyseal growth
centers commence and cease at predetermined times.
At the end of this period, cartilage only persists between
the epiphysis and the metaphysis (growth plate) and at
the articular surface covering the epiphyses. Growth
plate‐associated longitudinal growth continues thereafter at a much slower rate until the process stops

completely and the cartilaginous growth plates are
­
replaced by bone (growth plate fusion). Just as with the
epiphyses, the growth cessation and “fusion” of growth
plates occur at predetermined times (Table 171.1). The
rate of skeletal development and the final bone size vary
widely among canine and feline breeds.
Intramembranous and Endochondral Ossification
Bone is formed through two fundamentally distinct mechanisms: endochondral ossification (EO) and intramembranous ossification (IO). The key feature of EO is that it
involves the sequential resorption of hyaline cartilage that
is replaced with bone. Under physiologic conditions, EO
takes place in diaphyseal and epiphyseal growth centers,
growth plates and – at a very slow rate – at articular
surfaces. Endochondral ossification also occurs under
­
pathologic conditions and as a repair process. Examples are
secondary fracture healing, o
­ steophyte formation, synovial
osteochondromatosis, and heterotopic bone formation.
Intramembranous ossification occurs through condensation and differentiation of mesenchymal tissues,
without the requirement for an intermediate cartilage
form. During the embryonic period, it plays a role in the
development of flat bones (e.g., desmocranium). Later
during development, IO takes place in basic multicellular units (BMU or osteon) in Haversian canals, and on
endosteal, periosteal, and trabecular surfaces. It provides
an important mechanism for appositional bone growth
at the periosteal (outer) surface of bone, resulting in diaphyseal circumferential growth (i.e., widening) of bones
over time. Intramembranous ossification occurs under
pathologic conditions and/or as repair process seen, for
example, in panosteitis, hypertrophic osteoarthopathy,
and primary fracture healing.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1510

Section 13 Diseases of Bone and Joint

Table 171.1 Epiphyseal growth center appearance and growth plate fusion of selected bones in immature dogs
Anatomic site

Humerus

Age when ossification center appears

Diaphysis

Birth

Proximal epiphysis

1–2 wk

10–13 mo

Distal epiphysis

Radius

Ulna

Femur

6–8 mo to shaft

Medial condyle

2–3 wk

6 wk to lateral condyle

Lateral condyle

2–3 wk

Medial epicondyle

6–8 wk

Diaphysis

Birth

Proximal epiphysis

3–5 wk

6–11 mo

Distal epiphysis

2–4 wk

8–12 mo

Diaphysis

Birth

Olecranon

8 wk

6–10 mo

Distal epiphysis

8 wk

8–12 mo

Diaphysis

Birth

Proximal epiphysis (head)

2 wk

7–11 mo

Trochanter major

8 wk

6–10 mo

Trochanter minor

8 wk

8–13 mo

6 mo to condyle

Distal epiphysis

Tibia

Fibula

Tarsus

Age when fusion occurs

8–11 mo to shaft

Trochlea

2 wk

3 mo condyle to trochlea

Medial condyle

3 wk

Lateral condyle

3 wk

Diaphysis

Birth

Medial condyle

3 wk

6 wk to lateral

Lateral condyle

3 wk

6–12 mo to shaft

Tuberosity

8 wk

6–8 mo to condyle
6–12 mo to shaft

Distal epiphysis

3 wk

8–11 mo

Medial malleolus

3 mo

5 mo

Diaphysis

Birth

Proximal epiphysis

9 wk

8–12 mo

Distal epiphysis

2–7 wk

7–11 mo

Talus

Birth–1 wk

Fibular

Birth–1 wk

Source: Modified from Owens JM. Radiographic Interpretation for the Small Animal Clinician. St Louis, MO: Ralston Purina Company, 1982, and
Ticer JW. Radiographic Technique in Small Animal Practice. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders, 1975.

Growth‐Plate Associated Growth
Growth plates facilitate bone length growth by the
formation of new cartilage. The volume increase of
­
­cartilage in a growth plate is a function of chondrocyte
proliferation, chondrocyte enlargement, and matrix
­formation. Because growth in width of a growth plate is
constrained, the newly formed cartilage pushes the epiphysis away from the metaphysis, thus elongating the

bone. At about the same time – albeit with a different
circadian rhythm – growth plate cartilage is converted
into bone at the junction of the growth plate and the
metaphysis via EO. Because the rate of bone length
growth and the rate of advancement of the EO mineralization from the metaphysis are approximately the same,
the thickness of a growth plate will not vary much from
day to day.

VetBooks.ir

171 Skeletal Development and Homeostasis

The growth plate is located between the epiphysis and
metaphysis, and may be divided into a resting zone, a
proliferative zone, a hypertrophic zone, and a mineralization zone.
Changes in the morphology of the chondrocytes and
the volume and composition of their surrounding matrix
in the different zones of the growth plate represent the
temporal alterations taking place through a chondrocyte’s life‐span. Chondrocytes in the resting zone are primarily stem cells, that divide at a slow rate, and daughter
cells. The daughter cells initially assume a flat morphology and divide, slowly enlarge, and synthesize a type 2
collagen and proteoglycan rich matrix; they are organized in so‐called clones, chondrons or columns. Cells in
this stage of the lifecycle are located in the proliferative
zone. Then, chondrocytes suddenly and rapidly increase
their cell volume by active swelling, while continuing the
synthesis of matrix. Chondrocytes in this stage of their
life cycle are spheroidal and relatively large and are
located in the hypertrophic zone. Shortly thereafter,
chondrocytes achieve their final size and shape and convert their surrounding matrix into one that is permissive
of mineralization. This cell type is located in the zone of
mineralization on the metaphyseal side of the growth
plate. Chondrocytes abutting the metaphyseal vasculature die abruptly, presumably via the process of apoptosis. The life‐span of chondrocytes varies and is mostly
dependent on the growth plate location, the animal’s age,
breed, and species.
The regulation of chondrocytic proliferation and
hypertrophy, the main determinants of bone length
growth, is complex and facilitated by various growth
factors, transcription factors, extracellular matrix proteins, and cell–matrix interactions. The traditional
understanding is that growth hormone while acting on
stem cells promotes the formation of insulin‐like growth
factor‐1 (IGF‐1)‐responsive daughter cells. Then,
through autocrine and paracrine systems, IGF‐1 stimulates clonal expansion of chondrocytes (dual effector
theory). The change from a proliferative chondrocyte
phenotype to a hypertrophic chondrocyte phenotype is
mainly controlled by a local feedback loop involving
parathyroid hormone‐related peptide (PTHrP), Indian
hedgehog (IHH), and transforming growth factor‐beta
(TGF‐beta). However, other regulators also may be
involved. More recently, transcription factors, extracellular matrix proteins, and cell–matrix interactions
functioning as regulators of chondrocytic proliferation
and differentiation have been identified. Research in
this area is largely driven by these regulators’ role in
the etiology and pathogenesis of skeletal dysplasias.
Discussion of these regulatory mechanisms and canine
and feline skeletal dysplasias is beyond the scope of
this chapter.

Essential to EO in the growth plate is the sequential
resorption of growth plate cartilage and its replacement
by metaphyseal bone. Chondrocytes with increased
membrane activity of alkaline phosphatase, in the zone
of mineralization, undergo their terminal differentiation.
They synthesize type X collagen and the surrounding
matrix now includes chondrocalcin, osteonectin, and
osteopontin. Chondrocytes juxtaposed to the metaphyseal vasculature (terminal hypertrophic chondrocytes)
die abruptly by apoptosis and their space is invaded and
taken over by metaphyseal blood vessels, a process facilitated by metalloproteinases (MMPs) and vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) produced by hypertropic chondrocytes. Osteoprogenitor cells migrate via
the newly formed metaphyseal vessels, differentiate into
osteoblasts, and form woven bone on the calcified cartilage matrix of the longitudinal septa. The so‐called
­primary spongiosa thus formed consists of a lattice of
calcified cartilage and woven bone. The move from hyaline cartilage to bone is completed with the replacement
of primary spongiosa by secondary spongiosa, a lamellar
bone. The regulation of the conversion of cartilage to
woven bone is complex, but it appears that genetic,
nutritional, metabolic and mechanical factors all play a
role. Defects of growth plate EO are often seen with
­skeletal dysplasias and metabolic bone diseases.
Epiphysis‐Associated Growth
The epiphysis of developing bone consists of a mineralized center surrounded by hyaline cartilage. The cartilage on the end of immature bones, the articular‐epiphyseal
complex (AEC), consists of two functionally different
layers: a relatively thin outer layer and a relatively thick
inner part.
The outer layer is specialized immature articular cartilage, is avascular, and does not participate in epiphyseal
EO. Following maturation, the articular cartilage will
consist of a superficial zone, a transitional or middle
zone, a radial or deep zone and a zone of calcifying
­cartilage. Completion of the maturation process of the
articular surface is indicated by the presence of the tide
mark, a microscopically visible line(s) separating the
uncalcified radial zone from the zone of calcifying cartilage. The inner layer of the AEC is functionally similar to
the growth plate and is responsible for epiphyseal
enlargement by new cartilage formation and mineralization of the newly formed cartilage.
The cartilage on the metaphyseal side of the mineralized center of the epiphysis also consists of two layers.
Adjacent to the mineralized epiphysis is true epiphyseal
cartilage, while the cartilage on the metaphyseal side
represents growth plate cartilage. Morphologically, there
are two main differences between epiphyseal and growth

1511

VetBooks.ir

1512

Section 13 Diseases of Bone and Joint

plate cartilage. First, the chondroepiphysis is visually disorganized and does not have the ordered zonal and
columnar arrangement of the growth plate. Furthermore,
in contrast to the proliferative, hypertrophic and mineralization zones in the growth plate, the chondroepiphysis has a rich blood supply. Chondroepiphyseal blood
vessels originate from the perichondrium and are located
in so‐called cartilage canals. Under physiologic conditions, these cartilage canals play a role in the nourishment of epiphyseal chondrocytes, in the formation and
maintenance of the epiphyseal ossification center and in
providing mesenchymal stem cells. It has been suggested
that damage to cartilage canal vessels may result in osteochondrosis. Cartilage canal vessels are distinct from
vessels on the metaphyseal side of the growth plate.
Just as with growth plate‐associated growth, enlargement of the epiphysis‐associated growth is a function of
chondrocytic proliferation, chondrocytic enlargement,
matrix formation, and duration of chondrogenic activity
in the chondroepiphysis. Chondrocyte proliferation
mostly takes place on the epiphyseal periphery, whereas
EO occurs towards the center, where chondrocytes are
larger and surrounded by more matrix. Cartilage canals
regress through the process of chondrification as the
ossification front from the center of the epiphysis reaches
newly formed epiphyseal cartilage. Towards the end of
the growth period, blood vessels from the epiphyseal
bone marrow anastomose with cartilage canal vessels.
When epiphyseal growth and ossification are completed,
a thin layer of avascular articular cartilage and an avascular growth plate remain. The regulation of epiphyseal
enlargement and endochondral ossification is not well
understood and certainly not as well studied as the
regulation of the growth plate. However, most likely
­
there will be strong similarities with the regulation of the
growth plate.

­Bone Morphology
Composition of Bone
Bone is a composite material consisting of a fiber‐­
reinforced matrix (similar to reinforced concrete, or
Kevlar body armor). The fibers and the matrix in which
they are embedded are manufactured by bone‐forming
cells (osteoblasts) and are susceptible to breakdown by
bone‐resorbing cells (osteoclasts).
Bone Matrix

Bone is initially deposited as nonmineralized matrix
(osteoid), the major components of which are a proteoglycan‐rich ground substance with embedded fibers of
type 1 collagen. A number of important noncollagenous

proteins are also found in bone, including osteocalcin
(also known as bone Gla protein), osteopontin, and
­osteonectin. The importance of type 1 collagen is most
clearly evidenced by the profound clinical signs seen in
patients with congential defects in collagen 1 synthesis
(osteogenesis imperfecta, also known as “brittle bone
disease”). Abnormalities in either the quality or quantity
of type 1 collagen result in dramatic alterations in the
material and mechanical properties of bone by compromising the fiber reinforcement of osteoid. As a result, the
bone is embrittled and prone to fracture.
The next stage after formation of the osteoid is
­deposition of mineral, in the form of hydroxyapatite
(Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2). The process of matrix mineralization remains incompletely understood but is thought to
involve selective mineral deposition within matrix vesicles released by osteoblasts. Once they reach a certain
size, the needle‐like hydroxyapatite (HA) crystals are
released from the matrix vesicles into the extracellular
space, where they serve as templates for ongoing
­deposition of mineral within the collagen fibrils. The tissue‐nonspecific isoform of alkaline phosphatase is
believed to play a role in controlling the release of HA
crystals from the matrix vesicle, as well as in the progression of mineralization in the extracellular matrix.
Cells of Bone

Osteoblasts are the cells that synthesize new bone. They
are derived from mesenchymal precursor cells (variously
referred to as mesenchymal stem cells or marrow‐
derived stem cells) and exist either as flat resting cells or
as more metabolically active cuboidal cells. In both cases,
osteoblasts remain intimately attached the bone surface.
Over time, as additional osteoid is deposited and then
mineralized, osteoblasts become encased in bone, forming osteocytes. These cells are known to be critical determinants of cell–cell and matrix–cell signaling within
bone, playing an active role in transducing mechanical
stimuli (strain) into bone cell activity. Signaling is
­facilitated by the presence of long cellular extensions
(filopodia) on osteocytes; the filopodia run through
small channels (canaliculi) within the bone. The extended
surface area of the filopodia allows the osteocytes to
sense changes in the composition of the extracellular
fluid within the canaliculi, while their connectivity allows
for efficient signaling between cell bodies.
Osteoclasts are the cells that resorb bone. In contrast
with the mesenchymal origins of osteoblasts, osteoclasts
derive from hematopoietic cells via the recruitment,
activation, and fusion of mononuclear cell precursors.
Hallmarks of the osteoclast include a multinucleate cell
with a highly invaginated basal membrane (the so‐called
“ruffled border”) apposing the bone surface, expression
of the enzymes tartrate‐resistant acid phosphatase and

VetBooks.ir

171 Skeletal Development and Homeostasis

cathepsin K, and the formation of a “sealing zone”
through which cells attach to bone.
The process of osteoclastic bone resorption involves
local acidification by means of a vacuolar ATPase. Under
acid conditions, calcium and phosphorus are liberated
from the bone matrix. At the same time, cathepsin K
degrades the type 1 collagen, as well as other noncollagenous proteins within the bone matrix.
In cancellous bone, bone resorption occurs at the
bone surface; in cortical bone, osteoclasts may act
either directly on an exposed bone surface (e.g., on the
endosteum or periosteum) or within the interstitium of
bone, by resorbing bone within the longitudinally
­oriented Haversian canals, in a process known as intracortical remodeling.
Structure of Bone
The canine skeleton consists of approximately 319 bones
that can be classified as follows.
Long bones (e.g., femur, humerus)
Cuboidal bones (e.g., carpus, tarsus)
●● Flat bones (e.g., skull, rib)
●● Irregular bones (e.g., vertebrae, pelvis)
●● Sesamoid bones (e.g., fabellae)
●●
●●

Macrostructure of Bone

The shape of an individual bone is genetically determined but can be altered by changes in mechanical
­loading, blood supply, trauma, etc. For long bones, three
anatomically distinct regions are recognized.
Diaphysis – the shaft of the long bone, composed of
cortical bone surrounding the medullary cavity.
●● Epiphysis – the end of a long bone that is initially separated from the rest of the bone by the presence of a
growth plate (physis).
●● Metaphysis – the region between the epiphysis and the
diaphysis.
●●

Bone is present in one of two forms, cortical or cancellous. Cortical bone is very dense (it is also known as
compact bone) and is mainly found as an envelope for
the flat bones and in the diaphyseal regions of long
bones. Cancellous bone is less dense and exists as a
three‐dimensional network of interconnecting struts
(trabeculae), primarily within the metaphyseal and epiphyseal regions of the long bones, as well as in the irregular bones. Cancellous bone has a significantly higher
surface area (per unit volume) for cellular activity than
cortical bone and, as a result, is more metabolically
active. The regions of the skeleton in which there are
increased amounts of cancellous bone tend to be the
high turnover sites; in humans, these are the sites that

are most sensitive to hormonal change and most likely
to develop osteoporosis (proximal femur, spine, distal
radius).
Microstructure of Bone

Bone is organized as either lamellar bone or woven bone.
Woven bone is an immature form of bone and is only
seen in the skeletally mature animal at sites of fracture
healing, bone growth, and skeletal diseases such as neoplasia or panosteitis. When present in the adult skeleton,
it is rapidly remodeled into lamellar bone. Woven bone is
more cellular than lamellar bone and its collagen fibers
are aligned at random; as a result, woven bone is isotropic (i.e., mechanical properties do not depend on
specimen orientation).
Lamellar bone is found throughout the mature skeleton in both cortical and cancellous bone, irrespective of
whether the bone was formed by intramembranous or
endochondral ossification. The collagen fibers in lamellar bone are oriented in parallel with one another and, as
a result, lamellar bone displays anisotropy when tested
mechanically.
This means that the mechanical properties depend on
the direction of loading – similar to plywood, which is
easily cut in one plane (“with the grain”) but hard to cut
at right angles (“across the grain”).
Under polarized light microscopy, lamellar bone
appears to have a regular sheet‐like structure rather than
the irregular structure of woven bone. In cancellous
bone, the sheets of lamellar bone are oriented parallel to
the surface of individual trabeculae. In cortical bone,
lamellar bone is usually arranged in osteons, consisting
of a central vascular channel surrounded by multiple
concentric layers of lamellar bone; the osteons that comprise the osteonal complex are bounded externally by
circumferential lamellae and separated one from another
by interstitial lamellae.
The arrangement of bone within osteons provides the
cortical bone with strength and some limited flexibility
in bending and torsion.
Vascular Supply to Bone
In the long bone, there are three separate but related
c­ irculatory systems.
The nutrient artery enters the long bone through the
nutrient foramen in the diaphysis. Once within the
medullary canal, the nutrient artery divides into
ascending and descending medullary arteries that are
the primary blood supply to diaphyseal cortical bone.
Blood flow is centrifugal.
●● The metaphyseal vessels arise from geniculate arteries
that form the blood supply to periarticular tissues.
●●

1513

VetBooks.ir

1514

Section 13 Diseases of Bone and Joint

These vessels penetrate the cortex at the level of the
metaphysis. In addition, smaller proximal and distal
metaphyseal arteries derive from the ascending and
descending medullary arteries. The metaphyseal arteries are the primary blood supply to cancellous bone.
●● The periosteal capillaries supply the outer one‐third of
the cortex. These capillaries are derived from adjacent
soft tissues (muscles, fascia) that insert on the bone
(e.g., at the linea aspera on the femur). This blood
­supply is centripetal in nature.
There is considerable overlap and interplay between
the circulatory systems in bone, perhaps most evident
when bone is injured. If the medullary system is compromised, for example as a consequence of fracture or
intramedullary reaming, the periosteal blood supply will
increase in an attempt to revascularize the diaphysis.
External fixation devices and bone plates affect both the
endosteal supply and the periosteal supply. The design of
modern bone plates, with limited contact with the periosteal surface, represents an effort to try to reduce the
negative impact of plating on periosteal blood supply.
Preservation of an effective blood supply is a basic principle of surgery since it is a critical determinant of tissue
healing and subsequent function. Disturbances in blood
supply play a role in the pathophysiology of several
important orthopedic conditions, including ischemic
necrosis, osteomyelitis, delayed union, and nonunion of
fractures.

­Bone Physiology

structural support and bone turnover) and bone marrow
(important for hematopoiesis).
Bone remodeling, the process in which bone is first
removed and then replaced, is executed by the coupled
activities of bone‐resorbing osteoclasts and bone‐forming osteoblasts. Bone remodeling is temporally and spatially coupled, and proceeds through defined stages of
activation ⇒ resorption ⇒ formation. Bone remodeling
activity proceeds as a surface phenomenon on bone
­trabeculae within cancellous bone, or on the endosteal
or periosteal surfaces of cortical bone. However, cortical bone remodeling also occurs through osteonal
(Haversian) remodeling that is carried out by a complex
and unique structure, the basic multicellular unit (BMU),
that consists of a cutting cone of osteoclasts in front and
a closing cone of osteoblasts at the rear. The BMU moves
through bone over a period of several months, removing
damaged or unnecessary bone and replacing it as dictated by local mechanical and/or biologic stimuli. The
removal of damaged bone is critical to the replacement
of bone that has been microfractured, for example as a
result of chronic overload (as may be seen in elite human,
canine or equine athletes in training).
In the healthy adult animal, bone formation and
resorption (i.e., overall remodeling) are balanced.
However, imbalances in remodeling occur with aging.
The most important example of remodeling imbalance
is seen in postmenopausal osteoporosis in women,
in which loss of estrogen results in a relative increase in
bone resorption, reduced bone mass, and an increased
risk of “fragility” fracture.

Bone Modeling and Bone Remodeling

What Controls Bone Remodeling?

Bone remains a dynamic structure throughout life. This
is critical for both the maintenance of skeletal strength
and the continued role of bone as a mineral reservoir.
Mineral sequestered within the bone matrix can be
mobilized rapidly in response to calcitropic hormones
such as parathyroid hormone, vitamin D3, and calcitonin
that respond to, and modulate, circulating calcium
concentration.
Bone modeling is the process through which changes
in bone shape occur. In modeling, bone formation and
bone resorption can occur at different surfaces, resulting
in shape changes. For example, radial growth of a long
bone is achieved through new bone deposition at the
periosteal surface. If there was not concurrent removal
of bone from the endosteal surface, the net result would
be a bone with a very thick cortex and a very narrow
medullary canal. Removal of bone from the endosteum
leads to expansion of the medullary canal and preservation of a space for trabecular bone (important for both

The last 15 years have seen an explosion in what is known
about osteoclast biology, driven in large part by the quest
for greater understanding of disease states caused by
dysregulated osteoclast activity. The major clinical and
research emphasis has been on postmenopausal osteoporosis in women. Although the role of estrogen
­deficiency has long been recognized, we now know that
local paracrine factors play a critical role in driving the
excessive bone resorption that characterizes this disease.
At a cellular and molecular level, the control of bone
resorption depends on the availability of osteoclastic
precursor cells, local levels of macrophage colony‐stimulating factors (M‐CSF) and the activities of the receptor
activator of NF‐kappa B (RANK), its ligand (RANK
ligand, or RANKL) and its decoy receptor, osteoprotegerin (OPG). These interactions are illustrated in
Figure 171.1. RANK is expressed as a surface receptor on
mononuclear osteoclast precursors; binding of RANKL
to the receptor results in cell–cell fusion to form the

VetBooks.ir

171 Skeletal Development and Homeostasis

Figure 171.1 Molecular control of osteoclast
differentiation. Monocytes stimulated by
M‐CSF and RANKL fuse to form multinucleate
osteoclasts. Interruption of the RANK‐RANKL
axis offers a therapeutic approach to disease
characterized by increased osteoclastic
activity. Source: Reproduced with permission
from Allen MJ. Cellular and molecular biology.
In: Damron T, ed. Oncology and Basic Science
(Orthopaedic Surgery Essentials). Baltimore,
MD: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 2007.

Monocyte
precursors

RANK expressed
on monocytes

Fusion into
osteoclasts

Osteoclast

RANKL
OPG

Osteoblast
(or stromal cell)

multinucleate osteoclast. Increases in the ratio of
RANKL to OPG favor net bone loss, while decreases
favor net bone accrual.
A number of drug therapies have now been developed
for modulating osteoclastic activity. The most widely
used antiresorptive agents are bisphosphonates such as
pamidronate, clodronate, alendronate, and zoledronate.
These compounds, which bind to mineral within the
bone matrix, are released when mineral is resorbed by
osteoclastic activity. Direct exposure of the osteoclast to
high levels of these drugs leads to osteoclast apoptosis
and a decrease in bone resorptive activity. Although
­initially introduced for osteoporosis, bisphosphonates
are now widely used in the management of patients with
other forms of pathologic bone resorption, including
hypercalcemia of malignancy (e.g., with anal sac adenocarcinoma), primary bone cancer (e.g., osteosarcoma,
feline oral squamous cell carcinoma) or secondary
bone metastases (e.g., from mammary or prostatic
carcinoma).
An alternative approach to controlling osteoclastic
activity involves targeting the RANK‐RANKL pathway
by administration of exogenous OPG or RANK‐Fc
­antibodies that serve as competitive antagonists for the
RANK receptor.
Decreases in normal bone resorptive activity are also
not without consequence. The most extreme example of
this can be seen in patients with osteopetrosis, a congenital disease in which there is failure of osteoclast formation or functionality. The classic clinical features of
bone fragility, osteoarthritis, and marrow failure can all
be explained by failures of osteoclastic resorption,
including an inability to remodel and expand the medullary canal (and an absence of space for hematopoiesis),
failure to remodel cortical and trabecular bone (leading
to increased bone mineral density) and failure to resorb

and replace damaged bone (leading to bone fragility
­secondary to bone fatigue failure).
Since net bone mass is sensitive to changes in both
­formation and resorption, attention has also been paid to
the role of anabolic factors that modulate skeletal activity. In the context of long bone growth, it has been shown
that growth hormone is capable of enhancing longitudinal bone growth in the immature skeleton. In the adult
animal, preclinical studies have confirmed the anabolic
potential of both exogenous parathyroid hormone (PTH)
and bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs). Intermittent
(daily) treatment with recombinant or synthetic forms of
human PTH is effective in enhancing overall bone mass
and accelerating bone repair after fracture. Bone morphogenetic proteins, including BMP‐2 and BMP‐7, have
been studied extensively in dogs and BMP‐2 is now available commercially as a potential treatment to accelerate
or enhance fracture healing.
Effects of Mechanical Loading on Bone
Julius Wolff (1836–1902) was a German surgeon who
first identified the relationship between mechanical
forces and bone structure. He likened the arrangement
of trabecular bone in the neck of the femur to the
arrangement of supports in a crane, with the trabeculae
being oriented to best resist the forces to which the
­femoral neck was being exposed. Although originally
published in German in 1892, Wolff ’s law can be summarized thus: “Bone changes its structure according to
the mechanical loads to which it is exposed.”
Once the adult skeleton has formed, it continues to
adapt to the prevailing mechanical environment. Graphic
evidence of the importance of mechanical loading
in driving the change in bone shape and bone mass
(bone modeling) comes from professional tennis players

1515

VetBooks.ir

1516

Section 13 Diseases of Bone and Joint

(who develop significant increases in bone mass in their
dominant forearm) or astronauts (who lose significant
bone mass after even a few weeks in the microgravity of
space). Practical examples of modeling in the context of
veterinary orthopedics include the remodeling of fracture callus, functional adaptation of the metacarpal,
metatarsal and central tarsal bones of racing greyhounds,
bone loss following limb disuse, the development of
stress fractures secondary to accelerated bone remodeling in racing thoroughbreds, and “stress shielding”
around orthopedic implants.

­Bone Pathophysiology
Bone Response to Injury
The basic biology of bone’s response to trauma has been
a subject of intense investigation over the years, particularly within the context of understanding what happens
after bone fractures. The fundamental response of bone
to trauma is similar to that seen in other tissues, and
includes cellular recruitment, differentiation, and formation of an appropriate replacement tissue. In the context
of normal bone healing after fracture, three overlapping
stages are recognized: the inflammatory stage, the repair
phase, and the remodeling phase.
Inflammatory Phase

Significant trauma, such as fracture, inevitably result in
disruptions to the medullary blood supply, leading to
extravasation of blood and the formation of a clot
between and around the ends of the fractured bone.
Damage to the periosteum also results in formation of
clot around the external surface of the bone. Although
mechanically incompetent, the clot acts as a rich source
of growth factors for angiogenesis and subsequent fracture healing. This last point is of critical significance
when contemplating surgery for a fracture – excessive
manipulation of the soft tissue clot results in loss of many
of the cells (and signaling molecules) that are ultimately
required for successful healing. An “open but do not
touch” approach allows the surgeon to assess the fracture
and to apply fixation methods that do not interfere with
(but instead harness) the body’s innate healing response.
This is the concept of biologic osteosynthesis.
Repair Phase

Macrophages that are brought in through the newly
forming capillary bed serve to remove tissue debris and
initiate the conversion of the clot into first granulation
tissue and then callus. Callus formation starts with the
deposition of collagen (initially types 1, 2, and 3) by
fibroblasts. At the same time, mesenchymal cells that

were brought into the area during the inflammatory
response differentiate into chondrocytes and deposit a
cartilage framework that is subsequently mineralized.
It should be noted that the progressive transition from
clot ⇒ granulation tissue ⇒ soft callus ⇒ hard callus
recapitulates the process of endochondral bone formation that occurs during normal bone formation.
Remodeling Phase

The final stage of fracture healing involves the gradual
incorporation of the relatively disorganized hard callus
into the skeleton. This is the longest phase of fracture
healing. Remodeling of the callus is governed by Wolff ’s
law and, ultimately, the process of bone remodeling
results in a structure that is best able to resist the
mechanical forces to which it is subjected.
Thermal Injury to Bone
Bone is damaged by temperatures exceeding 47 °C for
more than one minute. The most common scenarios for
thermal injury to bone occur during orthopedic surgery
and are related to the use of power tools to cut and shape
bone, or the bone cement that is used to secure total
joint replacement implants.
Power tools such as saws, drills, and reamers are used
every day in orthopedic surgery. In the operating room,
every effort is made to reduce the risk of thermal injury.
This involves the use of sharp drills or saw blades (old,
dull blades or drill bits will mill bone and generate heat);
low‐speed cutting and drilling whenever possible; short
rather than sustained bursts of drilling or sawing; and
copious saline lavage, which serves both to cool the tissue and to remove bone debris that can otherwise clog
up blades and drill flutes.
The standard bone cement used in orthopedic surgery
is acrylic cement based on polymethylmethacrylate (as
used in Plexiglas). Bone cement is used to secure joint
replacement implants into bone. Cement is typically
injected in a liquid state but then hardens through a
chemical process of polymerization that is exothermic.
Since bone cement is usually placed immediately adjacent to cortical or trabecular bone, there is potential for
heat injury to the constituent bone cells, as well as to the
vascular supply to the endosteum. Data from preclinical
animal models indicate that this thermal injury is typically reversible. However, care should be taken to use the
minimum volume of cement necessary and to ensure
protection of adjacent neurovascular structures.
Vascular Injury to Bone
Vascular trauma to bone may occur secondary to a
fracture or as an unwanted consequence of surgical
­

VetBooks.ir

171 Skeletal Development and Homeostasis

interventions. Traumatic disruptions during fracture
typically involve significant injury to the blood supply on
both endosteal and periosteal surfaces. Vascular injury
secondary to surgical procedures may affect the entire
bone (if, for example, a nutrient vessel is cut by accident)
or it may preferentially affect one region (for example,
damage to the outer surface of the bone or to the adjacent soft tissues has a greater effect of periosteal blood
supply, while introduction of an intramedullary pin or
bone cement into the medullary cavity will selectively
damage the endosteal blood supply). Application of a
plate to the surface of the bone also may damage the
­ eriosteal supply.
p
In most cases, regional changes in blood flow will
be able to restore effective vascularity to the bone.
For example, loss of periosteal blood supply results in an
increase in centrifugal blood flow through the cortex,
while endosteal damage results in increased centripetal
blood flow from the periosteal vascular network.
Periosteal Trauma
Periosteal trauma occurs either as a consequence of fracture, secondary to surgical manipulation of the bone, or
as a consequence of bone pathologies such as infection
or neoplasia. Data from preclinical animal models have
shown that traumatic loss of periosteum has the potential to result in overall bone loss and an increased risk of
fragility in the affected bone. At least two factors appear
to be involved in this response. First, loss of periosteal
bone‐forming cells will lead to a decreased ability to
make new bone at the periosteal surface. Second, loss of
the vascular supply to the periosteum results in transient
derangements in bone blood flow. In healthy animals,
the extent of periosteal trauma would have to be significant to cause a whole‐bone effect. However, if the bone is
otherwise compromised by disease, periosteal damage
may result in further bone loss and an increased risk of
catastrophic bone failure.
Reactive New Bone Formation
Reactive new bone is a relatively common radiographic
finding and a not uncommon confounding factor in bone
biopsies taken from sites of bone pathology. While the
underlying process of forming new bone represents a
biologically conserved and logical response to bone
trauma, the response is not specific to any one initiating
cause, making it extremely hard for radiologists or bone
pathologists to ascribe a specific underlying disease
entity as the cause of the new bone formation. Some
information may be gleaned from the location of the new
bone, with both endosteal and periosteal surfaces being
potential sources of reactive new bone formation.

At the periosteal surface, fracture, infection, and
­neoplasia are the most common causes of a reactive
­periosteal new bone formation (“periosteal response”).
The role of periosteal callus in fracture healing will be
discussed shortly. In the context of bone infection and
neoplasia, situations in which the periosteum can be
underrun by inflammatory or neoplastic infiltrates, the
typical response is for new bone formation. The mechanisms responsible for this are not well understood but
likely relate to the ability of periosteum to react to
increased local mechanical deformation by depositing
new bone. There are significant numbers of nociceptors
at the periosteal surface, and periosteal involvement in
neoplasia and infection tends to be extremely painful.
Radiographically, the observation of focal to local periosteal new bone is highly suggestive of aggressive bone
conditions such as neoplasia or osteomyelitis.
With neoplasia, disruption and lifting of the periosteum proceed too rapidly for the bone to mineralize in
the normal layered fashion, and the net result is that only
the edge of the lifted periosteum ossifies. Radiographically,
the mineralized flap of periosteum is described as
Codman’s triangle.
At the endosteal surface, reactive new bone formation
is seen predominantly in fracture healing and also as a
component of canine panosteitis, which will be discussed
later.
Pathologic Bone Resorption
Excessive and dysregulated activation of bone resorption
is a hallmark of several important developmental, inflammatory, infectious and neoplastic disorders in animals,
including periodontal disease, osteomyelitis, multiple
myeloma, and aseptic or septic loosening of total joint
replacement implants. A complete description of the
pathobiology of these conditions is outside the scope of
this short discussion, but it is important to note that the
fundamental biologic mechanisms through which bone
is removed are the same as are seen in normal (physiologic) bone remodeling. The major differences lie in the
nature of the inciting cause; for implant‐related bone
resorption (osteolysis), it is the inflammatory response
to metallic and polymeric debris liberated from the surfaces of the implant that stimulates the inflammatory
cascade. In metastatic tumors that target bone, proinflammatory cytokines released from the tumor appear
to modulate the osteoclastic response immediately
­adjacent to the tumor deposits.
Irrespective of the inciting cause, strategies for managing pathologic bone resorption focus on eliminating the
underlying inciting cause with appropriate medical therapy (antibiotics, chemotherapy) or surgical intervention
(to remove a loose or infected implant). The use of oral

1517

VetBooks.ir

1518

Section 13 Diseases of Bone and Joint

or injectable bisphosphonates also represents a logical
approach to suppressing ongoing bone loss in these
patients.
Bone Healing after Fracture
The goal of fracture fixation is to restore structure and
function to the skeleton. Fracture healing is influenced
by a wide array of factors, including the animal’s age,
location and type of fracture, stability of the fragments,
extent of soft tissue and vascular compromise, and presence or absence of necrotic and/or infected tissues.
Mechanical stability is known to be of paramount importance in determining the nature, time course, and efficiency of the fracture healing response. Under stable
conditions, the fracture will unite via direct (primary)
bone healing, in which new bone forms a direct bridge
across the fracture plane. Under unstable conditions, a
soft tissue callus first forms and it is this callus that is
then progressively mineralized in a process known as
indirect (secondary) fracture healing.
Role of Mechanical Factors in Fracture Healing

Fractures that are anatomically reconstructed and maintained under stable conditions through the use of internal fixation heal without significant callus. However,
even under conditions of ideal bone fragment alignment,
it is common to find microscopic discontinuities between
the ends of the fragments. The extent of the gap dictates
the nature of the reparative response that will predominate. In very small gaps, woven bone forms and continuity is restored between the ends of the bone. If the gap is
larger than ~1 mm, the gap will fill in with soft callus. As
long as the fracture site remains stable, the callus will
successfully mineralize and remodel. In fact, controlled
amounts of micromotion have been shown to accelerate
bone repair, a finding that has been used to great benefit
in distraction osteogenesis, a procedure in which controlled axial distraction of a small bone fragment is used
to stimulate and maintain new bone formation. Over
time, the regenerated bone formed in this way is capable
of filling in a significant defect in the original bone.
Distraction osteogenesis can be useful in the management of both large bone defects (e.g., secondary to
trauma or neoplasia) and the correction of angular limb
deformities.
In the presence of mechanical instability, either with
comminuted fractures or with fractures that are unstable
despite attempts at fixation, fracture healing is characterized by the formation of abundant callus that unites
the bone fragments. The biologic processes that underlie
the formation of callus have been described previously.
The mechanical properties of the callus similarly evolve
as the callus matures from a fibrous connective tissue,

through a cartilaginous intermediate and finally to bone.
The total area (volume) of the callus depends on (i) the
degree of displacement of the fragments and (ii) the
extent of mechanical instability at the site of fracture.
Once the mechanical properties of the callus are sufficient to minimize interfragmentary strain (2% is often
cited as the threshold for new bone formation), primary
bone repair can occur and the callus will be remodeled to
restore the medullary cavity and cortical profile. It should
be noted that the presence of external callus leads to a
rapid increase in the mechanical integrity of the bone, so
that bone that heals with abundant callus is able to withstand physiologic forces within a relatively short period
of time after fracture.
Other Factors that Influence Bone Healing
Certainly, any factor that compromises the ability of
­callus to form or to differentiate would be expected to
delay or prevent fracture healing. In addition to mechanical instability due to incomplete reduction or stabilization, other factors that can lead to delayed or nonunion
after fracture include vascular compromise, premature
or excessive weight bearing after surgery (hence the
importance of controlling activity levels after surgery),
infection, radiation therapy, systemic illness, or concurrent treatment with prolonged courses of drugs such as
corticosteroids. In humans, smoking is a critically important determinant of wound healing in general and a
major risk factor for complications following fracture
repair. The potential negative effects of nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) on bone healing have
been the subject of significant research efforts in humans
but data in animals are less clear, and there does not
appear to be any objective evidence that short‐term
treatment with NSAIDs has a significant effect on bone
healing after trauma or surgery.

­Complications with Fracture Healing –
Delayed Union, Malunion, and Nonunion
Although the majority of straightforward fractures will
go on to heal (unite) without complication, a subset of
patients will experience problems with healing. The primary causes of suboptimal fracture healing have been
described in the preceding sections, and include incomplete reduction of the fracture, uncontrolled or excessive
weight bearing, vascular compromise, infection, and
concurrent medical disease or therapy. Three general
categories of abnormal fracture healing have been
recognized: delayed union, malunion, and nonunion.
­
The diagnosis of disturbed fracture healing is made on

VetBooks.ir

171 Skeletal Development and Homeostasis

the basis of careful physical examination and radiographic findings.
Delayed union is probably the most challenging to
diagnose definitively since it represents healing that
occurs at a slower rate than would be expected for a
given fracture. As mentioned earlier, the rate and completeness of healing are sensitive to a range of variables,
and as a result there can be significant variations in how
fast a given fracture heals. Most delayed unions can be
managed conservatively, without the need for additional
surgical intervention.
Malunions are fractures that have gone on to clinical
union but with abnormalities in the alignment of the
fragments. In the middiaphysis, this may manifest as
rotational abnormalities or angulation between the
proximal and distal ends of the bone. At the articular
surface, healing without complete restoration of

the articular surface would be considered a malunion.
The consequences of malunion depend on both severity
and location; minor angular malalignment may be clinically asymptomatic, while discontinuities or irregularities in the articular surface can predispose to the
development of posttraumatic osteoarthritis.
Nonunion represents the most extreme disturbance in
normal fracture healing. The extent and nature of the
healing response can be quite variable, but nonunions can
broadly be classified into viable nonunions, in which the
tissues are still capable of biologic activity, and nonviable
nonunions that are devoid of biologic activity. The management of these fractures can be complex and lies outside the scope of this discussion, but often involves
aggressive surgical intervention. In select cases, there may
also be a role for local (e.g., BMP) or systemic (e.g., PTH)
anabolic drug therapies to boost new bone formation.

­Further Reading
Breur GJ, Lambrechts NE. Osteochondrosis. In: Tobias KM
and Johnston SA, eds. Veterinary Surgery: Small Animal.
St Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2012, pp. 1178–89.
Doige CE, Weisbrode SE. Diseases of bone and joints. In:
Carlton WW and McGavin MD, eds. Thompson’s
Special Veterinary Pathology, 2nd edn. St Louis, MO:
Mosby, 1995, pp. 423–60.
Griffon D. Fracture healing. In: Johnson AL, Houlton JEF,
Vannini R, eds. AO Principles of Fracture Management

in the Dog and Cat. Stuttgart, Germany: AO Publishing/
Thieme, 2005, pp. 72–97.
Sumner Smith G. Bone in Clinical Orthopaedics, 2nd edn.
Stuttgart, Germany: AO Publishing/Thieme, 2002.
Villanueva AR. Bone. In: Sheehan DC and Hrapchak BB,
eds. Theory and Practice of Histotechnology.
Columbus, OH: Battelle Press, 1987, pp. 89–117.

1519

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1521

172
Metabolic Bone Diseases
Keren E. Dittmer, PhD, BVSc, DACVP
School of Veterinary Science, Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand

Metabolic bone diseases include osteoporosis, rickets
and osteomalacia, fibrous osteodystrophy (secondary
hyperparathyroidism), and scurvy (vitamin C deficiency).
Fibrous osteodystrophy is an important skeletal disease
of young dogs and cats. On the other hand, rickets and
osteomalacia are relatively rare. While osteoporosis is
the most common metabolic bone disease of humans, it
is seldom diagnosed in small animals, possibly due to the
lack of sensitive techniques to reliably diagnose the dis­
ease. Dogs and cats have the hepatic microsomal enzyme
L‐gulonolactone oxidase and can synthesize vitamin C
(ascorbic acid), therefore scurvy does not occur in these
species. The metabolic bone diseases covered in this
chapter include fibrous osteodystrophy, rickets and oste­
omalacia, with a brief discussion of osteoporosis.

­Calcium and Phosphorus Physiology
In order to truly understand the pathophysiology of
the metabolic bone diseases, good knowledge of nor­
mal calcium and phosphorus metabolism is required.
Therefore a brief description of calcium and phosphorus
homeostasis will be included here.
The hormones vitamin D, parathyroid hormone
(PTH), calcitonin, and fibroblast growth factor 23
(FGF23) are essential for controlling plasma calcium and
phosphorus concentrations. These hormones facilitate
calcium and phosphorus transportation in three main
organs: the kidney, intestine, and bone.
Calcium transport is predominantly under the control
of PTH and 1,25‐dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25(OH)2D3).
Parathyroid hormone is a small peptide secreted by the
parathyroid gland when the calcium‐sensing receptors
on chief cells detect low plasma calcium concentrations.
PTH binds to the PTH receptor 1 in renal tubules, result­
ing in activation of adenylate cyclase and phospholipase

C cell pathways, ultimately leading to opening of calcium
channels (such as transient receptor vanilloid potential 5,
TRPV5), and increased resorption of calcium from the
renal filtrate. Increased plasma phosphorus concentra­
tions may also lead to increased PTH secretion by an
unknown mechanism. Increased PTH leads to increased
breakdown of phosphate channels (Na+‐Pi ATPase
pump, NPT2), resulting in decreased resorption of
­phosphorus from the renal filtrate.
The actions of PTH on bone are dual and antagonistic.
Secretion of PTH in response to low plasma ionized cal­
cium leads to increased expression of receptor activator
of NF‐kB ligand (RANKL) by osteoblasts. When RANKL
binds to the RANK receptor on osteoclast precursors, it
leads to differentiation and maturation of these cells into
mature osteoclasts. At the same time, PTH leads to
decreased expression of osteoprotegerin (OPG/OCIF), a
decoy receptor that prevents binding of RANKL to
RANK. Increased production of osteoclasts ultimately
results in increased osteoclastic bone resorption and
release of calcium and phosphorus from bone matrix
into blood. The anabolic actions of PTH are used in the
treatment of osteoporosis in humans. Intermittent low‐
dose treatment with PTH analogs results in increased
differentiation and production of osteoblasts, and there­
fore increased bone formation.
Low plasma calcium concentration and PTH activate
the 1‐alpha‐hydroxylase enzyme in the kidney, resulting
in increased production of 1,25(OH)2D3. Active vitamin
D (1,25(OH)2D3) binds to the vitamin D receptor in the
nucleus of intestinal epithelial cells and renal tubular
­epithelial cells, leading to increased production of vita­
min D‐responsive proteins, such as calcium channels
(TRPV5, 6 and Na+/Ca2+ exchanger), phosphate chan­
nels (NPT2a, 2b, 2c), and calcium‐binding proteins
(­calbindin‐D9k and D28k). Increased production of these
proteins results in increased absorption of calcium and

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1522

Section 13 Diseases of Bone and Joint

phosphorus from the renal tubules and intestinal tract.
Active vitamin D also has a negative feedback effect
on its own production. In the parathyroid gland,
1,25(OH)2D3 directly inhibits PTH production and
increases the sensitivity of the calcium‐sensing
­receptors to calcium, thereby acting to control PTH
secretion.
Like PTH, vitamin D may also have dual and antago­
nistic effects in bone. When plasma blood calcium
­concentrations decline, 1,25(OH)2D3 leads to increased
bone resorption by upregulating RANKL production
and inhibiting OPG production, likely in association
with PTH. In addition, 1,25(OH)2D3 upregulates inhibi­
tors of bone mineralization. However, 1,25(OH)2D3
can be produced locally in bone, by chondrocytes, osteo­
blasts, osteocytes and osteoclasts, where it leads to
increased bone formation and mineralization.
Calcitonin is the antagonistic hormone to vitamin D
and PTH and is released in response to increased plasma
ionized calcium concentrations. It inhibits osteoclast
motility and leads to retraction of osteoclasts from bone,
resulting in decreased bone resorption and therefore
decreased release of calcium and phosphorus into the
blood.
Traditionally, it was thought that the control of plasma
phosphorus concentrations was indirect, as a result of
the tighter control of calcium. However, a suite of com­
pounds, known as phosphatonins, are critically involved
in phosphorus control, the most important of which is
FGF23. Increased plasma phosphorus concentrations
and increased 1,25(OH)2D3 may both independently
increase FGF23 production by osteocytes in bone. The
main target organ for FGF23 action is the kidney. FGF23,
together with its co‐factor klotho, downregulates the
NPT2a and 2c phosphorus channels in the kidney, lead­
ing to decreased resorption of phosphorus from the
renal tubules. FGF23 also acts on the parathyroid gland
to decrease secretion of PTH. FGF23 in combination
with the decrease in PTH leads to inhibition of the renal
1‐alpha‐hydroxylase enzyme decreasing production of
active vitamin D. At the same time, there is activation
of the enzyme (24‐hydroxylase) that breaks down
active vitamin D, ultimately resulting in decreased
1,25(OH)2D3.

­Fibrous Osteodystrophy
Fibrous osteodystrophy (FOD) is a skeletal disease char­
acterized by the replacement of bone with a combination
of fibrous tissue and poorly mineralized woven bone.
While the focus of this section is on nutritional hyper­
parathyroidism, primary and renal hyperparathyroidism
may cause similar skeletal lesions.

Etiology/Pathophysiology
Fibrous osteodystrophy is the skeletal consequence of
hyperparathyroidism or a chronic increase in PTH.
There are four main causes of hyperparathyroidism.
Primary hyperparathyroidism – due to a functional
tumor of the parathyroid gland, resulting in autono­
mous secretion of PTH. The increased PTH leads to
hypercalcemia and mineralization of soft tissues, and
in long‐standing cases clinical FOD. This will be dis­
cussed in the endocrine section. A probable hereditary
primary hyperparathyroidism has been reported in a
litter of German shepherd puppies.
●● Renal hyperparathyroidism – due to chronic kidney
disease. While renal hyperparathyroidism is common
in animals with chronic kidney disease, clinical signs
due to skeletal changes are usually minimal in adult
animals. Nonetheless, recent studies have shown that
dogs and cats with chronic kidney disease have
decreased bone mineral density and increased bone
porosity. Young rapidly growing animals with familial
renal disease may develop severe skeletal lesions.
●● Nutritional hyperparathyroidism – due to a decreased
calcium to phosphorus ratio in the diet. This is a com­
mon condition of young rapidly growing cats and dogs
fed poorly balanced diets post weaning.
●● Pseudohyperparathyroidism
or hypercalcaemia of
malignancy – due to a tumor that produces calcitropic
hormones. Parathyroid hormone‐related peptide
(PTHrp) is the best characterized of these calcitropic
hormones and has the same effect as PTH. Tumors
that most commonly produce PTHrp are lymphoma
and apocrine gland adenocarcinoma of anal sac origin.
Occasionally, other carcinomas, malignant melanoma,
and other tumors may produce other factors that cause
hypercalcaemia, such as 1,25(OH)2D3, prostaglandins,
and various cytokines (TGF‐beta, IL‐1‐beta). Skeletal
changes are mild and difficult to detect; clinical signs
are the result of hypercalcemia.
●●

Signalment
Nutritional hyperparathyroidism is typically a disease of
rapidly growing young animals after weaning. A case of
nutritional hyperparathyroidism in an adult dog has
been reported; the Rottweiler was on a home‐made diet
due to the diagnosis a year previously of lymphocytic‐
plasmacytic enterocolitis and lymphangiectasia.
History and Clinical Signs
Nutritional FOD occurs when the diet contains excessive
phosphorus or deficient calcium. In actual practice,
most commonly it is due to a combination of decreased

VetBooks.ir

172 Metabolic Bone Diseases

calcium and increased phosphorus in the diet. The most
frequent cause of nutritional FOD is an all‐meat diet.
The ideal Ca:P ratio of a diet is 1:1. Meat and liver have
calcium to phosphorus ratios of 1:20 and 1:50 respec­
tively, and a diet based solely on these components can
lead to clinical signs of FOD within four weeks.
Animals with nutritional hyperparathyroidism most
commonly present with an ill‐defined lameness, disincli­
nation to move, and a failure to thrive. Some animals
may have angular limb deformities. In more severe cases,
pathologic fractures may occur with only mild trauma.
Resorption of alveolar bone in the mandible and maxilla
may lead to loosening of teeth. A few animals may
develop vertebral compression fractures, which in some
cases may lead to neurologic signs. While another term
for fibrous osteodystrophy is rubber jaw, this is usually
only seen in severe prolonged cases, and is more com­
mon in young animals with familial renal disease and
renal secondary hyperparathyroidism, rather than nutri­
tional hyperparathyroidism.
Diagnosis
Biochemistry

Animals with nutritional fibrous osteodystrophy have
low to low‐normal plasma total and ionized calcium
concentrations. The calcium deficiency in the diet
stimulates PTH release, which subsequently leads to
­
osteoclastic resorption of calcium from bone, thereby
maintaining plasma calcium concentration to the detri­
ment of bone mineral content. If the dietary deficiency of
calcium is severe or the amount of calcium released from
the bones is inadequate then the dog or cat will have
hypocalcemia.
The increased PTH concentration leads to increased
excretion of phosphorus from the kidney, and so results
in an increase in the fractional excretion of phosphorus.
Depending on the balance of dietary intake to renal
excretion, plasma phosphorus concentrations may be
low, normal or increased.
Serum alkaline phosphatase concentrations are
increased due to increased bone remodeling but, along
with the phosphorus concentration, need to be inter­
preted with caution as both may be increased in younger
animals due to growth.
Plasma intact PTH concentration will be increased but
there are a number of cautions to be considered when
interpreting plasma PTH concentrations. The first is
­collection of the sample. PTH is highly susceptible to
proteolysis, so serum or plasma should be separated
from red cells immediately (samples should be at room
temperature for less than two hours) and tested directly,
refrigerated for no more than 24 hours or stored frozen
at –20 °C. Samples should be shipped chilled/frozen.

Serum separator tubes should not be used as they lead
to decreased PTH concentrations. In addition, visible
hemolysis of the sample interferes with the assay.
Second, there are several different assays available for
measuring PTH, including radioimmunoassays (RIA/
ERMA) and enzyme immunoassays (EIA/ELISA). In
addition, assays are available for whole PTH (W‐PTH),
intact PTH, N‐terminal fragment of PTH, and C‐terminal
fragment of PTH. PTH undergoes proteolysis in the
liver, blood, and other organs, forming N‐terminal and
C‐terminal fragments. The N‐terminal PTH fragment
cannot bind to the PTH receptor and so does not elicit
the classic response to PTH; it is in fact thought to inhibit
PTH action. N‐terminal PTH fragments are increased in
chronic renal failure.
The W‐PTH assay is a third‐generation PTH assay
that is specific for whole 1‐84 PTH, while the I‐PTH is a
second‐generation assay that, in addition to measuring
1‐84 PTH, also measures large N‐terminal PTH frag­
ments. Human two‐site RIA/IRMAs for I‐PTH have
been validated in both cats and dogs, as has a combined
W‐PTH/I‐PTH assay. Human EIAs may not cross‐react
with canine or feline PTH. Canine‐specific I‐PTH ELISA
assays are also available. Reference ranges are assay spe­
cific and ideally should not be extrapolated from other
types/brands of assay.
The third important point is that ionized calcium, total
calcium, and phosphorus concentrations should be
measured on the same sample as PTH. These analytes
are essential for the interpretation of the plasma PTH
concentration.
Radiography

The predominant change seen on radiography is gener­
alized osteopenia of all bones. It may be most obvious in
those bones with a greater proportion of cancellous bone
which is more readily resorbed, such as the vertebrae.
The mandible may show a marked reduction in bone
density, particularly the alveolar bone around the teeth
(Figure 172.1). There may be evidence of pathologic frac­
tures (see Figure 172.1), such as compression fractures in
the vertebrae and infractions in the long bones. In more
severe cases, there may be complete fracture of the long
bones. The growth plates are normal in animals with
fibrous osteodystrophy, but there may be increased radi­
oopacity in the primary spongiosa directly beneath the
growth plate (see Figure 172.1). The cortices appear
thinner and more porous. The limbs may show angular
deformities, and lordosis of the spine can be present.
New technology such as dual‐energy X‐ray absorpti­
ometry (DEXA/DXA) and computed tomography (CT)
give a more accurate assessment of bone mineral density
than plain radiographs. Bone mineral density must be
decreased by more than 30% before it is detected on

1523

VetBooks.ir

1524

Section 13 Diseases of Bone and Joint

(a)

(b)

­remodeling process, the poor‐quality woven bone and
fibrous tissue laid down will be replaced with well‐­
mineralized trabeculae and the bones will return to
­ ormal strength.
n

­Rickets and Osteomalacia
Rickets is a disease of young animals and is due to a
­failure of mineralization of osteoid and cartilage at the
provisional zone of calcification in the growth plate.
Osteomalacia is essentially the same condition but in
adult animals. Since adult animals do not have growth
plates, in osteomalacia only new osteoid laid down
during the normal remodeling process is poorly
­
­mineralized. Both conditions are rare in dogs and cats.
Etiology/Pathophysiology
Figure 172.1 Radiograph from 12‐week‐old greyhound puppy
with fibrous osteodystrophy. (a) Tibia/fibula showing osteopenia,
with normal growth plate width, sclerosis of the metaphysis
beneath the physis, and a folding fracture. (b) Mandible showing
loss of alveolar bone surrounding the teeth. Source: Courtesy of
K.G. Thompson.

plain radiographs. DEXA and CT may be useful for
­monitoring the success of treatment. In one study, bone
mineral density, as measured by both DEXA and CT,
showed substantial improvement once the diet had
been corrected.
Therapy
Animals with nutritional FOD should be fed a commer­
cial balanced diet with the recommended 1:1 ratio of
Ca:P. Affected animals may also benefit from receiving
additional calcium, enough to raise the total Ca:P ratio of
the diet to 2:1. The additional calcium may be in lactate,
carbonate or gluconate forms and should be continued
for two months, after which time the animal can be
maintained on a commercial balanced diet. Animals
with microfractures or infractions may require pain
relief. An important component of treatment is confin­
ing affected animals for the first 3–4 weeks of treatment
in order to decrease the risk of further pathologic
fractures.
Prognosis
With correction of the diet, and provided catastrophic
fracture does not occur, the prognosis for a return to
normality is excellent. With time and the normal

Rickets and osteomalacia are due to either dietary vita­
min D deficiency or phosphorus deficiency. Phosphorus
deficiency is very rare in dogs and cats, and as described
in the FOD section, phosphorus excess is far more
common.
Dogs and cats are unusual in mammalian species in that
they do not appear to produce vitamin D in the skin under
the influence of ultraviolet light. In most animals, ultravio­
let B light results in the conversion of 7‐dehydrocholes­
terol, in keratinocytes and the dermis, to previtamin D3
which then undergoes thermal isomerization to vitamin
D3. However, cats and dogs have been shown to have only
10% of the 7‐dehydrocholesterol in their skin that rats do,
and cat skin contains a 7‐dehydrocholesterol‐delta7‐
reductase which breaks down 7‐dehydrocholesterol.
Therefore, irradiation of cat and dog skin with ultraviolet
light does not cause an increase in plasma vitamin D
­concentration. Cats and dogs are, for that reason, reliant
on their diet for their vitamin D requirements. However,
there are few reports of naturally occurring rickets in dogs
and cats in the literature, likely due to the widespread
feeding of commercial pet food. In addition, the most
common inappropriate diet fed to puppies and kittens is
meat and offal, which contain high levels of phosphorus
and adequate vitamin D.
Vitamin D deficiency leads to decreased absorption
of calcium and phosphorus from the intestine and
decreased reabsorption of calcium and phosphorus
from the kidney, leading to hypocalcemia and
hypophosphatemia. Animals that have rickets due to
vitamin D deficiency will often have concurrent FOD
due to hypocalcemia. Decreased plasma ionized cal­
cium concentration leads to increased PTH secretion
and therefore increased osteoclastic resorption of bone
and FOD.

VetBooks.ir

172 Metabolic Bone Diseases

In humans, rickets and osteomalacia are described in
patients with gastrointestinal malabsorption disorders,
due to failure to absorb fat‐soluble vitamins such as
­vitamin D, and reduced absorption of calcium. Rickets
has been described in a 17‐week‐old male border collie
with extrahepatic biliary atresia.
Aluminium toxicity from chronic antacid administra­
tion or long‐term total parenteral nutrition may also
cause rickets and osteomalacia in humans.
Osteomalacia may occur in combination with FOD in
dogs and cats with chronic kidney disase. Hyperphos­
phatemia results in increased plasma FGF23 concentra­
tions, leading to inhibition of the renal 1‐alpha‐hydroxylase
enzyme, causing decreased production of 1,25(OH)2D3.
This combination of osteomalacia and FOD is often
termed renal osteodystrophy. As mentioned earlier,
while bone changes do occur in adult animals with
chronic kidney disease, the changes seldom result in
clinical signs.
Vitamin D also has an important role in the immune
system, and has been associated with many different dis­
eases in both humans and animals. Low serum 25OHD
concentrations in dogs have been associated with
immune‐mediated disorders, various types of cancer,
acute pancreatitis, progression of leishmania, chronic
enteropathy, chronic valvular heart disease, and poor
outcome in congestive heart failure, while in cats, low
serum 25OHD has been associated with inflammatory
bowel disease, intestinal small cell lymphoma, and myco­
bacteriosis. However, care should be taken not to overin­
terpret the role of vitamin D in these diseases. Correlation
is not causation, and randomized clinical trials are
required to determine the significance of vitamin D in
the pathogenesis of different diseases and whether
changes in serum 25OHD are primary or occur second­
ary to the disease.
Signalment
Rickets occurs in young animals and cases of rickets in
the literature have been reported in 10–14‐week‐old pup­
pies and kittens. Nutritional rickets has been reported
most commonly in greyhound litters, presumably because
these animals are more likely to be fed unusual diets.
Rickets is extremely rare in cats, and naturally occur­
ring nutritional rickets has not been reported in the
­literature. However, rickets has been induced experi­
mentally in both cats and dogs fed vitamin D‐deficient
diets.
History and Clinical Signs
As with nutritional FOD, animals with rickets usually
have a history of an unusual postweaning ration. In two

of the reported cases of rickets in the literature, puppies
were fed a diet of milk and meat. Such a diet would likely
meet the calcium and phosphorus requirements for the
animals, but not vitamin D, as the vitamin D concentra­
tion of milk is low.
A case of rickets has occurred in a 10‐week‐old
Shetland sheepdog on a commercial renal failure diet.
Such diets are designed to be low in phosphorus and
­protein in order to alleviate some of the clinical and bio­
chemical changes associated with the disease. However,
the level of phosphorus in the diet fed to this young
dog was inadequate for a growing animal, leading to
phosphorus deficiency and rickets. Similarly, osteomala­
cia has been reported in an adult dog with food allergies
fed an unbalanced elimination ration.
Affected animals present with lameness, reluctance to
walk, and a failure to grow and gain weight. Animals may
have angular limb deformities, particularly affecting the
forelimbs. Rickets most commonly affects rapidly grow­
ing physes, such as the distal radius, proximal tibia, distal
femur, and proximal humerus. The metaphyses of long
bones, particularly the distal radius, may be swollen.
Animals may have swollen costochondral junctions,
known as the rachitic rosary. Affected animals may have
pathologic fractures, and delayed eruption of teeth and
enamel hypoplasia may also be seen. In animals with
severe hypocalcemia, seizures may be the presenting
clinical sign.
Osteomalacia is reported rarely in dogs, and this may
partly be due to the subtlety of the clinical signs. The
most common clinical sign of osteomalacia in humans is
bone pain, and in older dogs this may easily be mistaken
as reluctance to move due to chronic degenerative joint
disease and not investigated further.
Diagnosis
Biochemistry

Animals with rickets due to vitamin D deficiency will
have decreased or low normal serum calcium concentra­
tion, hypophosphatemia, increased serum alkaline
­phosphatase activity, and increased plasma PTH concen­
tration. Serum vitamin D concentrations depend on the
inciting cause of the rickets. In vitamin D deficiency
­rickets, usually both serum 25OHD and 1,25(OH)2D3
concentrations are decreased. However, confusingly in
some cases, the increase in PTH as a result of hypocalce­
mia leads to increased activity of the renal 1‐alpha‐
hydroxylase and normal to increased serum 1,25(OH)2D3
concentrations. Despite this, low serum 25OHD indi­
cates there is insufficient vitamin D being obtained
from the diet.
In phosphorus deficiency rickets, animals have severe
hypophosphatemia but serum calcium and 25OHD

1525

VetBooks.ir

1526

Section 13 Diseases of Bone and Joint

­concentrations are normal. Serum 1,25(OH)2D3 concen­
trations may be normal to increased.
Radiography

The key radiographic change seen in animals with rick­
ets is widening and increased lucency of the long bones
physes (Figure 172.2). A 10‐point radiographic scoring
method for rickets based on the severity of radiographic
changes in the wrists and knees, to produce a score indi­
cating the severity of nutritional rickets, has been devel­
oped for human patients. The key features of this scoring
system include widening of the growth plate, irregularity
of the physeal–metaphyseal interface, and concavity or
cupping of the metaphysis. Other radiographic changes
may include swollen costochondral junctions, infrac­
tions and other pathologic fractures, delayed appearance
of ossification centers, curving of long bones, metaphy­
seal sclerosis, and generalized osteopenia. Stress frac­
tures and decreased bone density are seen radiographically
in osteomalacia. In humans, the presence of Looser
zones is considered consistent with osteomalacia; these
are radiolucent areas surrounded by a zone of sclerosis in
the cortex.

Radiography can only give a qualitative indication of
bone mineral density (BMD). DEXA or quantitative CT
is required for a quantitative measurement of BMD.
These techniques are also more sensitive in detecting
mild to moderate decreases in BMD, and would be useful
for monitoring response to treatment.
Therapy
Animals with nutritional rickets should be placed on a
commercial balanced diet with the recommended 1:1
Ca:P ratio and adequate levels of vitamin D. This may be
supplemented with additional calcium, phosphorus, and
vitamin D as required. Care must be taken with vitamin
D administration, as vitamin D is toxic at high doses,
leading to widespread soft tissue mineralization, so regu­
lar monitoring of serum calcium and phosphorus con­
centrations is recommended. A recent study found that
treatment with 25OHD increased serum 25OHD faster
than cholecalciferol (vitamin D) treatment, although
sample numbers were small and a safe dosage was not
determined. Other vitamin D metabolite options
include dihydrotachysterol, calcitriol (1,25(OH)2D3), and
alfacalcidol.
Vitamin D2 or ergocalciferol may be used but large
doses are required initially, and its long half‐life means
that if an animal becomes hypercalcemic it takes up to
four weeks for the effects of ergocholecalciferol to wane.
Therefore, it is not considered an ideal treatment for
rickets in dogs and cats.
Dogs and cats with rickets will benefit from 3–4 weeks
of confinement in order to prevent further stress and
microfractures. Pain relief for those with microfractures
may be helpful.
Prognosis
The prognosis for dogs and cats with nutritional rickets
for return to normality is good, providing catastrophic
fracture does not occur and the predisposing reason
(such as malabsorption, total parenteral nutrition) is
removed. Once the poorly mineralized bone laid down
during the period of dietary deficiency is replaced
­during remodeling, the bones will return to normal
strength.

Figure 172.2 Radiographs of the carpus from a 5‐month‐old
Pomeranian with hereditary vitamin D‐resistant rickets. There is
substantial widening of the radial and ulnar physes, irregularity of
the physeal–metaphyseal interface and cupping of the
metaphyses. The metaphyseal‐epiphyseal bone of the radius and
ulna is flared. Source: Reproduced with permission from LeVine
DN, Zhou Y, Ghiloni R, et al. Hereditary 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin
D‐resistant rickets in a Pomeranian dog caused by a novel
mutation in the vitamin D receptor gene. J Vet Intern Med 2009;
23: 1278–83.

Inherited Rickets
Inherited forms of rickets resulting from inborn errors in
metabolism have been diagnosed in both cats and dogs.
There is confusion in the literature with regard to articles
on inherited rickets; a number of reported cases are
more consistent with a diagnosis of nutritional FOD
than inherited rickets. Care should be taken in making a

VetBooks.ir

172 Metabolic Bone Diseases

diagnosis of inherited rickets, and the diagnosis should
be confirmed with genetic testing.
There are three main groups of inherited rickets.
Vitamin D‐Dependent Rickets Type I

An autosomal recessive disorder caused by a mutation in
the CYP27B1 (1‐alpha‐hydroxylase) gene that catalyzes
the conversion of 25OHD to 1,25(OH)2D3. Affected ani­
mals have clinical signs of rickets, hypocalcemia,
hypophosphatemia, very high serum 25OHD concentra­
tions, and low serum 1,25(OH)2D3 concentrations. One
unconfirmed case has been reported in a St Bernard dog,
and a number of cases reported in cats; however, only
two have reported causative mutations in the CYP27B1
gene. Long‐term treatment with 1,25(OH)2D3 (calcitriol)
is successful.
Hereditary Vitamin D‐Resistant Rickets (Vitamin
D‐Dependent Rickets Type II)

An autosomal recessive disorder caused by a mutation in
the vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene. In order to produce
its calcemic effects, 1,25(OH)2D3 must bind to the VDR‐
retinoid X receptor which then binds to vitamin D
response elements in the promoter region of the vitamin
D‐responsive gene. Animals with mutations in the VDR
are severely hypocalcemic and hypophosphatemic and
have serum 1,25(OH)2D3 concentrations 5–20 times
greater than normal. Approximately 70–80% of human
cases also have partial to total alopecia that may be obvi­
ous at birth or develop over the first few months of life.
Confirmed cases have been diagnosed in a Pomeranian
dog (see Figure 172.2) and a cat. A small number of
human patients have been successfully treated with large
doses of 1,25(OH)2D3, but for most patients vitamin D
treatment is not successful. Long‐term intravenous cal­
cium infusion has been the most successful treatment
option for patients that did not respond to high doses of
1,25(OH)2D3.
Hypophosphatemic Rickets

This form may have X‐linked, autosomal dominant or
autosomal recessive inheritance. Mutations have been
found in the FGF23, dentin matrix protein 1 (DMP1),
and ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase
1 (ENPP1) genes. Whichever gene is affected, the patho­
genesis behind the disease involves increased plasma
FGF23 concentration resulting in renal wasting of
­phosphate and severe hypophosphatemia, normal serum
calcium concentration, and low to low‐normal
serum 1,25(OH)2D3 concentration. This form of rickets
has not been described as yet in dogs or cats, but the
description of one case in a cat from the 1990s appears
clinically similar to an inherited phosphate wasting
disorder.

Tumor‐induced osteomalacia (TIO) is a disease with a
similar phenotype to inherited forms of hypophos­
phatemic rickets and occurs due to paraneoplastic pro­
duction of FGF23 by a tumor. TIO occurs in humans
with tumors known as phosphaturic mesenchymal
tumor, mixed connective tissue variant (PMT‐MCT),
which have many similarities to soft tissue sarcomas of
dogs. One study found that three of 49 soft tissue sarco­
mas from dogs had high relative expression of FGF23,
although no animals had clinical signs consistent with
osteomalacia.

­Osteoporosis
Osteoporosis is the result of an imbalance between bone
resorption and bone formation. In contrast to fibrous
osteodystrophy and rickets, the quality of the bone that
is formed is normal; there is just less of it. Although the
studies done on ovariectomized dogs have generally
been poorly controlled for diet, age and other variables,
it seems that unless dietary calcium is restricted,
­neutered dogs do not develop the postmenopausal oste­
oporosis that occurs in women. Potential causes of
­osteoporosis in dogs and cats include the following.
Senile osteoporosis – general decline in bone mineral
content with age, as osteoclastic resorption slowly
outstrips bone formation during normal bone
­
­remodeling. Generally, this decline is not clinically
significant.
●● Disuse osteoporosis – lack of weight bearing due to
immobilization or paralysis results in rapid loss of
BMD in the immobilized limb and increased BMD in
the contralateral limb. This effect is reversible once
weight bearing resumes, particularly in young animals.
●● Inflammatory bowel disease and malabsorption –
likely due to a combination of reduced absorption of
vitamin D and calcium, with increased inflammatory
cytokines such as IL‐6 leading to increased osteoclas­
tic bone resorption.
●● Corticosteroid‐induced – glucocorticoids decrease cal­
cium absorption from the intestinal tract, increase cal­
cium excretion from the kidney, decrease osteoblast
activity and increase bone resorption, all of which may
lead to osteoporosis. A study in beagles with hyper­
adrenocorticism found that bone trabecular volume was
decreased by 25% due to decreased bone formation.
●● Hyperthyroidism – increased thyroid hormone con­
centrations lead to increased osteoblastic bone
­formation and increased osteoclastic bone resorption;
however, the rate of bone resorption is greater
than bone formation, resulting in osteoporosis.
Pharmacologic doses of thyroxine administered to
●●

1527

VetBooks.ir

1528

Section 13 Diseases of Bone and Joint

dogs led to increased bone remodeling. While markers
of bone formation (alkaline phosphatase and osteocal­
cin) may be increased in cats with hyperthyroidism,
definitive data on the effect of thyrotoxicosis on bone
are lacking.
●● Drugs – in humans, ciclosporin and phenobarbital
have been associated with osteoporosis.

Osteoporosis is rarely diagnosed in cats and dogs, in part
possibly due to not considering it as a differential diag­
nosis for lameness or bone pain, and the insensitivity of
radiography for its diagnosis. The future use of improved
diagnostic testing such as DEXA and CT may reveal that
osteoporosis is more common in these ­species than is
currently thought.

­Further Reading
Craig LE, Dittmer KE, Thompson KG. Bones and joints.
In: Grant Maxie M, ed. Jubb, Kennedy and Palmer’s
Pathology of Domestic Animals, 6th edn. St Louis, MO:
Elsevier, 2016, pp. 160–63.
Dittmer KE, Thompson KG. Vitamin D metabolism
and rickets in domestic animals: a review. Vet Pathol
2011; 48: 389–407.
Hardcastle MR, Dittmer KE. Fibroblast growth factor 23:
a new dimension to diseases of calcium‐phosphorus
metabolism. Vet Pathol 2015; 52: 770–84.

Jones B, Mooney CT. Drugs used in the management of
thyroid and parathyroid disease. In: Maddison J, Page S,
Church D, eds. Small Animal Clinical Pharmacology,
2nd edn. Edinburgh: WB Saunders, 2008, pp. 498–508.
Mellanby RJ. Beyond the skeleton: the role of vitamin D
in companion animal health. J Small Anim Pract
2016; 57: 175–80.
Segev G, Meltzer H, Shipov A. Does secondary renal
osteopathy exist in companion animals? Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 2016; 46: 1151–62.

VetBooks.ir

1529

173
Osteoarthritis in Small Animals
Steven A. Martinez, DVM, MS, DACVS, DACVSMR
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA

Osteoarthritis (OA, syn. osteoarthrosis, degenerative
joint disease, DJD) is a syndrome that affects synovial or
diarthrodial joints and may manifest its presence by
causing pain in association with degeneration of articular cartilage (loss of extracellular cell matrix and chondrocytes, inflammatory response of synovium, and
critical changes in proteoglycan ratios within matrix and
synovial fluid) and changes in periarticular soft tissues.
Since typically a low‐grade inflammatory process is associated with the development and maintenance of the
degenerative process of articular cartilage, the underlying subchondral bone response (e.g., sclerosis), intra‐
and periarticular response (e.g., synovial hypertrophy,
periarticular fibrosis), the term osteoarthritis describes
the disease process of the diarthrodial joint better than
the older term degenerative joint disease. Typically, OA is
an insidiously progressive, degenerative condition that
targets high‐motion synovial joints. Osteoarthritis can
occur in two forms: primary and secondary, with secondary OA being the more common form presenting
clinically in veterinary medicine.

­Etiology/Pathophysiology
Primary OA is considered a “wear and tear” phenomenon of joint degeneration occurring in older patients.
Although primary OA may be more common in cats
than previously appreciated, it appears to be rare in dogs
compared to clinical presentations for secondary OA
issues. Causes of this form of OA in humans have been
linked to obesity, the hormone leptin, and the development of OA. The target or targeted effected tissues that
initiate the development of primary OA are unknown
but could involve the initial degeneration of the sub-

chondral bone resulting in secondary degeneration of
articular cartilage, primary degeneration of articular cartilage, the synovium, or another tissue or combination of
degeneration of tissues yet to be determined.
Secondary OA is due to an underlying or secondary
cause for the development of the disease. Joint instability,
direct joint trauma, infection, toxins, immune‐­mediated
disease, and developmental/congenital disease are some
of the known etiologies for the development of secondary OA and others may include infectious (e.g., septic
arthritis) or noninfectious (e.g., immune mediated,
trauma, developmental/congenital) environment development within the joint. The hyaline cartilage matrix
(type 2 collagen, proteoglycan molecules and chondrocytes) is directly damaged which results in chondrocyte
death. Synoviocytes are then stimulated to produce myriad cytokins and inflammatory mediators (e.g., interleukins, inducible encosinoids, nitrous oxide, tumor necrosis
factor‐alpha, etc.). These synoviocyte‐based products
then in turn stimulate surviving chondrocytes to produce many of the same cytokines and inflammatory
mediators which result in the production of chondrocyte‐based matrix metalloproteinases which catalytically
digest more cartilage matrix (increased aggrecans content of matrix and synovial fluid drawing more water into
matrix and synovium) and reduces the matrix’s ability to
biomechanically manage normal load and shear forces at
the cartilage surface (resulting in more matrix loss and
debris as well as fracturing of the supporting subchondral bone deep to the cartilage matrix). In addition, the
chondrocyte‐based cytokines and inflammatory mediators directly result in chondrocyte apoptosis. The cartilage matrix is now in a continuous metabolic state of
catabolism which will drive the progression of osteoarthritis in the affected joint (Figure 173.1).

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

Section 13 Diseases of Bone and Joint

VetBooks.ir

1530

Synovium

Cartilage
breakdown
products
PA/Plasmin
Latent MMPs
Cartilage

–

IL-1
NO
PGE2

Active
MMPs

TNF-α

Aggrecanases

TIMPs
PA inhibitor

IL-1
NO

MMP-13

IL-8

Mechanical
forces
Type X
collagen

? TGF-β
BMP-2
Apoptosis

Bone

Osteophyte

Figure 173.1 Molecular pathogenesis of osteoarthritis. Development and propagation of osteoarthritis with disruption of the cartilage
matrix, stimulation of synoviocytes to produce inflammatory mediators and cytokines, stimulation of chondrocytes to produce
inflammatory meditators, cytokines, and enzymes (matrix metalloproteinases) that result in apoptosis and matrix loss, all perpetuating
the progression of osteoarthritis. IL‐1, interleukin‐1; IL‐8, interleukin‐8; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; NO, nitrous oxide; PA, plasminogen
activator; PGE2, prostaglandin E2; TGF, transforming growth factor; TIMP, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase; TNF‐alpha, tumor necrosis
factor‐alpha. Source: (www.med.nyu.edu). Reproduced with permission of Steven Abramson, MD.

Micro‐ and macroscopic changes within the synovial
joint may result in the clinical signs of lameness due to
joint pain (synovitis, microfractures of subchondral bone,
osteophytes, and joint effusion/distension) (Figure 173.2).

­Epidemiology
The radiographic incidence of OA in referral hospital‐
based cats is estimated at 26–82% depending on age
(older cats, greater incidence). In dogs, OA has been estimated to clinically affect 20% of the dog population in
the United States.
Figure 173.2 Photomicrograph of osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis
cartilages: note the presence of fibrillation, fissuring, cloning
chondrocytes, loss of staining due to loss of proteoglycans in the
matrix, and fracture of subchondral bone. Source: Image courtesy
of Dr Steven Arnoczky.

­Signalment
Primary OA typically occurs in older males or female
cats with a higher incidence with older age. As previously

VetBooks.ir

173 Osteoarthritis in Small Animals

stated, primary OA appears to be relatively uncommon
in dogs but would also be hypothesized to occur in
older dogs.
Secondary OA can occur in any breed or sex of dog at
any age. Certain juvenile skeletal developmental diseases
(e.g., elbow dysplasia, hip dysplasia, osteochondritis
­dissecans. etc.) that result in secondary OA have the propensity to clinical affect dogs between the ages of 5 and
11 months. Skeletally mature dogs of either sex (>1 year
of age) may on occasion present with clinical signs of OA
due to juvenile skeletal developmental diseases. Many of
the juvenile skeletal developmental diseases that affect
joints are breed specific or may be breed nonspecific.
Osteoarthritis secondary to etiologies other than juvenile skeletal developmental diseases can occur with any
sex and any age of dogs. Cranial cruciate ligament rupture continues to be a common cause of OA in mature
dogs. With the exception of hip dysplasia, secondary OA
is usually recognized in cats of any sex, breed, or age
­following joint trauma such as articular fractures.

­History and Clinical Signs
The clinical history of most canine OA patients will
commonly be a noted lameness of the affected limb following activity. Typically, the lameness will worsen with
progressive activity. Hip dysplasia patients have a different gait history from other causes of OA which centers
on the appearance of stiffness to rise and then sudden
halting of activity (e.g., “sitting down”) rather than
increasing lameness. Owners may also note a classic
“bunny hopping” gait in a hip dysplasia patient when
running. With any form of OA, owners may also note
pain on flexion, extension, and/or with other manipulation of the affected joint.
The clinical history of most feline OA patients will
center on behavior/activity changes; more fractious or
more subdued with owner or other animal interactions
and less active than noted previously (sitting/crouching
for long periods of time).
The clinical signs associated with OA vary from patient
to patient and may range from subclinical to a severe
functional disability. The following clinical findings are
typical of patients with OA.
Gait Assessment
Reduced weight bearing of affected limb
Shorten stride length of contralateral normal limb
●● Audible clicking or “clunking” during gait
●● Pelvic swings enhanced to the contralateral side of the
affected pelvic limb
●● Head dorsiflexed on affected thoracic limb side
●● Narrowed pelvic limb stance
●●
●●

Physical Exam Findings
Asymmetric or symmetric muscle atrophy
Asymmetric or symmetric joint thickening/joint effusion/heat
●● External rotation of pelvic limb or thoracic limb
●● Decreased joint range of motion (flexion and/or
extension)
●● Crepitus during joint motion
●● Pain/discomfort on one or more aspects of joint
manipulation (flexion, extension, abduction, a­ dduction,
internal or external rotation)
●●
●●

­Diagnosis
Diagnostics are initially directed towards orthogonal
view radiographs of the affected joint and should include
the contralateral joint for comparative assessment.
Radiographic features indicative of OA include osteophytes, effusion, subchondral bone sclerosis with or
without lucencies or erosive patterns (Figure 173.3).
Other nonimaging modalities can be used for more
detailed joint evaluation, including computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging . These
modalities may be beneficial if radiographic findings
are minimal or equivocal for radiographic features to
support a diagnosis of OA.
Arthrocentesis with synovial fluid cytology and fluid
analysis may be beneficial to confirm the diagnosis of OA or
to rule out other forms of joint disease, including immune‐
mediated arthropathies, septic arthritis, or neoplasia.
Typical secondary OA cytologic findings in dogs are 1000–
5000 nucleated cells/mm3, 88–100% mononuclear cells,
and 0–12% n
­ eutrophils. Viscosity may be normal to low.
If indicated (and rarely required beyond radiographic
diagnostics), minimally invasive diagnostics in dogs can
also be performed with arthroscopy. Direct macroscopic
visualization of the articular cartilage for evidence
of fibrillation, erosions, the presence of osteophytes,
and examination of the synovium for hypertrophy and
inflammation can provide a definitive diagnosis of OA
in a patient (Figure 173.4). Usually, arthroscopy can
­provide the etiology for the secondary OA as well (e.g.
ostochondritis dissecans (OCD), fragmented medial
coronoid disease, medical compartment disease of the
elbow, cranial cruciate ligament disease, etc.).

­Therapy
Management strategies for clinical OA patients are
focused on the fact that OA progression cannot be halted
or reversed. Fundamentally, no one treatment will be all‐
encompassing for all patients with OA. An individualized

1531

VetBooks.ir

1532

Section 13 Diseases of Bone and Joint

(a)

Figure 173.3 (a) Radiographic appearance of
osteoarthritis. Two‐year‐old female‐spayed
Labrador retriever with chronic elbow dysplasia
(mediolateral projection of the left elbow).
Note osteophyte development (black
arrowheads) and marked subchondral bone
sclerosis of the ulna. (b) Eleven‐month‐old
male‐castrated Labrador retriever with elbow
dysplasia due to an OCD lesion of the medial
side of the humeral condyle. Note osteophyte
development on the medial side of the
coronoid process of the ulna (white arrow) and
the subchondral bone lucency on the medial
side of the humeral condyle (black arrow).

(b)

(a)

(b)

Figure 173.4 (a) Arthroscopic appearance of osteoarthritis. Four‐year‐old female‐spayed Rottweiler with cranial cruciate ligament rupture
of the right stifle. Note osteophyte development on the lateral aspect of the trochlear ridge of the right femur (black arrows) and synovitis
(white arrow). (b) Twelve‐month‐old female‐spayed Labrador retriever with elbow dysplasia. Note articular cartilage fibrillation (black arrow),
erosions (white arrow), and ebernation (black star) on the humeral condyle and ebernation on the anconeal process of the ulna (white star).

approach must be taken to successfully treat OA patients.
Current treatment strategies used to treat OA patients
are multimodal medical management, surgery or, more
commonly, the integration of both treatment modalities.
A multimodal management “pyramid” with three
major components – weight control, exercise modification, and pharmaceuticals/nonpharmaceuticals – must
be considered when nonsurgically managing a patient

with OA (Figure 173.5). Exclusion of one or more of
these components from a treatment protocol will result
in an overall poorer clinical response from the patient.
Weight Control
Obesity is a major risk factor for the development of OA
in people and weight loss can reduce the symptomatic

VetBooks.ir

173 Osteoarthritis in Small Animals

Rx/N-Rx
Exercise
Modification

Weight Control

Figure 173.5 Multimodal approach to treating osteoarthritis.
Three basic components of the multimodal strategy for the
management of the clinical signs of osteoarthritis. The size of the
area of each component within the pyramid reflects the
importance of that component for successful management of
the patient.

effects of OA. Recently, research shows the same is true
for other animals. A clinical study investigating the
effects of obesity in dogs with hip dysplasia concluded
that overweight dogs that achieved an 11–18% body
weight reduction were significantly less lame ­compared
to their preweight reduction lameness scores.
Weight control can be one of the most challenging
aspects of the medical management of OA in dogs for
several reasons.
A patient that is clinically inhibited by moving an OA
joint(s) will not be able to utilize consumed or stored
body energy efficiently and will instead increase body
stores of energy (fat) when given a constant caloric
intake.
●● Dogs with underlying endocrine disease (e.g., hyperadrenocorticism, hypothyroidism) will have the metabolic propensity to maintain body fat stores even in the
face of a reducing diet.
●● Dogs in a multipet household (e.g., other dogs and
cats) are more prone to consume greater volumes of
food than dogs in single‐pet households.
●● An inaccurate estimation of the animal’s ideal body
weight.
●● An inaccurate estimation of the animal’s energy
requirements.
●● The owner’s lack of willingness to be proactive in
­trying to reduce their pet’s body weight.
●●

Any one or a combination of the above factors will
­maintain the obese patient indefinitely.
Prior to starting a weight‐reducing program, a complete physical exam should be performed. The clinical
history (attempted weight reduction in the past with poor
results, lethargy, “heat seeking,” polyuria/polydipsia,
etc.) and physical exam findings (pendulous abdomen,
­symmetric alopecia, recurrent dermatopathy, etc.) may

warrant a complete minimum database (complete blood
count [CBC], serum chemistry profile, urinalysis [UA])
to rule out metabolic disease or endocrinopathies.
Weight reduction can be obtained in healthy patients
by four methods.
Reducing current caloric intakes, using reductions by
33–50% of the “normal” volume of the regular diet.
●● Calculating caloric content of regular diet and caloric
needs based on basal metabolic rates.
●● Using specially formulated commercial diets with
­recommended intake volumes per the manufacturer.
●● Pharmacologic management (e.g., dilotapide).
●●

Appropriate caloric restriction should result in the loss
of 1–2% of body weight per week.
All weight reduction/control programs must include
an exercise element to ensure constant weight loss and
eventual body weight maintenance. To encourage activity in the debilitated OA patient, regular pharmacologic
treatment may be required for a short period until the
patient becomes more ambulatory and physiologically
acclimated to the new level of physical activity.
Exercise and Activity Modification
Exercise is very important in people for maintaining
strength, stamina, and joint range of motion; there is also
less dependency on medication when OA patients are
allowed to exercise. It is assumed that the same is true in
other animals as well and this is supported by a study in
hamsters. Therefore, an important aspect in the management of OA in animals should be controlled exercise.
Depending on the animal’s activity history, it may be
necessary to modify a patient’s regular level and type of
activity.
It may seem intuitive that an OA animal should not be
allowed to have hard‐impact, prolonged exercise activity,
but controlled clinical studies have not been performed
to evaluate this recommendation. However, from clinical
experience, practitioners are used to hearing the usual
owner’s report of greater clinical signs in OA patients
after hard, prolonged activity. It is known from kinetic
and kinematic gait analysis that dogs with OA will modify
their gait to reduce the load of weight bearing and motion
of the affected joint. It is therefore safe to assume that
prolonged “overactivity” should result in greater modification of gait due to exacerbation of the discomfort associated with an OA joint. Some recommendations for the
duration of certain activities in dogs have been made but
recommendations for activity duration can also be based
on common sense and owner observations of their pet’s
apparent gait response/comfort level to an activity period.
Just as important as duration of activity is the type
of activity undertaken in the animal’s daily lifestyle.

1533

VetBooks.ir

1534

Section 13 Diseases of Bone and Joint

Low‐impact activities (e.g., walking, cycling) have positive effects on human OA patients. In veterinary medicine, low‐impact activities (walking, swimming) have
been traditionally favored over hard‐impact aerobic
activities (jumping, hard starting/running, vigorous
climbing/running on irregular terrain) which can overstress degenerative joints. High‐impact activities may
overstress OA joints and increase the inflammatory
­condition of OA. Low‐impact activities are thought to
reduce loads on an OA joint and result in less discomfort
for the patient in maintaining good muscle strength/
mass and joint function. Walking under controlled
­conditions (leash restraint) and/or swimming can be recommended to the owner with further instructions to
eventually attempt to have the patient increase the duration of these activities gradually so long as the animal
appears to remain comfortable in doing so. To strengthen
the active stabilizers (muscles and tendons) and to
improve the range of motion of joints in OA patients,
several physical rehabilitation modalities such as passive
and active range of motion exercises, message, deep
ultrasound heat applications, and laser therapy can be
administered by certified small animal physical rehabilitation technicians and specialists. In many OA cases, the
adjunct use of physical rehabilitation can help improve
patient comfort and function with very good to excellent
clinical results.
Pharmacologic/Nonpharmacologic OA Agents
The primary goal in the pharmacologic management of
OA is to relieve the patient of discomfort associated
with joint movement. Ideally, this would involve oral or
injectable agents with analgesic, antiinflammatory,
and potential chondromodulating properties (disease‐
modifying OA agents, DMOA). Such agents would ideally biochemically block the inducible cyclooxegenase‐2
(COX‐2) and lipoxygenase pathways. Several FDA‐
approved “COX‐selective” nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have been developed for this
purpose (e.g., carprofen, meloxicam, firocoxib, etc.).
Robenaxocib is currently the only approved NSAID
for cats in the United States. Grapiprant, a newer class of
prostaglandin receptor antagonist; a non-COX pathway
inhibitor for the treatment of the clinical signs of OA,
has been developed with the intent to reduce the potential of adverse events of GI. renal, and liver disease seen
in the small percentages of patients administered select
and non-select COX-2 inhibitors. Grapiprant is specific
to the blockage of Prostaglandin E2 receptor 4 (EP4); a
primary mediator of OA-based pain and inflammation.
Although touted as a "non-NSAID" anti-inflammatory
and analgesic drug, OA patients administered grapiprant

can have the risk to develop adverse events that include
GI disease (emesis, diarrhea, and anorexia), and subclinical hyperalkaline phosphatemia and hypoproteinemia.
All COX‐selective (and nonselective) NSAIDs have
toxicity potential. Hepatic toxicosis due to NSAID
administration has been reported; however, all NSAIDs
have a toxicity potential especially if a patient has underlying hepatic or renal disease, or thrombocytopathy.
Several in vivo studies using chondrocyte cell cultures or
cartilage explants have reported a decrease in proteoglycan synthesis in those tissues incubated with selected
NSAIDs. It would appear to be a wiser clinical practice to
administer NSAIDs on a PRN basis, especially for the
patient that has only intermittent discomfort due to
osteoarthritis.
Disease‐modifying osteoarthritis agents have recently
been developed for the treatment of human and veterinary OA patients. These agents have become commonplace in the treatment of OA despite the lack of definitive
scientific studies confirming their efficacy. Most of these
products contain mixtures of glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate, which supposedly enhance cartilage health
by providing the necessary precursors to maintain and
repair cartilage. Glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate
reportedly have a positive effect on cartilage matrix by
enhancing proteoglycan production and inhibiting catabolic enzyme production or activity in OA joints. These
properties have contributed to the labeling of these
agents as “chondroprotective.” With the exception of one
product which is a true pharmaceutical by definition
(Adequan®, Luitpold Pharmaceuticals, FDA approved in
horses and dogs), these agents are marketed as oral nutritional supplements (“nutricueticals”) and not “drugs”
and as such, the FDA does not require the manufacturer
to provide efficacy data for their product. Bioavailability
of orally ingested forms of glucosamine and chondroitin
sulfate is 87% and 70% in humans and experimental animals, respectively. Limited investigations have been performed on the in vitro and in vivo activity of glucosamine
and chondroitin sulfate separately, but products containing both agents have become popular for treating OA
symptoms in humans and other animals. Synergism with
glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate has recently been
demonstrated histologically and with in vivo biochemical
analysis in a rabbit OA model.
Glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate are two regular
nutricuetical combinations used in many dietary supplenets for dogs and cats. Examples of these formulations are Cosequin® and Dasuquin® (similar to Cosequin®
but with the additions of with avocado/soybean
unsaponifiables and methylsulfonylmethane (MSM)
­
(Nutramax) and Glycoflex® (Vetri‐Science Laboratories).
Although clinically noted not to have predictable

VetBooks.ir

173 Osteoarthritis in Small Animals

­efficacy in all dogs, this combination of a precursor glycosaminoglycan and a glycosaminoglycan appears to
have a prophylactic effect on the development of OA in
dogs. Dogs undergoing a Pond‐Nuki model for the
development of OA with or without stifle stabilization
that were administered Cosequin for five months following surgery subjectively had less OA and less periarticular fibrosis than dogs not receiving Cosequin.
Chymopapain‐ induced acute carpal synovitis was
­significantly attenuated based on nuclear scintigraphy
and lameness evaluation when dogs were pretreated
with glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate (Cosequin).
Current research suggests that glucosamine and
chondroitin sulfate products may be prophylactically
­
beneficial in patients that are prone to develop OA (e.g.,
canine hip dysplasia [CHD], elbow dysplasia, OCD, cranial cruciate ligament injury, etc.) or patients that may
aggravate preexisting OA with activity. Further controlled clinical studies are still w
­ arranted to support
these statements.
Injectable forms of DMOA available include Adequan,
which is a polysulfated glycosaminoglycan (PSGAG)
product, and hyaluronic acid (HA), a nonsulfated GAG.
The US (Adequan) and European products (Arteparon®)
have been used in horses and dogs. Although conflicting
evidence exists that PSGAGs have a positive anabolic
effect on hyaline cartilage, studies have shown that
PSGAG may decrease hyaline cartilage catabolism. In one
study, immature dogs prone to hip dysplasia administered
Adequan developed better hip ­conformation than dogs
that were not treated with Adequan. A clinical study
investigating the use of PSGAG on hip dysplasia patients
found no significant difference in orthopedic scores
(lameness, range of motion, pain on manipulation of hip
joints) compared to PSGAG nontreated dogs. In a meniscectomy model in dogs, PSGAG provided partial protection to articular cartilage damage associated with the
meniscectomy. PSGAG has been reported to have chondroprotective properties in joints with a chemically
induced articular cartilage damage model versus no effect
on a physical articular cartilage damage model in horses.
Anecdotal reports have appeared indicating that there
may be a positive synergism between injectable PSGAG
and oral glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate when
administered concurrently to a patient.
Hyaluronic acid (sodium hyaluronate, HA) is a major
component of synovial fluid. HA acid is postulated to
enhance joint health by increasing the viscosity of the
joint fluid and reducing inflammation and scavenging
free radicals. A study using a Pond‐Nuki model for OA in
dogs followed by intraarticular injections of HA did not
modify OA and reduced overall proteoglycan concentrations in treated stifles.

Other products reported that have disease‐modifying,
anti‐OA potential include pentosan polysulfate, tetracyclines (doxycycline, minocycline, and modifications of
these molecules), methylsulfonylmethane (MSM), capsaicin, and fatty acid ratio manipulation (omega‐6:omega‐3).
S‐adenosyl‐L‐methionine (SAMe) has objectively not
been shown to have efficacy in dogs to resolve the clinical
signs of OA. Dietary management using omega‐3 fatty
acids has been reported to improve clinical scores and
ground reaction forces in approximately 25–82% of
patients. Metaanalysis evaluating the efficacy of various
nutritional‐based DMOAs concluded that only fatty acid
diet modifications appear to have the strongest evidence‐
based results to ameliorate the clinical signs of OA in dogs.
There are several commercially available OA diets that
incoroprate the use of omega-3 fatty acid in the dietary
formulations with other formulations adding antioxidants
such as Vitamin E, C, as well as glucosamine and chondrotin sulfate.
Adjuncts to pharmacologic, exercise/activity, and
weight control treatments that can also be considered
are the application of heat, cold, massage, hydrotherapy,
ultrasound/diathermy, and electrotherapy. Although
based on anecdotal observations only, these adjuncts
appear to help some patients. Laser, chiropractic, extracorporeal shockwave therapy (EST), and acupuncture
are professed to improve canine patients with the clinical
signs of OA. EST results reported can be variable with
regard to the joint evaluated and to date, acupuncture
has not been evaluated to be efficacious in dogs with OA
of the hip or elbow. Laser and chiropractic procedures
are anecdotally proclaimed to have efficacy in OA
patients or at best, may have only limited in vivo support
for efficacy. Unfortunately, placebo or negative controlled clinical studies are needed to test the supposition
that these and other developing modalities (e.g., radiation) have efficacy in veterinary OA patients.
Recently, the use of autogenic tissues such as adipose‐
derived mesenchymal stem cells and platelet‐rich plasma
or platelet‐enhanced plasma intraarticular injections has
been investigated as therapies to attenuate the clinical
signs of OA in dogs. Although early results appear promising for these therapies, additional controlled clinical
trials are needed to provide better evidence‐based proof
that they justify their high costs to the owner of an OA
patient.
Surgical management for the clinical signs of OA are
limited to arthroplasty (via arthroscopy or arthrotomy),
arthrodesis, total joint replacement for selected joints, or
limb amputation. Nonexcisional arthroplasties will typically require the integration of a multimodal medical
approach to provide better long‐term function for the
patient.

1535

VetBooks.ir

1536

Section 13 Diseases of Bone and Joint

­Prognosis
Dogs and cats can be significantly affected by OA; however, new concepts with a balanced multimodal management approach to treat the clinical signs of OA can result
in an acceptable quality of life for the majority of OA
patients, providing fair to excellent prognoses for lame‐
free function. Included in the formula for prognosis will
be the consideration of a specific joint affected by OA
(biomechanics, e.g., shoulder vs tarsus) and the degree of
disease present in that joint (e.g., cartilage erosions vs
minimal cartilage disease). Nonsurgical management
must be considered beyond conventional and nonconventional pharmacologic treatment to include a balance
created between exercise/activity and weight control
management. Failure to consider this multimodal
approach to OA treatment, especially in an individual-

ized medicine approach (i.e., not all dogs or cats will
respond the same with the same treatments), will usually
result in a poorer clinical response to therapy (surgical
and nonsurgical) and quality of life as perceived by the
owner of the OA patient.
Excellent progress continues in the development of
new pharmaceuticals and other agents to combat or even
reverse the degenerative processes of OA. In contrast,
research and development into exercise/activity management for the OA companion animal lag significantly
behind those of human medicine, but since the mid‐
1990s, it has become a major treatment focus in veterinary medicine. Nonetheless, large controlled clinical
trials are still needed for “evidence‐based” treatment
protocols (controlled clinical trials) that will allow us to
treat our OA patients beyond the individual clinician’s
clinical experience.

­Further Reading
Bennett D, Zainal Ariffin SM, Johnston P. Osteoarthritis in
the cat: 1. how common is it and how easy to recognise?
J Feline Med Surg 2012; 14: 65–75.
ComblainF, SerisierS, BarthelemyN, BalligandM, et al.
Review of dietary supplements for the management of
osteoarthritis in dogs in studies from 2004 to 2014. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther2016;39:1–15.
Impellizeri JA, Tetrick MA, Muir P. Effect of weight
reduction on clinical signs of lameness in dogs with hip
osteoarthritis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 216: 1089–91.

Johnston SA. Osteoarthritis: joint anatomy, physiology and
pathobiology. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
1997; 27: 699.
Vandeweerd JM, Coisnon C, Clegg P, et al. Systematic
review of efficacy of nutraceuticals to alleviate clinical
signs of osteoarthritis. J Vet Intern Med 2012; 26: 448–56.
Vuolteenaho K, Koskinen A, Moilanen E. Leptin – a link
between obesity and osteoarthritis. Applications for
prevention and treatment. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol
2014; 114: 103–8.

VetBooks.ir

1537

174
Developmental Orthopedic Diseases
Gert J. Breur, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVS1, Nicolaas E. Lambrechts, DVM, DECVS, DACVSMR 2, and
Heather A. Towle Millard, DVM, MS, DACVS-SA 3
1

Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA
3
Blue Pearl Pet Hospital, Overland Park, KS, USA
2

Developmental orthopedic diseases (DODs), a subset
of canine pediatric orthopedic diseases, are a group of
bone and joint diseases that initiate and develop during
postnatal skeletal growth, mostly during the first 26
weeks of life. During this period, joints attain their
adult morphology and bones assume their mature
length and shape. Pediatric orthopedic diseases are
aberrations of this ordered process (including endochondral ossification), described in more detail in
Chapter 172. Most DODs are caused by multifactorial
traits, with presumed or demonstrated genetic, nutritional, and environmental risk factors. Developmental
orthopedic diseases may affect bones or joints. In this
section, we will discuss hip dysplasia, osteochondrosis,
patella luxation, Legg–Calvé–Perthes disease, craniomandibular osteopathy, panosteitis, hypertrophic osteodystrophy, and slipped capital femoral epiphysis
(SCFE). Although all these diseases develop and usually
manifest during the period from birth to skeletal maturity, their long‐term clinical effects may be persistent
and profound.

­Developmental Orthopedic Diseases
Affecting Joints
Canine Hip Dysplasia
Etiology and Pathophysiology

Hip dysplasia literally means abnormal development of
the hip joint. The abnormal development appears to start
with laxity of the hip joint, with subsequent subluxation
and abnormal wear and tear of the joint. The joint capsule
becomes inflamed, the cartilaginous joint surface is

mechanically disrupted, and progressive osteoarthritis
(OA) ensues. The condition is usually bilateral.
At birth, the hip joints of puppies that will develop
canine hip dysplasia (CHD) are indistinguishable from
joints that will develop normally. After birth, laxity has
been associated with increased synovial fluid volume, as
well as swelling, damage, and excessive lengthening of
the ligament of the head of the femur. Dysplastic puppies
have a delayed onset and abnormal progression of mineralization of the head of the femur compared to nondysplastic puppies. Muscular development is also abnormal,
with predisposed breeds often having reduced pelvic
muscle mass, and atypical pectineal muscle fiber composition having been demonstrated in affected dogs.
In dysplastic animals with subluxated joints, greater
muscle forces are required to generate equivalent hip
motion compared to healthy animals. This, combined
with the smaller contact area of the incongruent opposing joint surfaces caused by the subluxation, results in
abnormal wear and tear of the articular surfaces with
subsequent synovitis and OA.
The etiology of laxity is not fully understood but
includes genetic, endocrine, and nutritional factors.
Canine hip dysplasia is mostly diagnosed in medium‐
and large‐breed dogs and strong breed predispositions
have been identified (Table 174.1). The condition is considered a polygenic trait with a heritability varying from
0.2–0.3 (based mostly on arthritic changes on the ventrodorsal extended hip joint radiographs) to 0.5–0.6
(mostly based on distraction index or dorsolateral subluxation index). Thus, somewhere between 20% and
60% of the phenotype of a patient affected with CHD
may be attributed by its genetic make‐up. Several
quantitative trait loci (QTLs; chromosomal regions
­

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1538

Section 13 Diseases of Bone and Joint

Table 174.1 Breed predispositions for selected developmental orthopedic diseases (DODs).
Trait

Breeds at increased risk

Comments

Craniomandibular
osteopathy

Cairn terrier, Scottish terrier, West Highland white terrier

Autosomal recessive in
West Highland white
terriers

Hypertrophic
osteodystrophy

Boxer, Chesapeake Bay retriever, German shepherd dog, golden retriever, Great
Dane, Irish setter, Labrador retriever, Weimaraner

–

Panosteitis

Afghan hound, akita, American cocker spaniel, American Staffordshire terrier,
basset hound, bearded collie, Bernese mountain dog, boxer, bull terrier, bulldog,
Chesapeake Bay retriever, chow chow, Dalmation, Doberman pinscher, English
Setter, English springer spaniel, giant schnauzer, German shepherd dog, German
shorthaired pointer, golden retriever, Great Dane, Great Pyrenees, Irish
wolfhound, Labrador retriever, mastiff, Neapolitan mastiff, Newfoundland,
Rhodesian ridgeback, Rottweiler, St Bernard, shar‐pei, shih tzu, Weimaraner,
West Highland white terrier

–

Osteochondritis
dissecans (OCD)
shoulder

Bernese mountain dog, border collie, bouvier, boxer, bullmastiff, Chesapeake Bay
retriever, Dalmation, English setter, German shorthaired pointer, German
shepherd dog, German wirehaired pointer, golden retriever, Great Dane, Great
Pyrenees, Irish wolfhound, kuvasz, Labrador retriever, mastiff, Munsterland,
Newfoundland, Old English sheepdog, Rottweiler, St Bernard, standard poodle

Polygenic mode of
inheritance

OCD elbow

Chow chow, German shepherd dog, golden retriever, Great Dane, Labrador
retriever, Newfoundland, Rottweiler

Polygenic mode of
inheritance

Fragmented coronoid
process

Basset hound, Bernese mountain dog, bouvier, bullmastiff, chow chow, German
shepherd dog, golden retriever, Gordon setter, Irish wolfhound, Labrador
retriever, mastiff, Newfoundland, Rottweiler, St Bernard

Polygenic mode of
inheritance

Ununited anconeal
process

Basset hound, Bernese mountain dog, chow chow, English setter, German
shepherd dog, golden retriever, Labrador retriever, mastiff, Newfoundland,
Pomeranian, Rottweiler, St Bernard, shar‐pei

Polygenic mode of
inheritance

Hip dysplasia

Airedale, Alaskan malamute, bearded collie, Bernese mountain dog,
bloodhound, border collie, bouvier, Briard, Brittany spaniel, bulldog, bullmastiff,
Chesapeake Bay retriever, chow chow, English springer spaniel, German
shepherd dog, German wirehaired pointer, giant schnauzer, golden retriever,
Gordon setter, Great Dane, Great Pyrenees, keeshond, kuvasz, Labrador
retriever, mastiff, Neapolitan mastiff, Newfoundland, Norwegian elkhound, Old
English sheepdog, pointer, Portuguese water dog, Rottweiler, St Bernard,
Samoyed, tree walking coonhound

Polygenic. Heritability
of 0.2–0.6

Legg–Calvé–Perthes
disease

Australian shepherd, cairn terrier, Chihuahua, dachshund, Lhasa apso,
Manchester terrier, miniature pinscher, pug, toy poodle, West Highland white
terrier, Yorkshire terrier

Autosomal recessive or
multifactorial with high
heritability

OCD stifle joint

Boxer, bulldog, German shepherd dog, golden retriever, Great Dane, Irish
wolfhound, Labrador retriever, mastiff, Rottweiler

‐

Patella luxation
(medial and lateral)

Akita, American cocker spaniel, Australian terrier, basset hound, bichon frise,
Boston terrier, bulldog, cairn terrier, Cavalier King Charles spaniel, Chihuahua,
chow chow, flat‐coated retriever, Great Pyrenees, Japanese chin, keeshond,
Lhasa apso, Maltese, miniature pinscher, miniature poodle, papillon, Pekingese,
Pomeranian, pug, sha‐rpei, shih tzu, silky terrier, standard poodle, toy fox terrier,
toy poodle, West Highland white terrier, wirehaired fox terrier, Yorkshire terrier

Multifactorial, polygenic.
Low heritability

OCD talocrural joint

Labrador retriever, Rottweiler, bullmastiff

‐

DODs affecting bones

DODs affecting joints

Source: Modified from LaFond E, Breur GJ, Austin CC. Breed susceptibility for developmental orthopedic diseases in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
2002; 38: 467.

VetBooks.ir

174 Developmental Orthopedic Diseases

­containing a gene or group of genes influencing the phenotypic expression of a trait) for CHD and hip OA have
been identified on multiple canine chromosomes.
Several upgraded genes like COX‐2, MIG‐6/Gene 33,
DNCLl, LAMS, and ATF3 have been identified. Only
genetically predisposed animals exposed to certain specific environmental factors may develop clinical hip dysplasia, and dogs not predisposed but exposed to the
same environmental factors will not.
The hormones estrogen and relaxin have also been
implicated as etiologic factors of CHD. Both are present
in colostrum and may be absorbed from the puppy’s gastrointestinal tract. Estrogen is probably not a strong etiologic factor, as estrogen fluctuations during the estrus
cycle do not result in joint laxity changes. One of relaxin’s functions prepartum is to relax the ligaments of the
maternal pubic symphysis, and in dogs and humans it is
associated with joint laxity. However, the significance of
relaxin in the etiology of CHD is unclear.
Rapid growth and body weight have been associated
with the development of CHD. In recent studies, heavier
puppies developed hip OA requiring treatment at a much
younger age than lighter littermates. Similarly, ad libitum
feeding of Labrador retrievers accelerated the onset of hip
OA when compared to a control group fed a restricted diet.
High dietary concentrations of calcium and/or vitamin D3
have also been implicated, but not conclusively proven, as
etiologic factors. A high dietary anion gap and vitamin C
deficiency have also been proposed as causes of CHD, but
their clinical significance has not been demonstrated.
Epidemiology

Hip dysplasia is the most commonly diagnosed canine
orthopedic condition and in one North American epidemiologic study of canine appendicular musculoskeletal
disorders, it comprised 9.6–12.8% of all patients. In this
population, the incidence of CHD ranged from 21.1 to
28.1 per 1000 patients, but incidences as high as 50–70%
in some large breeds have been reported. Hip dysplasia
in cats is thought to be uncommon.
Signalment

Canine hip dysplasia is most commonly diagnosed in
medium‐ and large‐breed dogs (see Table 174.1). Male
and female dogs are equally affected. Patients younger
than 1 year of age are usually presented because of pain
and lameness caused by synovitis following hip laxity. As
a result of progressive joint capsule fibrosis, older, mature
patients usually have minimal laxity but suffer from subsequent hip OA.
History and Clinical Signs

Young patients with hip dysplasia (hip laxity) usually
present with uni‐ or bilateral lameness, bunny hopping,
difficulty rising, reluctance to walk, trot, jump, or climb

stairs, and exercise intolerance. Hips are often very painful in these animals. Older dogs mostly present with
similar signs but with a more chronic presentation due to
the slow progression of arthritic changes. Differentials
for these signs include panosteitis, iliopsoas myopathy,
bilateral cruciate disease, and lumbosacral disease.
Diagnosis

Affected hip joints have a decreased range of motion
and pain on extension and abduction, and may exhibit
crepitus on manipulation. There is often atrophy of the
large muscles round the thigh and hip joint. Hip laxity
may be clinically assessed using the Ortolani test. With
this test, the presumed lax hip joint is first manually
subluxated and then reduced. If the joint is lax, the subluxated hip will reduce with a palpable or audible clunk
or click. This evidence of reduction is regarded as a
positive Ortolani sign and is suggestive of hip laxity. In
the awake, unsedated patient, the Ortolani test can be
most easily performed with the dog in lateral recumbency, affected side up. The test may induce pain and
should be performed humanely. In the sedated patient,
the Ortolani maneuver also can be performed with the
patient in dorsal recumbency.
The diagnosis of CHD is confirmed using well‐positioned, ventrodorsal extended hip and lateral pelvic radiographs. The lateral pelvic view is mostly evaluated for
evidence of lumbosacral disease. The ventrodorsal hip‐
extended (VD) view is assessed for hip joint laxity, osteophytes, hip remodeling, and enthesophytes of the lesser
trochanter suggestive of iliopsoas muscle injury. This
view is also helpful in identifying transitional vertebrae,
for example sacralization of the last lumbar vertebra. Hip
laxity is suspected if on the VD view less than 50% of the
femoral head is within the acetabulum or if the cranial
half of the joint space is not uniformly wide and diverges
medially. Unfortunately, with this technique actual hip
laxity may be present in the absence of radiographic
signs. Thus this technique has limited sensitivity for the
detection of hip laxity as false‐negative results may be
obtained. Early nonspecific osteoarthritic signs can be
found around the femoral head (circumferential femoral
head osteophyte) and the femoral neck (caudolateral
curvilinear osteophyte = Morgan’s line). Osteophytes
may also be seen on the cranial and caudal acetabular
margins, and sclerosis of the craniodorsal acetabulum
may be noted. Later stages of the disease are characterized by varying degrees of remodeling of the femoral
head (flattening) and acetabulum (shallowing) and thickening of the femoral neck.
Radiography is also used as a screening tool to identify
dogs suffering from CHD and at risk for OA, to predict
progression of the disease, and to assist in identifying
suitable breeding animals. Several techniques are in use.
In the USA, the Orthopedic Foundation for Animals

1539

VetBooks.ir

1540

Section 13 Diseases of Bone and Joint

requires ventrodorsal hip‐extended views of the pelvis
for their examination. Their evaluation is mostly based
on evaluation of arthritic changes, and prediction of
future disease and suitability for breeding is based on
radiographs of dogs 2 years of age and older. Another US
registry for CHD, PennHIP, requires three views: a ventrodorsal hip‐extended view, a ventrodorsal hip view
with the limb in a neutral, weight‐bearing position with
the femoral heads pressed into the acetabula (compression view), and a ventrodorsal hip view with the limb in a
neutral, weight‐bearing position with the femoral heads
pulled out of the acetabulum (distraction view). The latter two views are used to determine joint laxity and the
“fit” of the femoral heads into the acetabula, respectively.
Crucial in the evaluation is the so‐called distraction
index (DI): a DI >0.3 is suggestive of laxity and an indicator of future disease. The DI can be used as a predictor of
CHD in dogs 16 weeks and older.
Prevention

The incidence of CHD may be reduced by selective
breeding based on the results of radiographic screening.
Restricted dietary intake and perhaps a diet with a low
calcium density may reduce the severity and/or slow
down the development of hip dysplasia and OA.
Treatment

Treatment may consist of conservative (nonsurgical) or
surgical management. The choice of treatment will
depend on the severity of clinical signs, the stage of the
disease, the patient’s age and the owner’s commitment
and expectations. The goal of nonsurgical management
in dogs younger than 1 year of age (predominantly hip
laxity) is to control the synovial pain and adjacent muscle spasm and increase muscle mass to stabilize the hip
joint. The treatment consists of NSAIDs, skeletal muscle relaxer, weight management, nutritional supplements (omega‐3 fatty acids, glucosamine/chondroitin
sulfate), exercise control (avoidance of intense/high‐
impact exercise, roughhousing and stairs; long walks
and swimming are beneficial), and physical therapy
(electrotherapy, joint manipulation and others). Most
young dogs respond well to conservative management
and the pain is well controlled although normal hip
function is not restored.
If a patient is refractory to conservative management,
has evidence of substantial hip dysplasia at young age or
is at risk to develop clinical hip dysplasia, surgical intervention may be required. Employed surgical interventions include juvenile pubic symphysiodesis (JPS), triple
pelvic osteotomy, intertrochanteric osteotomy, total hip
replacement, femoral head and neck ostectomy (FHNO),
and pectineal myectomy. Juvenile pubic symphysiodesis,
surgically induced premature closure of the pubic

­symphysis, is recommended for 10–20‐week‐old dogs with
palpable hip laxity and a distraction index of 0.3–0.5. The
goal of this procedure is to improve the dorsal acetabular
coverage of the femoral head by limiting mediolateral
length growth of the cranial pubic rami. In patients
between 6 and 11 months of age with no to minimal
osteoarthritic changes, a triple pelvic osteotomy (TPO)
may be recommended. With this procedure, the acetabular segment of a hemipelvis is rotated to increase the
acetabular coverage of the femoral head. Just as with the
JPS, this may retard the development of OA.
For patients over 1 year of age with moderate to severe
hip dysplasia, a total hip replacement (THR) may be considered. In the past decade, THR has to a large extent
replaced TPO. Pectineal myectomy is a procedure that
may provide pain relief for patients with hip dysplasia by
releasing the tension of the spasmodic muscles across
the inflamed synovium, although it will not alter the hip
joint congruity and the development of OA. Femoral
head and neck ostectomy is a salvage procedure that may
be employed if concerted medical management is unsuccessful and THR is not possible. Its outcome is most predictable in patients weighing less than 23 kg.
Dogs over 1 year of age (suffering from predominantly
secondary OA) may be treated as any other OA patient
with nonsurgical methods as above. If animals become
refractory to nonsurgical management, surgical treatment is indicated. The main surgical options are THR
and FHNO. Even though FHNO can benefit patient
of all body weights, it is most beneficial in patients
under 23 kg. In patients over 23 kg, THR is preferred.
Denervation of the synovium of the hip joint is a more
recently described surgical procedure for the treatment
of hip dysplasia. The goal of this procedure is palliative
and the procedure is not meant to change the course of
the disease. However, the pain relief is variable, and may
not be accompanied by improved limb function.
Prognosis

No treatment has been developed that can arrest or
revert the pathologic changes associated with hip dysplasia. However, conservative and surgical treatments
provide adequate pain relief and acceptable but not normal clinical function.
Osteochondrosis
Osteochondrosis (OC) is a disease of endochondral ossification (EOS), the normal process whereby epiphyseal
and growth plate cartilages expand (lengthen the bone)
and gradually transform into bone. It is a focal or multifocal disorder with an often bilaterally symmetric distribution, seen in young growing animals and humans.
The term most commonly refers to a disturbance of

VetBooks.ir

174 Developmental Orthopedic Diseases

Table 174.2 Manifestations of osteochondrosis
Widely reported and accepted

Presumptive/proposed

Osteochondrosis in the dog
Caudomedial aspect of the proximal humeral head
●● Medial aspect of the distal humeral condyle
●● Lateral or medial femoral condyles
●● Medial or lateral trochlear ridge of the talus

Osteochondrosis in the dog
●● Caudal glenoid osteochondritis diseccans (OCD)
●● Ununited caudal glenoid ossification center
●● Fragmented coronoid process
●● Ununited anconeal process
●● “Erosion” of the medial aspect of the humeral condyle
●● Ununited medial humeral epicondyle
●● Retained endochondral cores of the distal ulna
●● Asynchronous growth between radius and ulna
●● Slipped femoral capital epiphysis
●● Femoral condylar deformity
●● Genu valgum
●● Tibial tuberosity avulsion
●● Medial tibial trochlea
●● Lumbosacral OCD
●● Cervical vertebral malformation‐malarticulation

●●

Osteochondrosis in the cat
Caudomedial aspect of the proximal humeral head
●● Lateral femoral condyle
●●

Source: Breur GJ, Lambrechts NE. Osteochondrosis. In: Johnston SA, Tobias KM, eds. Veterinary Surgery: Small Animal, 2nd edn. St Louis,
MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2017, pp. 1299–315. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.

endochondral ossification of epiphyseal growth centers,
resulting in articular cartilage disorders of the shoulder,
elbow, stifle or hock joints. Sometimes, disturbances of
endochondral ossification of growth plates of long and
cuboidal bones are also classified as OC. Generally
accepted and proposed manifestations of OC are listed
in Table 174.2.
In this section, we will first discuss the common etiology/pathophysiology and epidemiology of all OCs, followed by a description of signalment, history and clinical
signs, diagnosis, treatment and prognosis of OC of the
shoulder, elbow, stifle and hock joint, and the presumed
manifestation of growth plate OC, retained cartilaginous
core of the distal ulna.
Etiology and Pathophysiology

Osteochondrosis has a multifactorial etiology with several suggested risk factors playing a role: heredity, rapid
growth, dietary factors, and trauma.
Strong breed and bloodline predispositions for the different forms of OC strongly suggest a heritable etiologic
component. Reported heritability for these conditions
ranges from 10% to 45% and it is thought that most forms
of canine OC are inherited as a polygenic trait. In humans
and pigs, severity of OC lesions may be associated with
certain joint shapes and joint morphology also may be an
etiologic factor for canine OC.

Several nutritional factors have been implied in the etiology of OC. The relatively increased growth rate resulting from overnutrition (ad libitum feeding) presumably
predisposes the development of OC lesions by increasing muscle mass and body weight, resulting in biomechanical overload of structurally weak joint surfaces.
However, in a recent review, a direct role of rapid growth
from overnutrition in the etiology of osteochondrosis
was questioned. Another suggested nutritional predisposition is a diet high in calcium and/or vitamin D3. It is
evident that such diets cause a disturbance in endochondral ossification but there is no clear evidence that high
dietary calcium concentrations will cause or increase the
risk for OC in breeds other than Great Danes.
Both macro‐ and microtrauma have been implicated in
OC etiology. Microtrauma may presumably damage cartilage canal blood vessels at the chondroosseous junction
of the epiphysis, thus initiating OC. In dogs, exercise has
been suggested as a risk factor for osteochondrosis.
There are no studies demonstrating that in dogs macrotrauma will cause or initiate OC. However, studies in
pigs and humans suggest that macrotrauma may hasten
the conversion from an osteochondrosis manifesta to an
osteochondrosis dissecans lesion (see later).
A series of elegant, primarily histologic studies in
horses and pigs have suggested that the primary lesion of
OC is a focal necrosis of epiphyseal cartilage canals at

1541

VetBooks.ir

1542

Section 13 Diseases of Bone and Joint

the chondroosseous junction of the epiphysis, resulting
in areas of epiphyseal cartilage ischemia and chondronecrosis. Necrotic cartilage cannot undergo EOS. This
early lesion is called osteochondrosis latens. With progression of the epiphyseal mineralization, the area of
ischemic chondronecrosis may become located at the
cartilage–bone interface. This stage is called osteochondrosis manifesta and the resulting shape change of the
subchondral epiphyseal bone may be seen on radiographs. Several sequelae have been proposed. The chondronecrotic focus may heal, may develop into a bone
cyst, or may deform, resulting in an altered joint contour
and congruency. Commonly, fissures, clefts or cracks
may start at the necrotic cartilage lesion and propagate
along the osteochondral junction or tide mark. Fissures
may further propagate to the joint surface and form a
cartilage flap off the underlying subchondral bone,
resulting in synovitis, joint effusion, arthralgia, lameness, and OA. At this stage, OC is commonly known as
osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) or (more physiologically) osteochondrosis dissecans. This is the most well‐
known and described manifestation of OC. Cartilage
flaps may reattach, resorb, undergo dystrophic calcification or detach and form a so‐called joint mouse.
Epidemiology

In a large epidemiologic study of more than 400 000
canine patients, articular OC was diagnosed in approximately 3.7% of all dogs presented with an orthopedic
problem, translating into an incidence of 8.1 cases per
1000 patients. In dogs younger than 1 year of age, OC
was diagnosed in approximately 9% of the dogs presented with an orthopedic problem. Male dogs are more
commonly affected than female dogs and strong breed
predispositions for all forms of OC have been identified
(see Table 174.1). Feline OC is very uncommon.
Osteochondritis Dissecans of the Shoulder Joint
Osteochondritis dissecans of the shoulder joint is a common form of epiphyseal OC. The lesion is located on the
caudomedial humeral head.
Signalment

The disease is most commonly seen in large‐ and giant‐
breed dogs (see Table 174.1), and males are more commonly affected than females. Most dogs are presented
between 4 and 10 months of age.
History and Clinical Signs

Most dogs suffering from shoulder OCD develop clinical
signs between 4 and 8 months of age, but some dogs only
experience discomfort later in life. Most patients present
with an insidious unilateral lameness that worsens with

exercise and improves with rest. The condition is bilateral in 27–68% of cases but signs will predominate on
one side and can shift sides. Differentials include elbow
dysplasia, panosteitis, hypertrophic osteodystrophy
(HOD), injuries of the shoulder muscles, and cervical
nerve root pain. These conditions can occur concurrently with shoulder OCD.
Diagnosis

The presumptive clinical diagnosis is based on signalment, history, and pain on shoulder hyperflexion and/or
hyperextension. Crepitus and swelling of the shoulder
joint are usually not detected. The final diagnosis is
based on characteristic radiographic changes on the
mediolateral and craniocaudal view of the shoulder joint.
Most radiographic changes are seen on the mediolateral
projection and include flattening to saucer‐shaped and
radiolucent defects of the subchondral bone of caudal
humeral head. Occasionally, mineralizations representing dystrophic calcification of the cartilage flaps are evident either over the subchondral lesion if the flaps are
still attached, or removed from the lesion if they have
detached and become joint mice. These may appear anywhere in the joint, but most commonly are seen in the
caudoventral joint pouch or occasionally in the bicipital
tendon sheath. Because the disease is often bilateral,
both shoulders should be radiographed.
Treatment

Patients diagnosed with shoulder OC may be initially
treated with restricted activity, weight control, and
NSAIDs. If the patient is refractory to conservative management, the lameness has persisted for more than six
weeks, or the patient is older than 6 months of age, surgical treatment in the form of arthrotomy or arthroscopy is
indicated. The goal of the procedure is to remove the flap
and/or joint mouse, debride necrotic cartilage within the
defect, stimulate the formation of fibrocartilage, and
remove synovial fluid cytokines and wear debris through
joint lavage.
Prognosis

More than 90% of surgically treated patients return to
normal limb function. Long term, arthritic changes may
develop but these changes usually do not result in serious discomfort and lameness. Because shoulder OC is a
heritable trait, the owner should be advised that the
patient should not be used for breeding.
Elbow Dysplasia
Elbow dysplasia is an abnormal development of the
elbow joint due to fragmented medial coronoid process
(FMCP), OCD of the medial humeral condyle, elbow

VetBooks.ir

174 Developmental Orthopedic Diseases

incongruity, and/or ununited anconeal process (UAP).
These diseases have in common that they will cause varying degrees of OA. It is thought that FMCP, OCD of the
medial humeral condyle and UAP may be associated
with humeroradial and/or humeroulnar joint incongruity secondary to asynchronous growth of the radius and
ulna. It has been speculated that activity or exercise‐
induced microtrauma to a vulnerable medial coronoid
process or the growth plate of the anconeal process, due
to asynchronous growth of the radius and ulna, could
facilitate the initial chondronecrosis associated with
FCMP, OCD of the medial humeral condyle, and UAP
respectively. It also has been demonstrated that chondronecrosis is associated with a delay of endochondral
ossification of the medial coronoid process in animals
afflicted with FMCP. All three traits are thought to be
multifactorial. The reported heritability of FCMP ranges
from 0.18 to 0.31.
Signalment

Large‐ and giant‐breed dogs are most commonly affected
and unique breed predispositions for FMCP, OCD and
UAP have been identified (see Table 174.1). For all three
diseases, males are more often affected than females.
History and Clinical Signs

Dogs affected with elbow dysplasia are usually presented
for unilateral forelimb lameness. The lameness usually
starts insidiously, worsens with exercise, and improves
with rest. Clinical signs often develop between 4 and 8
months of age, but may be missed if the condition is
bilateral and the gait is symmetrically affected. Patients
also may present at later age, but then clinical signs are
usually due to secondary OA. Differentials are similar to
those of shoulder OC.
Diagnosis

The presumptive diagnosis of elbow dysplasia is based
on the patient’s signalment, history, clinical signs, and
orthopedic exam findings. Muscles of the affected limb
may be atrophied and affected joints may be swollen, initially due to joint effusion but later secondarily to capsular fibrosis. Hyperextension and/or hyperflexion of the
joint are painful and a decreased range of flexion and/or
extension may be present. Internal rotation of the antebrachium with the elbow joint in 90° of flexion may elicit
pain as the medial compartment is compressed (so‐
called Campbell maneuver). Crepitus may be noted during joint manipulation. The final diagnosis is based on
characteristic radiographic or computed tomography
(CT) findings. Recommended radiographic views
include a neutral and a flexed mediolateral view and a
craniocaudal view. Because the condition is often bilateral, both elbows should be radiographed.

Fragmented medial coronoid process and OCD of
the medial humeral condyle both are characterized by
secondary OA of the medial joint compartment as seen
on the craniocaudal view (osteophyte formation on the
medial coronoid process and the medial humeral condyle), but osteophytes also can be present on the anconeal process, caudodistal humerus, and the cranial
portion of the radial head (mediolateral view). Primary
changes of FMCP include fragmentation, blunting or
deformity of the medial coronoid process and sclerosis
of the subchondral bone of the trochlear notch (mediolateral view). Direct evidence of OCD includes flattening or a radiolucent concavity of the medial humeral
condyle (craniocaudal view). Radiography often results
in false‐negative interpretations for FMCP, OCD
and elbow incongruity and therefore oblique elbow
views have been suggested. However, CT is a much
better technique for visualization of FMCP and OCD
defects and elbow incongruity than orthogonal radiographic views. The diagnosis of UAP is made after 22
weeks (the normal time of growth plate fusion), on the
basis of a persistent lucent line or zone in the area
of the growth plate. This lesion is best seen on the
flexed mediolateral radiograph. Comparison radiographs of the opposite elbow may aid with establishing
the diagnosis.
Treatment

After an initial diagnosis of FMCP or OCD, the patient
may be treated conservatively with rest, weight control,
and NSAIDs. However, conservative management will
not arrest or retard progression of OA. Surgical intervention may be needed if conservative management does
not improve the clinical signs. The goal of the intervention is to remove loose fragments, debride the affected
coronoid process down to healthy subchondral bone,
stimulate the formation of fibrocartilage in areas with
eburnated cartilage, and remove synovial fluid cytokines
and wear particles. Recently, repair of OC defects of the
medial humeral condyle with osteochondral autografts
was reported. Patients with more advanced OA and
refractory to medical management may temporarily
benefit from surgical intervention to remove loose fragments, wear particles, and cytokines in the synovial fluid.
The elbow joint can be approached by open arthrotomy
or arthroscopy. Ulnar or humeral corrective osteotomies
may be indicated if significant elbow incongruity exists.
A total elbow replacement may be considered if a patient
with advanced OA has become unresponsive to conservative management.
Dogs with suspected UAP should be treated conservatively with rest, weight reduction, and NSAIDs
until the diagnosis can be confirmed when the patient
is older than 22 weeks of age. Once the diagnosis is

1543

VetBooks.ir

1544

Section 13 Diseases of Bone and Joint

made, surgical intervention should be considered.
Proposed procedures include excision of the ununited anconeal process, ulnar osteotomy, or a combination of ulnar osteotomy and lag screw fixation.
Excision controls a major trigger for secondary OA
but does not stop its progression. Ulnar osteotomy is
an effective treatment of lameness, and in dogs
younger than 7–8 months of age may lead to reattachment of the process. These procedures are not recommended for use in older dogs with UAP and
advanced OA; these patients should be treated for
their OA. If the patient becomes refractory to conservative management, a total elbow arthroplasty
may be considered.
Prognosis

The prognosis for FMCP and OCD depends on the
extent of articular cartilage damage, the state of joint
congruity and severity of the arthritic changes. In cases
with minimal cartilage damage and OA, the prognosis
may be good. If the articular cartilage damage is more
substantial, the prognosis is not as favorable and OA will
progress. In these cases, the condition can be particularly debilitating and hard to manage. The prognosis for
UAP following surgical treatment in young dogs is usually good if treated before secondary changes develop.
However, severe OA may develop, particularly if in combination with FMCP.
Osteochondritis Dissecans of the Stifle Joint
(Medial or Lateral Femoral Condyle)
Osteochondritis dissecans of the stifle joint is an uncommon form of epiphyseal OC. The lesion is located on the
weight‐bearing surface of the medial or lateral femoral
condyle.
Signalment

The disease is most commonly diagnosed in large‐ and
giant‐breed dogs (see Table 174.1). Males are more commonly affected than females.
History and Clinical Signs

abrupt stop of the cranial drawer motion will suggest that
the cranial cruciate ligament is intact. The final diagnosis
is based on characteristic radiographic changes on the
mediolateral and especially the craniocaudal view of the
stifle joint. Lesions are located on the medial or lateral
femoral condyle. Oblique views of the stifle may improve
visualization of the defect. Radiographic changes range
from subchondral bone flattening and subchondral
sclerosis to more severe radiolucent concave defects.
Effusion is always seen and secondary arthritic changes
are usually present.
Treatment

Patients may be treated initially with restricted activity,
weight control, and NSAIDs. If the patient does not
respond to conservative management, surgical treatment in the form of arthrotomy or arthroscopy is indicated. The purpose of the surgical intervention is to
remove the cartilage flap and debride the defect, stimulate the formation of fibrocartilage, and remove synovial
fluid cytokines and wear particles. The OC defect also
may be repaired with osteochondral autografts, or resurfaced with a single‐layer or bilayered implant. Dogs that
have developed severe secondary OA unresponsive to
conservative management may be treated with a total
knee replacement.
Prognosis

Treatment, including surgical treatment, does not
change the progression of secondary OA. Conservatively
managed dogs usually end up with an intermittent lameness. Surgical treatment usually improves the limb function but lameness may persist, especially after exercise.
There is no long‐term evidence yet that the currently
used osteochondral transplant techniques improve the
treatment outcome. The owner should be advised that
stifle OC most likely is a hereditary trait and that the
patient should not be used for breeding.
Osteochondritis Dissecans of the Hock Joint
(Medial or Lateral Trochlear Ridge of the Talus)

Dogs affected with stifle OCD become lame between 4
and 8 months of age, similar to other forms of joint OC.
Some dogs may develop lameness later in life. The lameness may range from mild to severe, and tends to worsen
with exercise.

Osteochondrosis of the hock joint is an uncommon epiphyseal OC. Lesions are localized on either the medial
(most common) or lateral trochlear ridge of the talus.
Most patients present between 4 and 10 months of age.

Diagnosis

Just as with the other articular OCs, this condition is
mostly seen in large‐ and giant‐breed dogs, and
Rottweilers, retrievers, and Great Danes are most predisposed (see Table 174.1). Male dogs are more commonly
affected than female dogs.

The presumptive clinical diagnosis is based on signalment, history, and pain on stifle hyperflexion and/or
hyperextension. Joint effusion and crepitus are usually
present. Mild cranial drawer also may be detected, but an

Signalment

VetBooks.ir

174 Developmental Orthopedic Diseases

History and Clinical Signs

Affected dogs usually present between 4 and 8 months of
age, but some dogs develop clinical signs later in life.
Affected dogs usually present with an insidious unilateral lameness that worsens with exercise and the patient
may be mildly exercise intolerant.
Diagnosis

The presumptive clinical diagnosis is based on signalment, age of presentation, history, and pain on hock
hyperflexion and/or hyperextension. A decreased range
of motion of the hock joint, as well as joint crepitus and
joint swelling/effusion, are often present. The final diagnosis is based on characteristic radiographic changes on
a neutral mediolateral and extended craniocaudal view
of the hock joint. Flexed mediolateral and craniocaudal
views facilitate visualization of the defect if not obvious
on the aforementioned views. With OC of the medial
ridge of the talus, flattening of the medial trochlear ridge
can be seen on both orthogonal views; widening of the
medial joint compartment (craniocaudal view) and periarticular mineralizations are also often present. OC of
the lateral trochlear ridge is characterized by subchondral fissures at the base of the lateral trochlear ridge. CT
may help to establish the diagnosis, particularly with lateral trochlear ridge OC.
Treatment

Patients suffering from hock OC may be initially treated
with restricted activity, weight control, and NSAIDs. If
the patient does not respond to conservative management, arthrotomy or arthroscopy is indicated. The goal
of the procedure is to remove the flap and/or joint mouse,
debride the defect and stimulate the formation of fibrocartilage, and remove synovial fluid cytokines and wear
particles.
Prognosis

Most dogs will have a fair to good quality of life despite
continued lameness. Conservative management usually
results in a continuous or intermittent lameness and progressive OA. Surgical management may improve limb
function, but progressive OA still may cause exercise‐
induced lameness. Affected dogs should not be used for
breeding as hock OC appears to be a heritable trait.
Retained Cartilaginous Core
Generically, retained cartilaginous core is caused by a
failure of endochondral ossification and can occur in any
metaphyseal growth plate. It is characterized by the projection of cones of unmineralized growth plate cartilage,
predominantly hypertrophic chondrocytes, into the
adjacent metaphyseal bone. The local thickening of the

growth plate may be caused by vascular events on the
epiphyseal or metaphyseal side of the growth plate.
Most cartilaginous cores will heal spontaneously and in
most growth plates will not have clinical consequences.
However, a retained cartilaginous core may have clinical
significance in the distal ulnar growth plate, a growth
plate with a rapid rate of length growth and with an adjacent paired radius. Here, they may be associated with a
reduced length growth of the ulna, leading to angular
limb deformities (radial bowing and valgus deformity)
and/or elbow incongruity, similar to cases with traumatic
closure of the distal ulna growth plate.
Signalment

The condition is most commonly seen in rapidly growing,
large‐ and giant‐breed dogs. Most patients are presented
between 4 and 10 months of age.
History and Clinical Signs

Patients are presented with angular limb deformity, radial
bowing, and/or valgus deformity that developed during
adolescence.
Diagnosis

The presumptive diagnosis is based on the patient’s signalment, history, clinical signs, and orthopedic exam
findings. Angular limb deformity, including radial bowing and/or valgus deformity, is often a prominent feature
and elbow incongruity (pain on hyperextension/hyperflexion) also may be present. The final diagnosis is based
on radiographic evidence of the presence of a cartilaginous core in the distal ulna (a long‐tapering radiolucent
triangle based on the physis) in combination with the
classic signs of angular deformity. Orthogonal radiographic views of the elbow joint, radius/ulna, and manus
are recommended to identify and assess the extent of the
deformities. If limb shortening is suspected, radiographs
of the humerus and comparative radiographs of the
opposite limb are useful.
Treatment

The choice of treatment is dependent on the age of the
dog, the remaining growth potential, and the severity of
the angular deformity. Treatment may consist of conservative management for patients with mild deformity and
limited remaining growth potential, or surgical intervention in patients with more substantial deformity and/or
bone shortening and more remaining growth potential.
Surgical techniques include ulnar ostectomy (for elbow
incongruity and mild deformity), static surgical deformity
correction (radial and ulnar osteotomy, followed by
deformity correction stabilized with an external fixator or
bone plate), and dynamic deformity correction (radial
and ulnar osteotomy, followed by deformity correction

1545

VetBooks.ir

1546

Section 13 Diseases of Bone and Joint

and bone lengthening with an adjustable external fixator). Surgical planning can be facilitated by 3D printed
(plastic) models of the deformity, based on a CT study of
the affected limb.
Prognosis

The prognosis for a normal limb function is good, particularly for patients with mild to moderate deformity. In
patients with significant limb shortening and elbow joint
incongruity, the prognosis may not be as favorable.
Patella Luxation
Etiology and Pathophysiology

Patella luxation (PL) may occur nontraumatically as a
consequence of quadriceps mechanism (quadriceps muscles, patella, and patellar tendon) malalignment with the
underlying bone and/or femoral trochlea articular surface secondary to the development of femoral and tibial
deformities during skeletal growth. Patella luxation also
may be acquired traumatically. The etiology of nontraumatic medial or lateral PL is not well understood. It has
been hypothesized that medial PL is initiated by a
decreased angle of inclination and a diminished angle of
anteversion of the proximal femur early in the postnatal
period. The resulting medial malalignment of the quadriceps mechanism produces eccentric forces across growth
plates and may cause bone deformities, such as coxa vara,
genu varum, distal femoral varus or external torsion,
proximal tibial varus or valgus, internal tibial torsion, and
medial rotation of the tibial tubercle. The malalignment
also may lead to rupture or weakening of periarticular
structures, thus facilitating PL. Malarticulation of the
patellofemoral joint may result in poor development and
shallowness of the trochlear groove, diminishing the normal retention of the patella.
It has been suggested that PL is a multifactorial polygenic disease. Strong breed predispositions have been
recognized (see Table 174.1). For instance, according to
the Orthopedic Foundation for Animals, 43% of examined Pomeranians had PL. A PL heritability of 0.17 was
reported and quantitative trait loci were identified on
chromosome 7 and 31 in a Dutch flat‐coated retriever
population. This moderate heritability suggests that
environmental factors play an important role in the
development of the disease.
Epidemiology

In general, small‐breed dogs are more likely to be affected
than large‐breed dogs. Medial PL is more common than
lateral PL in dogs of all sizes and lateral PL is more often
seen in large‐breed than in small‐breed dogs. Many
breeds have strong predispositions (see Table 174.1). In
small‐breed dogs, females appear to be more commonly

affected than males, while the opposite has been reported
for large‐breed dogs. Bilateral disease is common.
History and Clinical Signs

This condition is often asymptomatic, particularly in
small‐breed dogs, and may go unrecognized until incidentally discovered. Large‐breed dogs are rarely asymptomatic. Dogs suffering from PL may present with
lameness, intermittent skipping, a history of short acute
pain episodes, and/or exercise intolerance. Differential
diagnoses, particularly in small breeds, include cranial
cruciate disease, which often occurs concurrently, and
intervertebral disc disease.
Diagnosis

The diagnosis of medial or lateral PL is based on the
examiner’s ability to manually luxate the patella in medial
and/or lateral directions. Starting with the leg in full
extension, the patella is located and pushed in the medial
or lateral direction, while simultaneously slowly flexing
the hock and stifle joint and internally or externally
rotating the limb respectively. Simultaneously abducting
or adducting the limb may further encourage the patella
to luxate medially or laterally. This test is considered
positive (patella luxation) if during flexion of the stifle
joint the patella can be moved medial or lateral to the
medial or lateral femoral trochlear ridge. It should be
noted that with the stifle in full extension, the patella easily can be moved in medial and lateral direction; this
patellar mobility is normal and not indicative of patella
luxation.
The disease is classified according to the anatomic
relationship of the patella and trochlear groove during
the gait cycle. Patients with a grade I PL are usually
asymptomatic. Their patella is normally positioned in
the trochlear groove but the patella can be manually
luxated. Grade II is characterized by a normally positioned patella that may spontaneously luxate and relocate, which may cause acute pain and/or “skipping.”
The luxated patella may reduce spontaneously or can
be manually reduced. With a grade III PL, the patella
is found in a luxated position; the patella can be easily
reduced manually. In patients with a grade IV PL,
the patella is permanently luxated and cannot be
reduced. Bone angular deformities and trochlea maldevelopment become more severe with increasing
grade of PL.
The main purpose of radiography is to assess the severity of secondary osteoarthritic changes, determine the
location of the patella in the trochlear groove (lateral or
medially displaced or abnormally proximal or distal to the
normal central position, termed patella alta or patella
baja, respectively) and elucidate the degree of femoral
and tibial deformity. In cases of low‐grade PL and mild

VetBooks.ir

174 Developmental Orthopedic Diseases

skeletal abnormalities, mediolateral and caudocranial
views of the stifle will suffice. If more deformity is detected
during the orthopedic exam, additional orthogonal
(“alignment”) views of femur and tibia to characterize the
angular deformities are recommended. CT allows better
evaluation of the deformities and may be beneficial in
patients with severe deformities.
Treatment

Patients with grade I PL are asymptomatic and usually do
not require treatment. Grade II PL patients may require
treatment if the pain or skipping episodes increase in
duration or frequency. If clinical signs are mild, fewer
than 2–3 episodes per month, or if the owner is unable to
pursue surgical treatment, nonsurgical treatment is a
reasonable option. However, just as with grade I luxation, the patient should be reevaluated if the lameness
becomes more severe or frequent.
Surgical intervention is indicated for patients with
persistent lameness due to grade II, III or IV PL. The
purpose of the intervention is to realign the patella and
quadriceps complex over the trochlear groove and the
long axis of the femur, and to stabilize the patella in the
trochlear groove. In most patients with grade II or III
PL and mild femoral and tibial deformity, the alignment is obtained with a transposition of the tibial
tuberosity in the medial, lateral and/or distal direction.
The patella is stabilized in the trochlear groove with a
combination of trochleoplasty (deepening of the trochlear groove) and parapatellar soft tissue release and
imbrication techniques. Transposition is performed
after the apophyseal physis of the tibia has closed. In
patients with grade III or IV and more severe deformity, particularly large‐breed dogs, corrective distal femoral osteotomies may be needed to obtain adequate
alignment, in addition to the aforementioned techniques. In patients with grade III or IV PL and severe
osteoarthritic changes refractory to conservative management, a partial or total stifle replacement may be
indicated. The long‐term utility of partial stifle replacement (trochlea arthroplasty) in clinical patients has yet
to be described.
Prognosis

The prognosis for lateral and medial PL is similar and
mostly depends on the severity of the deformity. For
Grade II and III luxations, the prognosis for return of
function is good, while for most grade IV luxations the
prognosis is fair to good. However, for some patients
with chronic grade IV luxation with severe femoral
and tibial deformity, severe OA and/or severe muscle
atrophy and contracture, the prognosis is much more
guarded.

Legg–Calvé–Perthes Disease
Etiology and Pathophysiology

Legg–Calvé–Perthes disease (LCP) is an uncommon
cause of pelvic limb lameness in small‐breed dogs. The
lameness is associated with lysis, fragmentation, collapse, and deformity of the femoral head, including the
joint surface. These changes are the result of avascular
necrosis and structural weakening of the bone of femoral
head. Synonyms for LCP include osteochondritis coxae
juvenilis, osteochondrosis, coxa plana, aseptic necrosis
of the femoral head, and avascular necrosis of the femoral head.
The etiology of LCP is unknown but increased intracapsular pressure, abnormal anatomic conformation,
infarction of the femoral head, hormonal influences, and
heredity have been implicated as etiologic factors. Strong
breed predispositions exist (see Table 174.1) and it has
been suggested that LCP is a simple autosomal recessive
trait in West Highland white terriers and miniature poodles. In Manchester terriers, the trait is a simple autosomal recessive or multifactorial with high heritability.
Epidemiology

In one study, 277 of 33 633(0.82%) patients diagnosed with
an appendicular bone diseases were suffering from LCP.
Signalment

Predisposed breeds include terriers and toy‐breed dogs,
with affected dogs most commonly being presented
between 4 and 11 months of age. Males and females are
equally represented.
History and Clinical Signs

Patients present with unilateral or bilateral pelvic limb
discomfort, lameness, and muscle atrophy. Lameness
can be mild to nonweight bearing, although in minimally
affected cases the disease may be subclinical. Bilateral
involvement occurs in 12–16.5% of cases.
Diagnosis

Orthopedic exam findings may include muscle atrophy,
pain on hyperextension and manipulation of the hip
joint, and crepitus. An extended ventrodorsal and a
mediolateral view of the hip joint that include the proximal femurs are recommended. If positioning for this
view is causing discomfort, a flexed ventrodorsal (frogleg) view of the coxofemoral joint may be used. An additional advantage of this view is that it may help elucidate
the defect on radiographs. Early radiographic signs
sometimes include increased epiphyseal opacity but
more commonly, patients are presented with focal lytic
lesions of the femoral head. In later stages of the disease, collapse and flattening of the femoral head and

1547

VetBooks.ir

1548

Section 13 Diseases of Bone and Joint

remodeling of the acetabula, femoral neck lysis, and
possible associated compression fractures may be seen.
Computed tomography may be beneficial for the detection of small lesions in patients with early‐stage disease
where LCP is suspected but no radiographic evidence of
the disease is seen. Orthopedic examination will rule
out common differential diagnoses such as patellar luxation and cranial cruciate ligament rupture. Less common differential diagnoses include septic arthritis,
neoplasia, and osteomyelitis.
Treatment

Analgesics and rest result in lameness resolution in less
than 25% of cases. Surgical treatment with femoral head
and neck excision or total hip replacement is recommended if patients do not respond to conservative management. At the time of surgery, excised tissue should be
submitted for histopathology and bacterial culture to
rule out neoplasia and osteomyelitis.
Prognosis

Surgery resolves lameness and discomfort in 84–100% of
LCP cases. Persistent lameness may be due to the resultant change in biomechanics and reduced range of motion
associated with femoral head and neck excision.

­Developmental Orthopedic Diseases
Affecting Bone
Craniomandibular Osteopathy
Etiology and Pathophysiology

Craniomandibular osteopathy is characterized by unilateral or bilateral irregular symmetric osseous proliferation on mandibles and/or tympanic bullae, causing
difficulties opening the mouth. Temporal, frontal, maxillary, and long bones can also be affected. The disease can
be self‐limiting. Synonyms for craniomandibular osteopathy (CMO) include lion jaw, Scotty jaw, Westie jaw,
craniomandibular osteodystrophy, mandibular periostitis, and craniomandibular osteoarthropathy.
In affected mandibulae, lamellar bone is resorbed and
new bone originating from the periosteum invades the
adjacent connective tissue and muscle fibers. Bone
marrow is replaced by a highly vascular fibrous‐type
stroma and inflammatory cells (lymphocytes, neutrophils, and plasma cells) that surround the lesions. The
etiology of the disease is unknown but strong breed
predispositions suggest a hereditary etiology. The condition is autosomal recessive in West Highland white
terriers. A test to determine genetic predisposition for
the test is available.

Epidemiology

The disease has a reported incidence of 1.4 per 100 000
cases. The incidence of the disease is highest in the
southern and western regions of the United States.
Signalment

Dogs from many breeds, including large‐ and small‐
breed dogs, can be affected (see Table 174.1). Females
and males are equally represented. Patients younger than
6 months are at the highest risk for being affected by
CMO, while the probability for diagnosis decreases in
patients over 12 months of age.
History and Clinical Signs

Patients affected by CMO are most commonly presented
with complaints of not eating, difficulty eating or drinking or complete inability to open the mouth. Additional
clinical signs that have been reported include discomfort,
swelling of the mandibles, intermittent hyperthermia,
increased salivation, exophthalmia, and strabismus.
Diagnosis

Clinical signs include inability to partially or completely
open the patient’s mouth and swelling of the mandibles
and/or temporomandibular joint region. The final diagnosis is based on demonstration of osseous proliferation
on mandibles and/or tympanic bullae using ventrodorsal, lateral, and oblique radiographs of skull and mandibles. Computed tomography may be useful in identifying
small lesions in early stages of the disease and may also
allow the extent of the lesions to be more accurately
characterized. A complete blood count, serum chemistry, and urinalysis are recommended when systemic
signs are present. Fine needle aspirate/biopsy for histopathology and culture are recommended to rule out
other diseases, including osteomyelitis, neoplasia, and
metabolic bone diseases.
Treatment

There is no known medical or surgical cure for this condition. Treatment is primarily aimed at supportive care.
Feeding soft food, gruel food, or syringe‐fed food, and/or
placement of a feeding tube may be needed for as long as
the patient is unable to take in an adequate amount of
water and food. The level of treatment is based on the
severity of the condition and the patient’s ability to drink
and eat, so hydration and nutrition must be carefully and
frequently evaluated. Analgesics should be prescribed if
indicated. During febrile periods, patients may be treated
with antibiotics and steroids or NSAIDs. These treatments
are empirical and the benefits of these medications are
variable. Excision of osseous proliferations and/or rostral
hemimandibulectomy may be considered as salvage procedures for severe cases to permit improved alimentation.

VetBooks.ir

174 Developmental Orthopedic Diseases

Prognosis

The condition is often self‐limiting by 11–13 months of
age and until this time, supportive care is paramount.
There are no predictive factors to determine if the bony
proliferations will regress partially or completely. For
owners who are unable to provide adequate care, for the
rare severe case, and for cases with intractable discomfort, euthanasia is an option.
Panosteitis
Etiology and Pathophysiology

Panosteitis is a self‐limiting disease of the bone marrow
of fore‐ and hindlimb long bones. Synonyms for panosteitis include shifting leg lameness, enostosis, and eosinophilic panosteitis.
The earliest changes in affected long bones are seen
around the nutrient foramen. Vascular proliferation and
bone formation result in vascular congestion and increased
intraosseous pressure. In response to the increased intraosseous pressure, dogs develop lameness of the affected
limb and form bone in periosteum and medullary cavity.
Eventually, the affected bone marrow is replaced by
normal, healthy adipose bone marrow. The etiology of
panosteitis is unknown but strong breed predispositions
(see Table 174.1) suggest a genetic component.
Epidemiology

The reported incidence of panosteitis is 2.6 per 1000
patients. The disease incidence is higher in north central
and northeastern regions of the United States, especially
in the summer and fall.
Signalment

Panosteitis is primarily a disease of medium‐ and large‐
breed pure‐bred dogs. However, smaller dogs (either
mixed breed or pure bred) such as the American cocker
spaniel and the West Highland white terrier can also be
affected. Males are more frequently affected than females
(4:1), with patients most commonly affected between 5
and 12 months of age. However, patients have been diagnosed as young as 2 months and as old as 5 years. In a
study of 100 dogs, the median age of affected dogs was
12.4 months.
History and Clinical Signs

Panosteitis patients are often presented with a history of
lameness, often shifting between limbs (shifting lameness). Lameness ranges from mild to nonambulatory.
The occurrence can be acute in onset and may run a
waxing–waning course. There is a 4:1 ratio of lesions in
the forelimbs to hindlimbs, with 42%, 25%, 14%, 11%, and
8% occurrence in the ulna, radius, humerus, femur, and
tibia, respectively. The affected bones may be painful on

palpation. Systemic signs including fever, anorexia, lethargy, and weight loss may accompany the lameness. The
signs may regress and reoccur, but rarely continue past 2
years of age.
Diagnosis

Depending on the disease phase, radiographic findings
from orthogonal views of the affected bone(s) may vary
from completely normal to the classic blurring and inhomogeneity of the medullary cavity trabecular pattern.
The first stage, rarely seen, is characterized by a decrease
of the radiodensity of the medullary cavity near the
nutrient foramen. In the next stage, an increased medullary opacity with a granular pattern or loss of trabeculation, as well as periosteal bone formation, is seen. In a
later stage, changes in the medullary cavity become more
diffuse and homogeneous. After 4–6 weeks the lesions
regress and a coarse trabecular network develops. It
should be noted that radiographic signs are not correlated with patient discomfort or lameness.
Differential diagnoses include elbow dysplasia, OCD,
hip dysplasia, and HOD.
Treatment

There are no known medical or surgical cures for this
condition. Treatment consists primarily of analgesics
(NSAIDs) and rest.
Prognosis

The disease is self‐limiting, although recurrences are possible, reportedly even until the patient is 5 years of age.
Hypertrophic Osteodystrophy
Etiology and Pathophysiology

Hypertrophic osteodystrophy (HOD) is a disease of predominantly young, growing large‐breed dogs, characterized by metaphyseal swelling of affected bones and
lameness. Synonyms for HOD include infantile scurvy,
Moller Barlow disease, juvenile scurvy, osteodystrophy
II, skeletal scurvy, and metaphyseal osteopathy.
The etiology of HOD is unknown. Proposed theories
include overnutrition, vitamin C deficiency, infection,
vaccinations, and heritability. In more recent reports, the
etiologic roles of overnutrition and vitamin C deficiency
have been questioned.
Many large dog breeds are predisposed to HOD (see
Table 174.1) and therefore a genetic etiology has been
suggested. In a litter of affected Weimaraners, the heritability was estimated to be 0.68.
Several lines of evidence suggest an infectious etiology.
Specifically, many affected dogs have a history of, or
actually are suffering from, a systemic illness (for instance,
a respiratory infection). Active bacteremia (E. coli) in an

1549

VetBooks.ir

1550

Section 13 Diseases of Bone and Joint

affected dog has also been reported. Canine distemper
virus transcripts have been detected in the metaphysis of
dogs with HOD, but a direct relationship with canine distemper has not been demonstrated. More recently, it was
reported that clinical signs of HOD developed in six
Weimaraner puppies (five of the six were related), 10 days
after administration of a modified live vaccine of canine
distemper virus and canine adenovirus type 2. It was suggested that the HOD may have been facilitated by an
inherited immunodeficiency with low concentrations of
circulating immunoglobulins.
Epidemiology

Hypertrophic osteodystrophy is reported to occur in 2.8
per 100 000 cases. In one study, the incidence was highest in the northeastern regions of the United States, and
was highest in the fall and lowest in the winter.
Signalment

Several breeds are predisposed to HOD (see Table 174.1).
Males are more often affected than females (2.3:1) with
patients most commonly being presented between 2 and
6 months of age.
History and Clinical Signs

Hypertrophic osteodystrophy is a disease of young, rapidly growing dogs. The distal radius, ulna, and tibia are
the most commonly affected bones but the condition has
also been diagnosed in the humerus, mandible, ribs,
maxilla, femur, skull, vertebra, and scapula. Affected
patients have unilateral or bilateral swelling at the metaphyseal region(s) of affected bone(s). If the distal radius
and ulna are affected, an angular limb deformity may be
seen if a synostosis develops between radius and ulna.
Warmth and varying degrees of discomfort can be appreciated when palpating the swellings, with subsequent
lameness ensuing. The lameness may range from mild to
a complete inability to stand or walk. Additional systemic clinical signs may include anorexia, depression,
hyperthermia, and diarrhea.
Diagnosis

The hallmark radiographic finding is a metaphyseal radiolucent zone with adjacent sclerosis parallel and adjacent
to the growth plate. In a later stage, periosteal and
endosteal bone proliferation may be noted. Metaphyseal
enlargement and irregular widening of the growth plate
may be present in advanced disease stages. As the condition resolves, resolution of the radiolucent line and
remodeling of the periosteal reaction will occur. In
severely affected dogs with a secondary synostosis, an
angular limb deformity may develop. If a patient has systemic clinical signs, a complete blood count, serum
chemistry and urinalysis, as well as blood or synovial

fluid culture, may be indicated. Differential diagnoses
include septic polyarthritis, panosteitis, polyarthropathies, polyneuritis, polymyocytis, secondary nutritional
hyperparathyroidism, neosporosis, and toxoplasmosis.
In Newfoundlands, metaphyseal dysplasia also may be
considered.
Treatment

There are no known medical or surgical cures for this
condition. Treatment varies depending upon the severity
of the disease. In mildly affected dogs, a balanced diet (a
nutritional association has been reported) and NSAIDs
will be sufficient. In more severely affected dogs, more
supportive care may be needed, particularly if the patient
is reluctant to eat, hyperthermic, and/or unable to get
up. Antibiotics are indicated for patients with bacteremia. Severely affected Weimaraner puppies without bacteremia may respond better to steroids than to NSAIDs.
Prognosis

The prognosis is generally good to excellent for mild to
moderate cases. The disease is usually self‐limiting, typically within days to weeks, but can persist for months
with multiple recurrences possible. In severe cases, death
may occur. In cases with intractable disease and/or
refractory to treatment, euthanasia should be considered. All owners should be counseled on the potential for
secondary angular limb deformities.
Slipped Capital Femoral Epiphysis
Etiology and Pathophysiology

Slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE) is a nontraumatic, slowly progressive lateral slippage of the proximal
femoral metaphysis through the growth plate, resulting
in separation of the proximal femoral metaphysis from
the capital femoral epiphysis, causing pelvic limb lameness. The disease is most commonly seen in mature cats
but also has been reported in dogs. Synonyms include
spontaneous femoral capital physeal fracture, femoral
neck metaphyseal osteopathy, and femoral capital physeal dysplasia.
The etiology of the metaphyseal slippage is unknown.
Some have suggested that in cats, the slippage is the
result of weakening of the capital physis due to a multicentric dysplasia. Others proposed that SCFE in cats is
the result of early (juvenile) castration. The ensuing
delayed growth plate closure due to hypotestosteronism, together with obesity, exposes the physis to
increased/excessive/supraphysiologic cyclic shear forces
during the gait cycle, resulting in spontaneous slippage
and separation. The latter hypothesis is consistent with
the pathophysiology of SCFE in children and other animal species.

VetBooks.ir

174 Developmental Orthopedic Diseases

Epidemiology

The disease is uncommon, but an incidence has not been
reported.
Signalment

Cats are more commonly affected than dogs. Reported
feline cases are almost all neutered overweight males
presented when they were 4.5–42 months of age. In one
study of 13 cats, 23% were Siamese.
History and Clinical Signs

Clinical signs include uni‐ or bilateral lameness, decreased
ability to jump, weakness, and crepitus and pain during
palpation. Lameness can be acute in onset but is mostly
insidious and possibly intermittent. It was reported that
at initial presentation, 24–38% of cases were affected
bilaterally but not necessarily symmetrically.
Diagnosis

Radiographic lesions vary with the stage of the disease.
Early on in the disease, the capital growth plate is slightly

widened compared to the normal contralateral one and
slippage may be demonstrated on extended ventrodorsal
pelvic radiographs. In later stages, the proximal femoral
metaphysis may be craniodorsally displaced relative to
the epiphysis, with resorption and sclerosis of the femoral
neck. Ultrasound (slippage and periphyseal fluid accumulation) and/or computed tomography may be helpful
in early stages without obvious radiographic signs.
Treatment

The most common method of treatment is femoral
head and neck ostectomy because of progressive femoral neck resorption. Successful primary stabilization
with Kirschner wire and total hip replacement have
been reported.
Prognosis

The prognosis for patients treated with femoral head and
neck ostectomy is excellent, although limb function is
not normal. Unilateral cases can present with contralateral disease later in life.

­Further Reading
Breur GJ, Lambrechts NE. Osteochondrosis. In: Johnston SA,
Tobias KM, eds. Veterinary Surgery: Small Animal, 2nd
edn. St Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2017, pp. 1299–315.
Breur GJ. Lambrechts NE, Todhunter RJ. The genetics of
canine orthopaedic traits. In: Ostrander EA, Ruvinsky A,
eds. The Genetics of the Dog, 2nd edn. Wallingford, UK:
CAB International, 2012, pp. 136–60.
Roush JK. Surgical therapy of canine hip dysplasia. In:
Tobias KM, Johnson SA, eds. Veterinary Surgery: Small

Animal. St Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2012,
pp. 849–64.
Schultz KS. Diseases of joints. In: Fossum TW, ed. Small
Animal Surgery, 4th edn. St Louis, MO: Elsevier Mosby,
2013, pp. 1215–374.
Towle HA, Breur GJ. Miscellaneous orthopedic conditions
In: Johnston SA, Tobias KM, eds. Veterinary Surgery:
Small Animal, 2nd edn. St Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders,
2017, pp. 1112–26.

1551

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1553

Section 14
Social and Ethical Issues in Veterinary Medicine

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1555

175
Canine and Feline End of Life Care
Robin Downing, DVM, MS, DAAPM, DACVSMR
The Downing Center for Animal Pain Management, LLC, Windsor, CO, USA

The Buddhists say “Pain is inevitable; suffering is
optional.” Our obligation in veterinary medicine is to
recognize, relieve, and prevent pain and suffering in
the animals entrusted to our care. At no time is this
­obligation to advocate on behalf of beings who cannot
advocate for themselves more imperative than when an
animal approaches the end of its life.
Veterinary medicine and human medicine are intimately intertwined. Many of the life‐saving procedures
now used for human patients had their roots in animal
models. Likewise, most pharmaceuticals undergo animal
testing before they are brought to trials in human subjects. The flow of medical knowledge, information, technology, and techniques between human and veterinary
medicine is bidirectional. Advanced surgical techniques
(e.g., arthroscopy), advanced diagnostic technologies
(e.g., magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]), and critical
care interventions (e.g., mechanical ventilation) have
been embraced by veterinary medicine and have proved
to be game‐changers, allowing countless animals who
would otherwise have succumbed to their conditions or
been euthanized to be restored to life and health. It is a
logical extension of the search for better and broader
ways to practice veterinary medicine for veterinarians to
recognize the utility of evaluating human palliative medicine and hospice care for application to animal patients.
Companion animals have made a migration of Biblical
proportions from the backyard to the bedroom and from
the kennel to the couch. The evolving role of pets as
members of the family, coupled with advances in preventive and interventive medicine, has resulted in dramatically longer life expectancies among dogs and cats. One
consequence of longer lifespans in pets is the emergence
of age‐related diseases and physiologic breakdowns
that were once considered unusual. Examples include
multiple joint osteoarthritis, pulmonary hypertension,

systemic hypertension, advanced renal disease, and
­cancers of all types. When pets did not generally live as
long as they do now – when their cause of death was an
infectious disease or a violent event like being hit by a
car – neither veterinarians nor pet owners were faced
with the slow, incremental declines so often witnessed
now. Squiring companion animals into advanced old age
has opened the door to a new discipline of veterinary
palliative medicine and hospice care. Human palliative
and hospice medicine can provide veterinarians with a
template to follow when adapting and adopting these
principles and practices for veterinary application.
But a simple translation is not enough. In human end of
life care, the patient must, with rare exceptions, die on his
or her own. Exceptions at the time of this writing are found
in the states of Oregon, Washington, Montana, California,
New Jersey, and Vermont where physician‐assisted death
with ­dignity has been affirmed as legally available. Of note,
however, is that physician‐assisted death with dignity
remains ultimately the act of the patient, generally by
refusing food and water or by ingesting a lethal dose of
a barbiturate drug previously prescribed by a physician.
Only in a few jurisdictions worldwide, most notably the
Netherlands, can the physician take an active role in the
patient’s death by performing voluntary active euthanasia.
What that means for the majority of dying humans is that
they must die on their own.
The gift of euthanasia, translated from the Greek as
“good death,” remains, at least in the Americas, exclusively in the hands of veterinarians. The single most
important caution to the veterinary profession in
embracing wholesale the palliative medicine and hospice
care model provided by human medicine is to resist the
temptation to force animals to suffer to death rather than
providing compassionate, humane euthanasia. It is
equally important to resist the temptation to force heroic

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1556

Section 14 Social and Ethical Issues in Veterinary Medicine

interventions with little hope for success on animals
who are approaching their end of life. Finally, it is also a
veterinarian’s obligation to the pet, the pet owner, and
the precious human–animal bond not to force or rush
euthanasia on a patient whose care has shifted from that
of curative to palliative. Ours is a delicate balance to
negotiate.
In addition to drawing palliative care strategies from
the disciplines of pain management, physical rehabilitation, behavior medicine, and oncology, it is to the discipline of clinical bioethics that the veterinary profession
should turn for guidance when evaluating the application of interventive, palliative, or hospice techniques
in end of life care. The foundational principles of biomedical ethics – respect for autonomy, nonmaleficence,
beneficence, and justice – all have a role to play during
the decision making that occurs as an animal approaches
the end of its life. Before exploring the application of
the principles of biomedical ethics in end of life clinical
veterinary medicine, it is appropriate to consider the
development and evolution of veterinary palliative medicine and hospice care, as well as the many techniques
that can be used to sustain a life‐limited pet’s comfort
and quality of life until the time when humane euthanasia becomes the most reasonable choice.

­Veterinary Palliative Medicine
and Hospice Care
Veterinary palliative medicine and hospice care derive
their basic principles from human palliative and hospice
care, both directly and by analogy. Historically, hospices
were first places of refuge for travelers, often those on a
religious pilgrimage. In the 11th century, the focus
shifted to care of the incurably ill who either had no family or could not afford other care. Hospice providers were
typically members of various religious orders. In the 19th
century, the formal concept of caring for the dying
emerged, first in France in 1842. In the late 1800s and
early 1900s, several facilities that are still in existence
opened in England and Australia to attend to the dying.
Religious orders continued to provide care, as this
­preceded the phenomenon of “medicalizing” the dying
process. Hospice in the US began in earnest in the 19th
century, mirroring activities in the US and Australia. A
leap forward in the development of palliative care and
hospice occurred following the 1969 publication of Dr
Elisabeth Kübler‐Ross’ seminal work, On Death and
Dying. She and others created awareness about the lack
of adequate care for the dying, and sharpened the focus
on the important role palliative care and hospice can fill.

While the original hospices were places for the dying,
it is important to understand that hospice is a philosophy
of caring that “affirms the concept of palliative care as an
intensive program that enhances comfort and promotes
… quality of life … When cure is no longer possible, hospice recognizes that a peaceful and comfortable death is
an essential goal of health care…” This commitment to
quality of life and comfort care brought to the patient
lends itself well to the veterinary profession. Animal
patients can be seen and cared for in many settings,
including the clinic and the home. The emergence of
ambulatory companion animal veterinary practices
clearly demonstrates the response of the veterinary profession to the demand for veterinary care provided in the
comfort of the animal’s home. This paradigm of sophisticated in‐home care further reinforces the opportunity to
provide palliative and hospice care to pets who are
approaching the end of their lives.
The first formal discussion of hospice for animals
was presented at the Delta Society’s 10th Annual
Conference in Portland, Oregon by Drs Guy Hancock
and James Harris, and Ms Bonnie Mader. The presentation, “The hospice concept for animals,” was delivered at multiple regional, national, and international
conferences by Dr Hancock between 1995 and 2005.
Dr Eric Clough, a veterinarian in New Hampshire,
alongside his wife, June, a registered nurse with expertise in human hospice, were also pioneers in applying the concepts of animal ­hospice and palliative care.
In 2001, the American Veterinary Medical Association
approved the first “Veterinary Hospice Care Guidelines,”
an open‐access document available at www.avma.org.
In 2003, the Pet Hospice Volunteer Student Outreach
Program was launched by the Argus Institute at
the Colorado State University College of Veterinary
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences.
During the ensuing years, a clear focus on quality of
life during the end of life of companion animals has
emerged, leading to the establishment of the International
Association for Animal Hospice and Palliative Care
(www.iaahpc.org) as well as the provision of postgraduate continuing education on the subject for both veterinarians and veterinary technicians/nurses. Clearly, there
is a need for the veterinary profession to understand its
critical role in a pet’s end of life care. There truly is a
“space” between ceasing to pursue a cure and the time
when humane euthanasia is in the best interest of the
patient. It is also worth noting that while only recently
has the term “palliative care” entered the mainstream
veterinary vocabulary, veterinarians routinely provide
what qualifies as palliative care. Palliative medicine is
care that is not focused on a cure but rather on improving and maintaining good quality of life. Pets with many

VetBooks.ir

175 Canine and Feline End of Life Care

different conditions enjoy the benefits of this approach
long before they are at the end of life, including those
with diabetes mellitus, systemic hypertension, and
chronic kidney disease.
At the end of life, with the many sophisticated interventional options available, it is appropriate for veterinarians to exercise a more formal approach to the
necessary decision making that occurs. Veterinarians
must combine the following elements in order to help
the pet owner make ongoing care decisions that are in
the best interest of the pet approaching its death.
Regular evaluations of the animal’s quality of life in
dialogue with the pet owner.
●● Regular assessment of the human family’s quality of
life as they care for the pet.
●● Regular reevaluation of the therapeutic goals of care.
●● Application of the foundational principles of clinical
bioethics (respect for autonomy, nonmaleficence,
beneficence, and justice) to both the patient and the
human family during decision making to maximize
outcomes and to act in the best interest of all
parties.
●●

When considering any intervention as a pet approaches
the end of its life, it is important to ask the question, “Just
because we can, does that mean we should?”

­Evaluating and Maintaining Quality
of Life in End of Life Care
As soon as a life‐limiting disease is diagnosed, it is
appropriate to open a dialogue with the pet owner about
the anticipated arc of the disease process on the way
to the end of the pet’s life. Likewise, it is important to lay
the foundation for periodic ongoing evaluations of the
pet’s quality of life. Finally, it is important to consider
the effects of pet end of life care on the family’s quality
of life. Caring for a beloved animal family member at the
end of life can become overwhelming and fraught with
­emotional overload. The veterinarian’s obligation is to
advocate on behalf of a being who cannot advocate
for itself, and that obligation becomes even more
­critical when choreographing care at the end of life
(Figure 175.1).
Quality of life is an exquisitely subjective concept.
Quantifying a particular pet’s quality of life is equally
subjective. Each pet’s quality of life must be assessed on
a case‐by‐case basis as every animal is unique. Likewise,
every family situation must stand on its own merits in
order to assess both the financial and emotional
resources that are available for care of the pet approaching its death.

Figure 175.1 A comfort room lends itself well to end of life
consultations with pet owners. Source: Courtesy of Robin
Downing, DVM.

Dr Alice Villalobos has created a Quality of Life
Scale to use in dialogue with pet owners to offer a somewhat objective assessment of what is a very subjective
experience (Table 175.1). The scale considers seven
parameters, each scored 1–10 (10 is best). A score at or
above 5 in each category with an overall score of 35 or
greater generally suggests an acceptable quality of life.
While a particular score is important, the trend of scores
over time is a more accurate representation of how the
pet is doing. A single low score may illuminate a weakness in the palliative care plan, calling for a fine‐tuning of
care. On the other hand, a low score in even a single category may signal the time when humane euthanasia is in
the pet’s best interest. The seven parameters follow the
mnemonic HHHHHMM.
Hurt
Hunger
●● Hydration
●● Hygiene
●● Happiness
●● Mobility
●● More good days than bad
●●
●●

1557

VetBooks.ir

1558

Section 14 Social and Ethical Issues in Veterinary Medicine

Table 175.1 Villalobos Quality of Life (HHHHHMM) Scale
Pet caregivers can use this Quality of Life Scale to determine the success of Pawspice care. Score patients using a scale of 0 to 10
(10 being ideal).
Score

Criterion

0–10

HURT – Adequate pain control and breathing ability is of top concern. Trouble breathing outweighs all concerns. Is the
pet’s pain well managed? Can the pet breathe properly? Is oxygen supplementation necessary?

0–10

HUNGER – Is the pet eating enough? Does hand feeding help? Does the pet need a feeding tube?

0–10

HYDRATION – Is the pet dehydrated? For patients not drinking enough water, use subcutaneous fluids daily or twice
daily to supplement fluid intake

0–10

HYGIENE – The pet should be brushed and cleaned, particularly after eliminations. Avoid pressure sores with soft
bedding and keep all wounds clean

0–10

HAPPINESS – Does the pet express joy and interest? Is the pet responsive to family, toys, etc.? Is the pet depressed, lonely,
anxious, bored or afraid? Can the pet’s bed be moved to be close to family activities?

0–10

MOBILITY – Can the pet get up without assistance? Does the pet need human or mechanical help (e.g., a cart)? Does the
pet feel like going for a walk? Is the pet having seizures or stumbling? (Some caregivers feel euthanasia is preferable to
amputation, but an animal with limited mobility yet still alert, happy and responsive can have a good quality of life as long
as caregivers are committed to helping their pet)

0–10

MORE GOOD DAYS THAN BAD – When bad days outnumber good days, quality of life might be too compromised.
When a healthy human–animal bond is no longer possible, the caregiver must be made aware that the end is near.
The decision for euthanasia needs to be made if the pet is suffering. If death comes peacefully and painlessly at home,
that is OK

TOTAL

A total over 35 points represents acceptable life quality to continue with pet hospice (Pawspice)

Dr Alice Villalobos (09/2004), scale format created for author’s book (2007), revised for IVAPM (2011) Palliative Care and Hospice Guidelines.
Reproduced with permission of Dr Alice Villalobos and Wiley‐Blackwell.

Hurt
Adequate pain management is the cornerstone of end of
life care, and a key to sustaining an acceptable quality of
life. Dr Lloyd E Davis wrote in 1983:
[o]ne of the psychological curiosities of therapeutic decision making is the withholding of analgesic drugs because the clinician is not absolutely
certain that the animal is experiencing pain. Yet
the same individual will administer antibiotics
without documenting the presence of an infection. Pain and suffering constitute the only situation in which I believe that, if in doubt, one should
go ahead and treat.
Because pain is such a major factor in diminished quality
of life, excellent, aggressive, and comprehensive (e.g.,
multimodal) pain management plays a critical role in
applying palliative care and hospice principles to pets.
While humans have eschewed overt cruelty to animals
from Biblical times, it is only within the past several decades that human understanding of nonhuman pain and
suffering has expanded to include a more proactive
approach to recognizing and relieving that pain. Richard
D. Ryder, in his groundbreaking work Painism: A Modern

Morality, coined the term “panience” to describe the
principle that a moral code should be based on the capacity to feel pain. He went on to state that the terms “pain”
and “suffering” are interchangeable and “what matters
morally is the degree of pain and not who or what experiences it.” In Ryder’s worldview, pain is the common
enemy of all beings. Ryder’s work, alongside that of scientists like Marc Bekoff and Frank McMillan, lays the
foundation for applying clinical bioethical principles to
pet end of life and quality of life considerations. There
are several excellent resources for practitioners to access
in creating appropriate pain management plans for
patients approaching the end of life.
Appropriate pain management at the end of life is a
function of striking a balance between risks and benefits.
Regardless of the root of the palliative care patient’s pain,
the practitioner must always start with a careful pain palpation assessment to determine all the uncomfortable
areas on the body in order to create as comprehensive a
pain management strategy as possible. The ability to
breathe falls into this category, and trouble breathing
trumps all other concerns about quality of life. Because
animals cannot self‐report, measurement of oxygen saturation may be an important part of patient assessment
if breathing is compromised in any way.

VetBooks.ir

175 Canine and Feline End of Life Care

Figure 175.2 Foam steps up to bed. Source: Courtesy of Robin
Downing, DVM

Figure 175.3 Delivering subcutaneous fluids. Source: Courtesy of
Robin Downing, DVM.

One final consideration for managing pain at the end
of life is to use nonpharmacologic strategies. These
include modifying the pet’s environment and everyday
handling in order to maximize comfort (Figure 175.2).
Environmental modifications may include:

Appetite stimulants as well as antinausea medications
may be indicated, at least in the short term. For an animal experiencing difficulty prehending, chewing, or
swallowing food, placing an esophagostomy tube may be
appropriate if other quality of life parameters remain
high. This is a minimally invasive technique requiring a
very short period of general anesthesia, and the contribution to overall quality of life can be significant.

raising food and water dishes to shoulder height
using a form‐fitted lift harness for gait assistance
●● using a fabric sling under the abdomen for support
●● limiting access to stairs
●● covering slippery floor surfaces
●● using a ramp for vehicle entry and exit.
●●
●●

Many techniques commonly employed in physical medicine lend themselves very well to relieving pain and
supporting comfort in veterinary palliative and hospice
care patients. Application of heat and cold, stretching,
joint mobilizations, massage, neuromodulatory acupuncture, photobiomodulation via therapeutic laser,
transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS),
neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES), as well as
some proprioceptive retraining and therapeutic exercise, can all contribute to pain relief in this population of
patients.
Hunger
Hunger can serve as an important barometer of a pet’s
quality of life. If the pet remains hungry and willing to
eat, it is reasonable to presume that it is still interested in
living. On the other hand, a decline in appetite is one
part of the natural process as the end of life approaches.
Nutritional support is important if hospice care is to
continue, and malnutrition and weight loss occur quickly
in an anorectic pet. Hand feeding or feeding a different
texture (canned versus dry kibble) may enhance appetite.

Hydration
Many animals approaching the end of life do not drink
enough to sustain metabolic functions. Dehydration not
only undermines quality of life, it hastens the decline of
all metabolic functions, particularly waste elimination by
the kidneys. Many animals readily accept the delivery of
subcutaneous (SC) fluids, and this is an easy technique
to teach pet owners (Figure 175.3). It is important to link
the delivery of SC fluids with something that the pet
enjoys, like tasty treats or gentle combing or brushing, in
order to minimize any objection the pet may have to
receiving fluids. If a pet receiving end of life care vigorously objects to receiving SC fluids in spite of all attempts
to make the procedure as comfortable as possible, it is
important to respect the animal’s expressed preference.
To force fluids on an uncooperative hospice patient
­compromises quality of life.
Hygiene
Good hygiene is an important component of good quality of life. As animals approach the end of their lives,
they may develop fecal and/or urinary incontinence,
which is the most likely hygiene issue these pet owners
will face. Preventing urine and fecal scalding is a priority

1559

VetBooks.ir

1560

Section 14 Social and Ethical Issues in Veterinary Medicine

in these patients. Keep hair trimmed short around the
genitals and anus to facilitate cleaning. It may be worth
considering a whole‐body trim to make day‐to‐day
grooming easier for both the pet and pet owner.
Reusable/washable diapers as well as diapers with
replaceable absorbent pads are available for animals
whose incontinence is intermittent or unpredictable.
Waterproof bedding covers facilitate clean‐up. Cats may
need to have one side of their litter pan cut away to make
entry easy. If the pet has any areas of devitalized tissue
that secrete serum and form crusts (e.g., a tumor that
cannot be removed), lemon juice in a 1:1 dilution with
water can be used to cleanse the area, and absorbent fabrics like cotton T‐shirts may be used to help manage
exudates. Waterless shampoos also work well to keep
immobilized pets clean.
Happiness
Happiness may be the most subjective of the quality of
life parameters to be measured during the pet’s end of
life time, but it is an important one. It is in this area in
particular that the veterinarian must listen very carefully
to the client’s report of how the pet is doing overall. The
pet’s mental state and psychosocial well‐being are critical components of quality of life. Dogs and cats communicate with their eyes, their facial expressions, and their
actions. These are social creatures, and their happiness
depends upon interaction with “their” humans. Animals
engage in many mutual care behaviors that can be mimicked by the human caregiver to contribute to happiness,
including stroking and sounds of contentment (e.g.,
purring while interacting with a cat patient).
Owners of animals receiving end of life care must be
instructed to think through the activities the pet has
enjoyed over its lifetime, and then to consider how those
activities and interactions may be modified to provide
joy to the pet. For instance, the author worked with a toy
poodle who had been felled by a stroke. She became paralyzed in the rear legs and profoundly paretic in the front
legs. Her greatest joy before her stroke was playing tug‐
of‐war with a cloth toy. She would bring the toy to one or
another family member and ask them to play. The family
simply modified this game by initiating play sessions
themselves. This dog obviously derived great joy from
these play sessions.
Many end of life pets will cheer up and greatly anticipate their interactions with their human family members. Feeding, grooming, play, simple stroking, and
strategic placement so that the pet may watch what the
family is doing are all simple strategies for enhancing
happiness. McMillan makes a strong case that animals
not only do experience happiness, but that their happiness contributes immeasurably to their quality of life. In
general, we can equate happiness with the will to live.

Figure 175.4 A cart can restore and maintain mobility. Source:
Courtesy of Robin Downing, DVM.

Mobility
As the inevitable decline toward approaching death proceeds, animals may lose their ability to move independently. How much of an impact this makes on the pet’s
quality of life and the family’s ability to continue end of
life care may depend on the size/weight of the patient as
well as the willingness of the pet to accept assistance.
There are many mobility assistance options available for
pets of all sizes, and simple environmental modification
may make a profound impact, allowing a pet to sustain
its own ability to get up and down and move around
(Figure 175.4). Providing nonskid floor surfaces, preventing unsupervised access to stairs, utilizing ramps for
entry and exit from vehicles, as well as slings, supportive
vests, and pet wheelchairs are all simple strategies for
sustaining mobility. The owners of immobilized end of
life pets must be instructed in the details of preventing
decubital ulcers. The size of the immobilized pet relative
to the size and strength of the pet owner must be considered when deciding whether to proceed with palliative
and hospice care versus opting for humane euthanasia.
More Good Days Than Bad
A single “bad day” in the end of life time of a pet is something to be expected, but more than a few bad days in a
row suggests that quality of life may be too compromised
to continue palliative and hospice care. If the pet is
“turned off” to life, is no longer responding to activities
in its immediate environment, or is withdrawing
from interactions with family members, then quality
of life is compromised. The overarching goal in a pet’s
end of life care is to maintain a healthy, two‐way, interactive human–animal bond (Figure 175.5). When the
HHHHHMM score drops below 35, it is likely that
the end is near. It is the obligation of the veterinarian

175 Canine and Feline End of Life Care

VetBooks.ir

­The Four Foundational Principles
of Clinical Bioethics
In Principles of Biomedical Ethics, Tom L. Beauchamp
and James F. Childress describe four foundational principles that may serve as an analytical framework for the
formulation of rules guiding medical decision making.
Respect for autonomy (respecting and supporting
autonomous decisions).
●● Nonmaleficence (avoiding the causing of harm).
●● Beneficence (relieving, lessening, or preventing harm
and providing benefits, and balancing benefits against
risks and costs).
●● Justice (fairly distributing benefits, risks, and costs –
distribution of scarce resources).
●●

Figure 175.5 An end of life care patient quietly resting near family
activities. Source: Courtesy of Robin Downing DVM

coordinating end of life care to speak on behalf of the
dying pet when compassionate, humane euthanasia is in
the pet’s best interest. It is critical, when there are more
bad days than good, not to allow the beloved pet to suffer
to death.

­Pets Should Not Suffer to Death
Occasionally, the veterinary healthcare team will encounter a client whose personal or religious beliefs prohibit
the active ending of a life – any life. If this is the case, then
a deep discussion about the need to prevent an agonizing
death must be a part of the dialogue between the veterinarian and the owner. In a case like this, it is extremely
important to make available powerful pain medication
that can provide heavy sedation and relieve any suffering
that emerges as death approaches. The flipside of this is
the client who wishes to pursue treatments, interventions, and procedures that are futile in the face of the pet’s
life‐limiting disease. In both cases, it is essential to have a
back‐up plan in place to provide the gift of humane
euthanasia at any time of the day or night should the need
arise and should the family decide to pursue that option.
Applying the foundational principles of clinical biomedical ethics provides a useful framework and strategy
for assisting families to negotiate the emotional minefield that end of life care represents. This formal approach
to the decision making involved in end of life care serves
all parties – the pet owner, the veterinary health care
team, and, most importantly, the pet with a life‐limiting
condition who is receiving end of life care.

These four principles, by the authors’ assertion, do not
constitute a general ethical theory, but rather provide a
place to start in order to specify application to a particular patient or case. Application of these four principles of
clinical bioethics requires balancing among them to
decide what, ultimately, is in the best interest of the
patient. These principles have a role to play in clinical
veterinary medicine in general, but they should definitely
play a role leading up to and during a pet’s end of life care
in order to maximize outcomes and quality of life for the
pets and the families who love them.
A conventional application of the four pillars of clinical
bioethics in the context of veterinary end of life care is to
the interactions with the pet owner as the surrogate decision maker. It is, after all, the pet owner who ultimately
makes all the caregiving decisions and who must carry
out all the caregiving activities for the pet approaching
the end of its life. Considering each of the four principles
as described by Beauchamp and Childress, we begin with
respect for autonomy.
Acting autonomously, according to Beauchamp and
Childress, involves three steps.
1) Intentionality (to make and follow a plan).
2) Understanding the consequences of decisions that
will be made.
3) Freedom from control or undue influence in the decision making process.
Respect for the autonomy of the pet owner during a pet’s
end of life care is fairly straightforward and hinges on the
veterinarian providing the owner with enough information in an understandable form that he or she may act as
autonomously as possible at each step of the decision‐
making algorithm as the pet’s dying progresses. While,
legally, the pet is property and can be subjected to nearly
any decision the pet owner might make, aside from gross
negligence or abuse, it is acknowledged that the human–
animal bond helps to define us as humans. James Serpell

1561

VetBooks.ir

1562

Section 14 Social and Ethical Issues in Veterinary Medicine

states that it is “hard to escape the conclusion that the
child‐like qualities of many animals can evoke in people
a strong desire to nurture and provide parental care and
protection.” The pet owner must make end of life decisions analogous to those made by parents on behalf of
children. The information that must be provided to the
owner of a dying pet in order for him or her to make
autonomous decisions on behalf of that animal includes
the expected arc of progression of the co‐morbidities the
pet possesses as well as the expected cause of death, costs
associated with various techniques and/or procedures
that may be recommended, statistics for expected outcomes of any interventions, a balanced presentation of
the pros and cons of any treatment or interventional
options, as well as guidance when humane euthanasia is
the better choice for the pet.
The principles of nonmaleficence and beneficence as
applied to the owner of the pet approaching death are
closely allied and related. According to Beauchamp and
Childress, nonmaleficence “obligates us to abstain from
causing harm to others” and beneficence “potentially
demand(s) more than the principle of nonmaleficence”
because it obligates us to “take positive steps to help
others, not merely refrain from harmful acts.”
­
Nonmaleficence and beneficence in this situation
demand full revelation of the facts, costs, and potential
consequences of pursuing any particular treatment or
care option during the pet’s end of life care. The positive
obligations of beneficence in veterinary palliative care
and hospice include active and ongoing patient and ­client
support by the veterinary healthcare team, a clear outline of the pet‐specific care required, and contingency
planning for unexpected or unplanned events.
Finally, applying the principle of justice to the owner
whose pet has entered end of life care involves full disclosure of the costs and details about the anticipated care
to each pet owner equally. Each pet owner and family is
unique and must be able to conduct a fair appraisal of the
investment (monetary and emotional) that they must
make. It is not appropriate for the veterinarian to cherry‐
pick the information that is provided to the client based
on his or her impression of what the client can and cannot afford or accomplish. Justice suggests that it is the
veterinarian’s obligation to the client to guide the decision making based on what is medically in the dying pet’s
best interest.

­Bioethical Principles and The Life‐
Limited Pet
Turning our attention to the pet entering end of life care,
it is not only appropriate but necessary to consider how
at least three of the four foundational principles – respect

for autonomy, nonmaleficence, and beneficence – apply,
despite the fact that animals cannot participate in the
caregiving decisions made on their behalf. This reflects a
novel application of clinical bioethical principles in clinical veterinary medicine, and acknowledges that animals
can and do express preferences, which can guide caregiving decisions.
In order to apply the principles of clinical bioethics to
animals, we must first consider them as moral agents and
thus appropriate targets of such an application. This
involves issues of consciousness and a need to respect
the preferences they express. Darwin himself recognized
that animals possess the fundamentals of consciousness.
His reasoning was that “if animals show emotion through
behavioral expression, then the behavioral expression of
emotion in man must share a similar neurobiological
evolution with other animals capable of expressing similar emotions.” As cited earlier, Richard D. Ryder laid the
foundation for considering animals as moral agents in
his work Painism: A Modern Morality. An updated narrative on the need for humans to recognize the moral
agency and emotional richness of animals is presented in
the provocative volume Wild Justice: The Moral Lives of
Animals by Marc Bekoff and Jessica Pierce. They argue
compellingly, based on robust behavioral science, that
“differences between species are differences of degrees
rather than differences in kind.” They go on to state that
in “including some animals within the sphere of morality,
we force a reconsideration of what have been assigned to
be the essential ingredients of morality – reflective judgment, agency, and conscience.” This and other contemporary work opens the door to applying the principles of
clinical bioethics in a serious way to the pets themselves
who are entering end of life care.
Animals do express preferences, if only the human is
willing to listen. When applying the principles of clinical
bioethics to animals receiving end of life care, we accept
the limitations presented by beings who do not possess
decisional capacity as we strive to achieve optimal outcomes for them, ultimately leading to a peaceful and pain‐
free death. The animal receiving end of life care must
be considered carefully. The pet’s personality, willingness
to be handled, willingness to take medication – basically,
the pet’s willingness to participate in its own care – must
weigh in the balance. In applying respect for this
pet’s autonomy, we must evaluate these preferences, as
expressed by the pet, before embarking on a complex path
of end of life medical management. To force medication
or painful wound care on an animal whose response is
either anxiety or aggression clearly violates the autonomy
the pet can express, independent of its inability to actively
choose specific end of life care. McMillan would argue
that forced medication or other forced procedures,
performed without the animal’s c­ooperation, present
­

VetBooks.ir

175 Canine and Feline End of Life Care

a sufficiently aversive stimulus to activate a powerful
­sympathoadrenal response that can precipitate negative
gastrointestinal and cardiovascular changes.
Nonmaleficence and beneficence are intertwined when
applied to the pet receiving end of life care. Nonmaleficence
is the requirement to avoid harm, and this principle is in
play when considering a procedure or other interventive
technique for an end of life patient. On balance, the
benefit must clearly outweigh any potential harm to
­
the patient. Beneficence means acting in the patient’s
best interest. At each decision‐making step, it must be
considered that the patient may be best served by
the compassionate application of humane euthanasia.
Nonmaleficence and beneficence are tightly aligned with
the pet’s willingness to participate in its own care. Without
that willingness, the animal itself is expressing its preferences and we have an obligation to heed the message if we
are unable to change the circumstances of care to improve
quality of life. While animals cannot anticipate or fear
their own death, they certainly can and do anticipate and
fear pain, and unrelenting pain is a deal‐breaker for the
continued imposition of care on a dying pet.
McMillan might argue that one barometer of our ability to monitor and measure our success in applying the
principles of respect for autonomy, nonmaleficence, and
beneficence is the animal’s ability to experience and
express happiness. As elusive a concept as happiness is,
ongoing active engagement with the environment and
human family members, the ability to exert some level of
control over activities, and modification of activities that
had previously brought enjoyment (e.g., tug‐of‐war
games) appear to contribute to an animal’s happiness
(Figure 175.6). This provides a slightly richer context for
consideration of quality of life issues.

­End of Life Care and The Human–
Animal Bond
End of life discussions are among the most difficult for
both the pet owner and the veterinary healthcare team,
yet they are among the most important. Taking a systematic approach to the practicalities of end of life care
allows the veterinarian to exhibit and express compassion while at the same time providing the client and family with a longer view of the arc of care that will be
required as the pet’s condition deteriorates.
The veterinarian should start with an initial consultation to assess the client’s goals, beliefs, concerns, and
financial resources/constraints. It is important to discuss
all of the pet’s co‐morbidities to ensure that all relevant
issues are addressed to maximize comfort and function.
Schedule regular quality of life evaluations and pain reassessments. The trend over time of the quality of life

Figure 175.6 A healthy human–animal bond is a two‐way
relationship. Source: Courtesy of Robin Downing, DVM.

scores is generally more important than individual
scores. Provide regular ongoing guidance to the client
about comfortable bedding for the pet, safe surroundings, medications, feeding, wound management when
necessary, assistive devices, physical medicine techniques to enhance comfort and function, and environmental enrichment. Construct a preparedness plan for
the inevitable decline in the pet’s health status, including
an advanced directive (e.g., “Do not attempt resuscitation” – DNAR) and options for euthanasia at any time of
the day or night. Plan for unexpected escalations of pain
or discomfort, providing the client with specific steps to
take. Plan for in‐home euthanasia if that is preferable to
the client and available in the community. Plan ahead for
preferred body handling when the animal dies. Be ready
to refer the client and family for grief support services if
that becomes necessary.
Planning ahead for the anticipated and inevitable
events that occur at the end of life supports the human–
animal bond and helps to prevent the client from being
overwhelmed with decisions once the animal’s death day
arrives.

­Conclusion
Veterinary medicine has long prided itself on its commitment to scrutinize advances in human medicine and
to evaluate the possible application of those advances to

1563

VetBooks.ir

1564

Section 14 Social and Ethical Issues in Veterinary Medicine

animal patients. In fact, many of the medical and surgical
techniques now utilized in human medicine were first
developed in animal models. There exists now a paradigm in human and veterinary medicine that recognizes
the importance of interdisciplinary collaboration in
order to foster synergistic attention to enhance the care
of animals, humans, and the environment. This is the
One Health Initiative –www.onehealthinitiative.com/).
The mission statement of the One Health Initiative recognizes “that human health (including mental health via
the human‐animal bond phenomenon), animal health,
and ecosystem health are inextricably linked” seeking to
“promote, improve, and defend the health and well‐being
of all species by enhancing cooperation and collaboration between physicians, veterinarians, [and]other scientific and environmental professionals.” With such a
commitment to cross‐pollination between medical disciplines, it is logical to consider ways in which palliative
and end of life care options for animals may be expanded.
In pursuing such expansion, however, it is critical also
to expand the ethical framework within which palliative
and end of life care decisions are made on behalf of pets
who are either experiencing life‐limiting disease or
actively dying. In addition to applying human medical
principles and practices in end of life care for pets,
including aggressive pain management and other palliative care techniques, it is appropriate for veterinary
healthcare teams to understand and apply the foundational clinical bioethical principles and practices as well.
The pet owner is in an analogous situation to the parent
of a dying child when making decisions on behalf of
the pet. The pet clearly does not possess decisional
capacity – that is, the animal cannot weigh the evidence
and decide for itself, among the care options, which one

is in its best interest. It is up to the pet owner – the “pet
parent” – to listen to the explanation provided by the
veterinarian and veterinary healthcare team, to weigh
the options to try to determine the risk to benefit ratio,
and then to decide on behalf of the pet what treatment or
procedure will be performed or withheld.
This huge responsibility to act in the best interest of
the pet must be borne by both the owner and the veterinarian coordinating care. In no other context of
­veterinary care is this shared obligation greater than at
the end of life. The veterinarian possesses knowledge
about the procedures and probabilities for various
­outcomes that the owner simply cannot know in the
same way. The late physician Edmund Pellegrino, MD,
acknowledged to be the father of modern medical ethics,
would affirm by analogy that every time a veterinarian
sees a patient and client and asks, “What is wrong?” she
is committing herself to having the competence to help
that animal patient as well as the judgment “to use that
competence in the best interests of the patient.”
In the end of life time for animal patients, it is especially important for veterinarians to find guidance in the
bioethical principles of respect for autonomy, nonmaleficence, and beneficence as applied to their patients
in determining what actions – or withholding of
actions – are in the best interest of that animal at that
time, in dialogue with the pet’s human family. It is important not to reach for euthanasia too early, but equally
important not to withhold it when that action reflects
the best interest of the animal. Reaching a decision about
what will best serve the animal patient at the end of life
may, in fact, demand answering the question mentioned
earlier in this chapter: “Just because we can, does that
mean we should?”

­Further Reading
Beauchamp TL, Childress JF. Principles of Biomedical Ethics,
7th edn. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2013.
Bekoff M, Pierce J. Wild Justice: The Moral Lives of
Animals. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2009.
McMillan FD. Do animals experience true happiness? In:
McMillan FD, ed. Mental Health and Well‐being in
Animals. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing, 2005,
pp. 221–33.

Pellegrino ED. Professionalism, profession, and the
virtues of the good physician. Mount Sinai J Med
2002; 69(6): 379.
Ryder RD. Painism: A Modern Morality. London: Open
Gate Press, 2001, p. 26.
Serpell J. In the Company of Animals: A Study of Human–
Animal Relationships. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 1996.

VetBooks.ir

1565

Section 15
Preventive Care

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1567

176
Role of Immunization
Melissa Kennedy, DVM, PhD, DACVM
Department of Biomedical and Diagnostic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA

The immune system is a complex network of interacting
cells and molecules. Manipulation of the immune
response is an attractive prospect, and has been achieved
in part through immunization. Immunization is the process of exposing an animal to whole or parts of microbes
in order to stimulate an acquired response. Immunization
takes many forms, and continues to advance as a field of
research. This chapter focuses on several aspects of
immunization in veterinary medicine.
Before one can understand immunization, one must
understand the nature of the acquired or adaptive immune
response. Acquired immunity is that which is developed
after an animal is born and is restricted primarily to the T
and B lymphocytes. This is to distinguish it from innate
immunity with which an animal is born. This latter form
of immunity is nonspecific in nature and involves many
cell types and molecules such as cytokines and complement. Acquired immunity is distinct in that it has a high
degree of specificity and diversity of antigen recognition,
as well as memory. It is this latter trait that is exploited by
immunization – the ability to establish an immunologic
memory of an encountered foreign antigen.
The major cells involved in the specific immune
response, and the only ones that manifest these properties of adaptive immunity, are the lymphocytes. Different
lymphocyte lineages are distinguished by cell surface
markers and perform different functions in the immune
response. The B lymphocytes, the producers of antibodies, or the humoral response, are critical for defense
against extracellular pathogens. The cytotoxic T lymphocytes, which force altered and invaded cells to
undergo apoptosis, are critical for defense against intracellular pathogens. The overseers of the entire response,
T helper lymphocytes, direct and modulate the response
using cell surface molecule expression and cytokine
production and secretion. It is important to understand
how various lymphocyte lineages recognize antigens in

order to design or select the most appropriate antigen
delivery method.
B lymphocytes are able to detect free and soluble antigens, while T lymphocytes are only able to recognize
antigens presented to them “on the pedestal” of the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) structures. For the
latter to occur, the foreign antigen must be processed
within a cell and displayed on the MHC for T lymphocyte
recognition. MHC structures are classified as class I or
class II. The former are expressed on all nucleated cells
and express only antigens that are produced within that
cell. The cytotoxic T lymphocytes recognize antigens
presented in MHC I. MHC class II are expressed on antigen‐presenting cells (APCs), such as macrophages, dendritic cells, and B lymphocytes. The antigen displayed by
these structures is produced outside of and taken up
by the APCs via endocytosis or phagocytosis. The antigen is then processed and inserted in MHC II for presentation to T helper lymphocytes. Understanding how
lymphocytes differ in this antigen recognition process is
critical to designing and selecting efficacious vaccines.
B lymphocytes bear immunoglobulins on their surface
for antigen recognition. As mentioned above, these antigens are extracellular, such as free‐living bacteria and
parasites and the extracellular form of viruses and other
intracellular parasites. In response to antigen recognition and assistance from T helper lymphocytes, naive B
lymphocytes will proliferate and differentiate into plasma
cells, which secrete antibody and are relatively short‐
lived, or memory cells, which are long‐lived cells that are
more easily activated and respond more quickly and with
higher magnitude and antibody affinity than naive B
lymphocytes. Producing a significant population of the
latter is the goal of most vaccines. Antibodies, the effector mechanism of B lymphocytes, will opsonize, neutralize, clump for easy removal of, or activate complement to
destroy the infecting agent.

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1568

Section 15 Preventive Care

T helper lymphocytes use the T cell receptor to recognize antigens displayed in MHC II by APCs. These antigens originate outside of and are “ingested” and processed
by the APCs. Thus, as with B lymphocytes, the antigen is
extracellular. In response to antigen recognition, the T
helper lymphocytes begin to proliferate and differentiate
into cytokine‐producing cells. These cytokines, such as
interleukin 2, enhance or modulate the immune response.
In addition, depending on signals received by the T
helper from the APC, the former will direct the immune
response in the most appropriate direction – the humoral
response for extracellular pathogens or cell‐mediated
immunity for intracellular pathogens. Thus, the T helper
lymphocyte is critical to an effective immune response,
whether humoral or cell mediated. T helper memory
cells develop, as with B lymphocytes, into long‐lived,
easily activated cells, and their production is a critical
goal of vaccination.
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes detect antigens presented to
them in MHC I using T cell receptors on their surface.
The antigen displayed in MHC I, as described above, is
produced within a cell and displayed on the surface. The
presence of foreign peptide from an intracellular invader
in MHC I results in induction of apoptosis in the infected
cell by the cytotoxic T lymphocyte. This type of response
is critical for elimination of an intracellular pathogen, as
it is inaccessible to most other defense mechanisms.
Thus, for protective immunity against most intracellular
pathogens, activation of cytotoxic T lymphocytes must
occur; to do this, the vaccinal agent must be replicating
in order to produce a peptide for display in MHC I. As
with T helper and B lymphocytes, this process leads to
proliferation and differentiation of the cytotoxic T lymphocyte into effector and memory cells.
It goes without saying that there are many other components to an effective immune response, including
granulocytes, natural killer cells, cytokines such as interferon, and inflammatory mediators. But the goal of vaccination remains lymphocyte stimulation and memory
cell production. How this is accomplished depends not
only on the antigen presented but how it is delivered.
Induction of adequate protection depends on appropriate vaccine selection and immunization protocols. As
stated by Shams (2005), “an ideal vaccine should be inexpensive, stable, adaptable to mass administration, and
confer a strong and long‐lasting immunity with no or
minimal adverse side effects in the vaccinated animal.”

­Antigen Delivery Systems
Vaccines can be divided into two basic groups depending
upon whether or not there is transcription/replication of
the agent after inoculation, referred to as infectious or

noninfectious, respectively. There are an increasing variety of strategies to produce vaccines in both categories,
and each has its advantages and disadvantages.
Noninfectious Vaccines
These vaccines may contain inactivated whole organisms or pieces (subunits) of the organism. Killed vaccines
contain whole organisms that have been altered or inactivated to destroy their ability to replicate. These vaccines are generally inexpensive to produce. Subunit
vaccines contain purified immunogenic and protective
antigens, often microbial proteins. These proteins may
be purified from the whole organism or may be generated using molecular technology (recombinantly produced). Conjugation to carrier proteins may be required
for the antigen to stimulate an effective response; this is
expensive and currently laborious. Peptide vaccines contain immunogenic epitopes that have been generated
synthetically. Conjugation to carriers is required for
effective immunogenicity of peptide vaccines.
In all cases, the vaccine is nonreplicating; thus, no
amplification of the antigenic mass occurs after inoculation. In addition, because no transcription/translation/
replication is occurring, MHC I presentation of microbial antigens, in general, does not occur. Thus, these vaccines stimulate primarily humoral immunity. They may
require multiple inoculations to be effective, but this is
not always the case. Most noninfectious vaccines also
require an adjuvant to enhance the immune response.
These substances nonspecifically increase the immune
response, often by unknown mechanisms. Concern
exists, particularly for feline vaccines, about the potential
for adverse effects due to adjuvants.
Still, noninfectious vaccines have several advantages.
Because they contain killed/inactivated organism or only
a portion of the infecting agent, there is no chance for
reversion to virulence. In general, they are safe for pregnant animals as well as for animals that may be immunocompromised or have an underlying disease. In addition,
noninfectious vaccines are stable in field conditions and
are usually inexpensive to produce.
Infectious Vaccines
Infectious vaccines contain metabolically active agents
that undergo transcription and translation at a minimum
and often the entire replication cycle of the inoculated
organism. For infectious whole organisms, the agent is
attenuated in some way such that it is no longer virulent
while retaining its antigenicity. Examples of infectious
vaccines include whole organism live vaccines, recombinant vectors, and DNA vaccines. Because infectious
vaccines undergo transcription and translation after
­

VetBooks.ir

176 Role of Immunization

inoculation, presentation of an antigen in MHC I will
occur, thus enabling stimulation of cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Meanwhile, the extracellular form of the agent will
be detected by B lymphocytes as well as APCs, which
will process it for presentation and activation of T helper
lymphocytes. Thus, both cell‐mediated and humoral
arms of the immune response are activated.
Modified Live Vaccines
Modified live vaccines contain organisms altered to
remove their disease‐causing ability. Attenuation may be
accomplished by acquisition of multiple genetic mutations. Alternatively, virulence genes may be removed
using recombinant technology. The attenuation process
must remove the virulence without altering the immunogenicity of the organism. In addition, the attenuated
organism must be genetically stable.
Recombinant Vector Vaccines
These are a variation on the theme of modified live vaccines in which one or more genes encoding immunogenic microbial proteins are engineered into a harmless
bacterial or viral carrier. Examples of this technology are
the canarypox virus vectored vaccines containing genes
of rabies virus or feline leukemia virus. The recombinant
vector expresses the cloned gene as well as its own genes
during transcription and translation. This technology is
useful for pathogens that would otherwise be too unsafe
to administer as a live vaccine. DNA vaccines use purified DNA containing microbial genes of immunologic
importance. They are taken up by cells after inoculation,
and the cloned genes are expressed within the cell and
presented in MHC.
Generally, for infectious vaccines, a lower antigen mass
is required, and no adjuvant is needed to achieve a protective response. There are drawbacks to infectious vaccines. Attenuated organisms can potentially revert to a
virulent state, though this is very uncommon. For recombinant vectors and DNA vaccines, reversion to virulence
is not possible. Infectious vaccines may be less stable in
field conditions than noninfectious vaccines. Finally,
infectious vaccines are not generally recommended for
pregnant or immunocompromised animals.
Vaccine programs may vary with each patient and client. Core vaccines, those recommended to be given routinely to all dogs and cats, are outlined in the guidelines
published by various organizations, including the AAFP,
AAHA, AVMA, and WSAVA (see list at end of chapter).
Additional vaccines are available for a number of pathogens, including feline immunodeficiency virus and
Chlamydia for cats, and Leptospira, Lyme, and canine
influenza for dogs. Administration of these vaccines

varies with epidemiology of the organism and risk of
exposure to the animal. Also severity of disease, cost
and efficacy of the vaccine, and potential for adverse
reactions should be considered.
Vaccine administration for the majority of vaccines
is parenteral, with subcutaneous being the route of
choice for most vaccines. When multiple vaccines are
given at the same visit, it is recommended that administration be done at different sites so that local adverse
reactions can be documented for the specific vaccine
that induced them.

­Vaccine Failures
Vaccine failures do arise and have several potential causes.
The most common reason in puppy‐ and kittenhood is
interference from maternal antibodies. For the majority of
puppies and kittens, the amount of maternal immunity
present at any point in time is unknown. Thus, vaccination generally begins at the earliest point when most will
begin losing protection from maternal antibodies and
continues through the latest point at which the majority of
animals do not have significant levels of interfering antibodies. The booster vaccine given during this period is
actually a misnomer, as multiple vaccines are given not to
boost preexisting immunity but to insure that the animal
responds to at least one vaccine in the series. Because we
do not know at what time point this occurs for each animal vaccinated, and it is not feasible to measure antibodies
multiple times throughout this period, we give multiple
vaccines with the intention that one of the series will work.
For example, some puppies may have immunity that has
waned by 6–7 weeks of age; these pups will respond to the
vaccine given at 8–9 weeks of age. In reality, this would be
the only vaccine necessary (for live vaccines) if we knew
for certain that maternal immunity had waned and the
pup had responded to the vaccine. The vaccines that follow at 12 and 16 weeks will in fact be neutralized by the
antibodies induced from vaccination. If maternal immunity does not wane until 13–14 weeks of age, only the 16‐
week vaccine will induce full protection. Because we do
not know the individual status at multiple time points for
each animal and against multiple pathogens, we start at
the early end of the susceptibility window and continue
through the late end of this window.
Other causes of vaccine failure that are host related
include immunosuppressive disorders and occurrence of a
genetic nonresponder. The former should likely not be vaccinated with live vaccines until the disorder is corrected.
For the latter, vaccinating with a different strain of the
agent may be able to overcome the nonresponsiveness.
Vaccine factors also play a role in vaccine failures. Vaccine
design, strain variation, and route of administration

1569

VetBooks.ir

1570

Section 15 Preventive Care

may all factor in to the level of protection induced. Human
error is also a concern, including improper storage, preparation, and administration.
Duration of immunity is likely much longer than current revaccination recommendations. Studies have shown
duration of immunity of years, and in many cases it is
likely lifelong, especially following infectious vaccines.
Detectable antibody levels to administered vaccines have
been found as long as 14 years after vaccination for canine
distemper virus and canine parvovirus in dogs. Challenge
studies in dogs vaccinated for canine distemper and canine
parvovirus have shown protection as long as nine years
post vaccination. Similar results have been reported in
cats. Current guidelines recommend revaccinating every
three years, but some are electing not to boost senior animals that have a strong vaccination history.
How young is too young? Generally, most live vaccines
cannot safely be administered to neonatal animals, as they
may cause disease in the neonate. Noninfectious vaccines
can be used as can intranasal live vaccines. However, in
the very young, the response may be less than adequate
due to immaturity of the immune system and interference from maternal antibodies. The exception to this

interference is the intranasal vaccines which can be used
in high‐risk settings where the history of the neonate may
not be known.
How old is too old? This is a difficult question to
answer, and varies with each animal. Health status of the
animal, previous vaccination history, and exposure of the
animal to infection all must be considered when vaccinating senior animals. Rabies requires adherence to local
vaccination policies.

­Conclusion
Vaccination remains an important tool in preventive veterinary medicine. Against the common pathogens affecting dogs and cats, their use has led to decline in disease
prevalence. Canine rabies, for example, has been eradicated from the USA, though rabies from wildlife still
occurs in dogs and cats. There are many choices among
current vaccines, and selection of vaccines is an important action for any practitioner. The practitioner must
remain vigilant as new strains of pathogens emerge and
new vaccines appear on the market.

Further Reading
Bartges J, Boynton B, Hoyumpa Vogt, A, et al. AAHA
Canine Life Stage Guidelines. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
2012; 48(1): 1–11.
Bohm M. Current vaccination strategies in dogs and cats.
In Practice 2009; 31: 2–7.
Day MJ. Vaccine safety in the neonatal period. J Comp
Pathol 2007; 137: S51–S56.
Day MJ, Horzinek MC, Schultz RD. Guidelines for the
vaccination of dogs and cats compiled by the
Vaccination Guidelines Group (VGG) of the World

Small Animal Veterinary Association (WSAVA). J Small
Anim Pract 2007; 48(9): 528–41.
Patel JR, Helden JGM. Review of companion animal viral
diseases and immunoprophylaxis. Vaccine 2009; 27:
491–504.
Schultz RD, Thiel B, Mukhtar E, Sharp P, Larson LJ. Age
and long‐term protective immunity in dogs and cats.
J Comp Pathol 2010; 142: S102–S108.
Wurzler GMD. Current vaccination strategies in puppies
and kittens. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2006;
36: 607–40.

Vaccine Recommendations
AAFP: www.catvets.com/guidelines/practice‐guidelines/
feline‐vaccination‐guidelines
AAHA (canine): www.aaha.org/aaha‐guidelines/
vaccination‐canine‐configuration/vaccination‐canine/

WSAVA (canine and feline): www.wsava.org/guidelines/
vaccination‐guidelines

VetBooks.ir

1571

177
Behavior Triage for Internists and the General Practitioner
Karen Lynn C. Sueda, DVM, DACVB
VCA West Los Angeles Animal Hospital, Los Angeles, CA, USA

All veterinarians are behaviorists to some degree,
whether they care for the mind or the body. Because we
treat nonverbal species, our patients cannot tell us
what hurts or how they feel. We rely upon behavioral
observations – either our clients’ or ours – to determine
if a pet is ill and to evaluate its response to treatment.
Just as physical illness may produce behavioral changes,
mental illness may also generate somatic signs. For example, anxiety may trigger compulsive behaviors such as psychogenic polydipsia or a proinflammatory response as in
feline urologic syndrome. It is important that ­veterinarians
recognize this mind–body interaction and be able to
address the behavioral component when necessary.
The objectives of this chapter are to help veterinarians
recognize the interplay between internal and behavioral
medicine and to provide an algorithm and recommendations for triaging behavior cases. Diagnosis and treatment of specific behavioral problems are beyond the
scope of this chapter. Recommended clinical small
­animal behavioral medicine texts which discuss the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of canine and feline
behavior problems are listed at the end of the chapter.

­Behavioral Presentations
The relationship between internal and behavioral medicine is more complex than one may assume at first
glance. In addition to physical illnesses triggering behavioral problems and vice versa, medical treatments may
also affect a pet’s behavior. Likewise, a pet’s misbehavior
may hinder the veterinarian’s ability or the client’s willingness to run diagnostic tests or implement treatment
plans. Examples of ways in which the diagnosis and
treatment of physical ailments may be influenced by
the pet’s behavior are listed below.

Physical Illness Causing a Behavioral Problem
While treating a pet for a physical problem, veterinarians
may learn from the client that the pet has started to misbehave. For example, a polyuric cat may have urinated
outside the litter box or a dog with pancreatitis may have
begun growling when his owner picks him up. Although
the behavior problem should resolve once the underlying
physical cause has been addressed, the client may
become frustrated with their pet’s behavior during the
treatment process. As such, veterinarians should query
clients regarding behavioral changes at each appointment and be able to provide short‐term treatment
­recommendations to alleviate them.
Ruling Out Physical Causes for a Behavior Problem

Clients may bring their pet to you to determine whether
there is a physical explanation for their pet’s behavior.
When a behavioral change is the first or only clinical sign
that the client observes, it is often unclear whether or
not a physical ailment is to blame. Physical causes for
behavioral problems should always be ruled out before
assuming the issue is purely psychological in nature. At
minimum, a complete physical exam, baseline bloodwork (i.e., complete blood count [CBC], chemistry panel,
total thyroid level), urinalysis and any other indicated
diagnostics tests (e.g., fecal exam for a pet defecating in
the house; radiographs or other imaging if pain is elicited
on physical exam) should be performed.
The likelihood of finding a physical cause for a behavior
problem varies widely and depends in part on the clinical
signs and history. For example, the odds of diagnosing a
physical cause for a cat’s sudden onset of house soiling are
much higher than finding a medical reason for a dog’s
eight‐year history of aggressive behavior toward strangers.
Of course, physical illness, if diagnosed, must be
addressed. However, if no such cause is determined or if

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

VetBooks.ir

1572

Section 15 Preventive Care

the behavior persists despite medical treatment, veterinarians should be prepared to offer behavioral treatment
recommendations.
Behavioral Problem Causing a Physical Illness
A pet may present with a physical illness that was caused,
either directly or indirectly, by a behavioral problem.
The link between the pet’s mental and physical ailments
may be straightforward. Examples include toxicity or
vomiting due to pica, polyuria secondary to psychogenic
polydipsia, and hair loss caused by psychogenic alopecia.
Because a psychological diagnosis for a behavior problem depends on excluding potential physical causes, it is
extremely important to discuss the necessity of diagnostic testing with clients.
In other cases, the connection between the physical
clinical signs and behavioral problem is less o
­ bvious. For
example, a cat presenting for rodenticide toxicity may be
hunting outdoors because he housesoils and is no longer
allowed inside. A dog with unexplained weight loss may
be suffering from separation anxiety, his weight loss
occurring because he does not eat and constantly paces
when home alone for 10 hours. In such cases, the client
may be unaware that their pet’s behavior plays a role in
their physical ailment. The veterinarian should look
beyond the presenting complaint to explore potential
psychological or behavioral issues that may be contributing to the disease. If the underlying behavioral cause is
not determined and addressed, it is very likely that the
pet will present for the same issue on subsequent
occasions.
Medical Treatment Causing a Behavioral
Problem
Unfortunately, medical treatment may cause undesirable behavior in some cases. Patients may have idiosyncratic reactions to certain medications. For example,
acepromazine may trigger aggressive behavior in some
patients, while opioids and metoclopramide may elicit
various behavioral changes, including agitation, in
others. Steroid‐induced polyphagia may result in
­
counter‐surfing, trash‐raiding or resource‐guarding
­
behavior. Similarly, frequent veterinary visits, physical
handling, restraint and manipulation, and constant
medication administration may trigger anxiety, depression or aggressive behavior in pets that do not understand that the veterinary staff and their owners are
trying to help them. In these situations – especially
if the treatment cannot be discontinued or altered –
veterinarians must provide behavioral recommendations to alleviate these behaviors or risk poor compliance
with their treatment plan.

Preexisting Behavior Problem Hindering
Medical Diagnostics and/or Treatment
Clients and veterinary staff may simply be unable to perform diagnostic tests or treatments because of the pet’s
behavior and temperament. The most common scenario
is the client who is unable to give oral medication to his
or her cat because the cat becomes aggressive when
restrained and is too finicky to consume medication hidden in food. Clients may find it impossible to administer
insulin injections to their diabetic dog that bites. A client
living in a busy household may not be able to conduct a
food trial if her dog knocks down her two‐year‐old son to
steal cookies out of his hand. Similarly, veterinarians and
staff may not be able to provide the best care to a patient
that is fractious or difficult to work with. Clients may
also hesitate to bring their pet to the hospital if the pet
does not travel well (e.g., hides from the carrier; is agitated or anxious during car rides) or is fearful or aggressive at the clinic. If the veterinarian or client is unable to
implement the ideal diagnostic or treatment plan because
of behavioral reasons, discuss other treatment options or
behavioral management solutions that may entail environmental changes, behavior modification and training
and/or referral to a behavior practitioner.
Client Declines Diagnostics or Treatment
Because of a Preexisting Behavioral Problem
The most insidious way in which behavior affects the veterinary practice occurs when the human–animal bond
has been broken due to a pet’s problematic behavior.
Clients may elect to not pursue diagnostic or treatment
options because their pet’s poor behavior factors into their
­decision. In the client’s mind, it may be difficult to justify
spending money to treat a pet that bites, destroys their
house, runs away or is a nuisance. Because clients rarely
admit to this aspect of their decision‐making process, it is
especially important that veterinarians screen for behavioral problems at each visit, as part of a general “systems
check.” Behavioral problems can be caught early and dealt
with before the human–animal bond has been affected.

­Behavioral Triage
Once a behavior problem has been identified, obtaining
complete medical and behavioral histories and conducting a physical exam and ancillary diagnostic tests will
allow the veterinarian to determine whether the behavior is normal or aberrant/abnormal and whether it is
physical or psychological in origin. The veterinarian may
then recommend an appropriate course of treatment,
which may include referral to an appropriate behavioral

177 Behavior Triage for Internists and the General Practitioner

VetBooks.ir

Behavior Problem

Normal

Aberrant/Abnormal

- Typical for species, breed, age, etc
- “Nuisance”; “unruly” behavior
- Due to lack of training or
appropriate behavioral outlet
- Anxiety and aggression not present
- No physical cause

- Atypical or unexpected for species, breed, age, etc
- Includes anxiety and aggression

Examples
Dog:
- Pulling on leash
- Jumping on people
- Submissive urination
Cat:
- Scratching furniture
- Jumping on counters
- Periuria secondary to inadequate
litterbox cleaning

Client handouts
Training aids
Positive reinforcement-based
training
Trainer

Physical
-Physical illness causing behavioral
signs
Examples
Dog:
-Polyphagia causing pica or
stealing food from the trash
Cat:
-Housesoiling secondary to a
urinary tract infection

Diagnose and treat physical
cause
If behavior problem
persists:
- Reassess original diagnosis and

treatment plan
- Consider combination of physical
and psychological causes or
development of a secondary
behavior problem

Physical and
Psychological/Behavioral
- Both physical and psychological/behavioral
causes are present
Examples
Dog:
- Growling at client when lifted into the car
due to osteoarthritis (physical) and fear of
car rides (psychological)
Cat:
- Excessive vocalization caused by
hyperthyroidism (physical) and reinforced by
client offering food (normal behavior)

Diagnose and treat physical cause
Determine if behavioral component
is normal vs. psychological

Psychological
- Emotional or neurochemical pathology
- Not resolved by training alone

Figure 177.1 Behavioral triage algorithm.

professional depending on the type and severity of the
issue. The algorithm in Figure 177.1 may help veterinarians triage behavioral issues they encounter.
1) Determine if the behavior is normal or abnormal.
–– Normal. These are behaviors you would expect
from another animal of similar species, breed, age,
lifestyle, experience, etc. These behavior problems
arise because normal expression of canine or feline
behavior is often incompatible with human rules.
Labeled “nuisance” or “unruly” behaviors, these
problems are often due to inadequate or inappropriate training or a lack of appropriate outlets for
the expression of species‐typical behavior. Anxiety
and aggression are not present. An underlying
medical cause is not present.
Problems stemming from normal behaviors are
extremely common and remain a frequent cause of
relinquishment and euthanasia. It is important to
identify these issues early and provide owners with
treatment resources. Client handouts outlining treatment protocols are available in veterinary behavior
textbooks and from veterinary, shelter, and training
websites. Depending on the particular behavior,
appropriate use of training aids such as head halters,
body harnesses, puzzle toys, etc. may also provide
clients with a “quick fix.” Because the problem does

not have an underlying physical or psychological
cause, referral to a qualified trainer or other behavior
professional is an appropriate measure.
–– Aberrant/Abnormal. An animal of similar species,
breed, age, lifestyle, experience, etc. would not be
expected to exhibit these behaviors. This category
includes but is not limited to anxiety and aggression.
Anxiety and aggression are normal behaviors when
expressed in rational contexts and with appropriate
intensity (e.g. cat hisses when a painful limb is manipulated). They are included in this category because
anxiety and aggression may be clinical signs of an
underlying physical and/or psychological disorder.
2) If the behavior is aberrant/abnormal, determine if the
primary cause is physical, psychological or a combination of both.
–– Physical. If the primary cause of the behavior problem is determined to be physical, diagnose and treat
the underlying physical cause of the behavior and
continue medical management until both the
­physical and behavioral clinical signs have resolved.
If the behavioral signs do not resolve or new
behavior problems arise, reassess your original
diagnosis and medical management and follow
Step 1 accordingly. Consider the possibility that the
original behavior problem had both physical and

1573

VetBooks.ir

1574

Section 15 Preventive Care

psychological causes and that medical treatment
only addressed the former. For example, a cat that
continues to urinate outside the litter box
despite elimination of its cystic calculi may have
concurrent feline urologic syndrome (physical
cause), litter box aversion due to inadequate cleaning by the client (normal behavior) or a learned litter box aversion because urination in the box had
been associated with pain (psychological cause).
–– Both physical and psychological. Diagnose and
treat the physical component. Assess whether the
behavioral clinical signs are normal or abnormal
and follow Step 1 accordingly. For example, a dog
that is aggressive when he is lifted into the car
may be painful due to osteoarthritis (physical
cause) but also fearful of car travel (psychological
cause). Similarly, an elderly cat that vocalizes at
night might have hyperthyroidism (physical
cause) but has also been reinforced by his owners
because they fed him when he cried (normal,
learned behavior).
–– Psychological. A primarily psychological etiology is
diagnosed once physical causes have been ruled out
or addressed. Unlike problems due to normal
behaviors, “abnormal” behavioral problems typically stem from an underlying emotional (e.g., fear
or anxiety) or neurochemical pathology rather than
a lack of training or opportunities to express species‐typical behavior. Simply reinforcing commands in these situations is unlikely to alter the
animal’s underlying emotional response to a situation they find threatening. These cases should be
referred to a behavior professional both adept at
interpreting canine or feline body language and
behavior and who understands the clinical applications of learning theory.
3) If you prefer not to manage the behavioral aspects of
the case yourself, determine the type of behavior
professional to refer to based on the presence or
absence of aggressive behavior, the severity of the
behavior problem, and whether the behavior itself is
common or atypical.
–– Human‐directed aggression. Ideally, cases involving
human‐directed aggression should be referred to a
veterinary behaviorist or a veterinarian experienced in treating aggression cases. Aggression
cases often require extensive and protracted care,
including an honest discussion with the owners
regarding risk assessment, development of a
­treatment plan tailored to the owner and pet and
ongoing communication – potentially for months
to years – to assess and monitor the response to
treatment. Because clients frequently inquire about
the role medication might play in treating their

pets’ aggression, referral to a veterinarian with
expertise in using and ability to prescribe behavior‐
modifying medications is best. Additionally, cases
involving human‐directed aggression may be at risk
of future legal involvement. Documented referral
to a veterinary specialist or another veterinarian
who establishes their own veterinarian–client–
patient relationship may be preferable to referring
to a nonveterinarian in these cases. If a veterinary
behaviorist or veterinarian with behavior experience is not locally available, consider a veterinarian‐to‐veterinary specialist consultation via phone
to discuss treatment and/or referral to another
behaviorist.
–– Common problems (mild). A common behavior
problem is one that, while abnormal, occurs frequently in that species. When they are mild in
severity, common behavior problems typically do
not require behavior‐modifying medication and
may be addressed through consistent behavior
modification and environmental changes. Although
it is always appropriate to refer to a veterinary
behaviorist, these cases suitable for referral to a
well‐qualified trainer or nonveterinary behaviorist.
–– Common problems (moderate to severe) or atypical problems. This category includes any behavior that is moderate to severe in intensity,
frequency or duration, atypical for that species or
signalment, or for which a typical trigger or pattern cannot be discerned (e.g., behaviors that are
idiopathic or occur “out of the blue”). These are
cases in which medication and extensive, long‐
term behavior modification may be necessary.
These cases should be referred to a veterinary
behaviorist or veterinarian experienced with
behavior cases.

­Referrals
Clients have become increasingly educated regarding
animal behavior and are seeking the advice of veterinarians when their pets misbehave rather than resorting to
relinquishment or euthanasia. Whether or not to refer
depends entirely on the individual veterinarian’s comfort
level and experience (Figure 177.2). “Normal” behavior
problems or mild forms of common behavior problems
may easily be addressed by the veterinarian “in house.”
Guidance on how to diagnose and treat canine and feline
behavior problems is available in various texts (see the
Further Reading list at the end of the chapter). If the veterinarian does not feel comfortable treating behavior
problems or lacks the time or interest to do so, many
referral options exist.

177 Behavior Triage for Internists and the General Practitioner

VetBooks.ir

Psychological
- Emotional or neurochemical pathology
- Not resolved by training alone

Common problem (mild)
- Occurs frequently
- Likely to improve with behavior
modification and environmental change
-Medication not needed
Examples
Dog and Cat:
- Intra-or inter-specific aggression, mild
- Separation anxiety, mild
- Fear of people or other animals, mild
- Periuria not due to a physical illness
- Situational anxieties (e.g. vet visit, noise
phobia), mild

DACVB or Non-Board-Certified
Veterinarian
CAAB
Trainer or Non-vet Behaviorist

Common (moderate, severe)
or Atypical Problem

Human-directed
Aggression

- Behavior is moderate to severe in regard to
intensity, frequency, duration, etc.
- Triggers or patterns cannot be determined
- Odd or unusual behaviors
- Medication or extensive, long-term behavior
modification may be needed

- Often requires in-depth, tailored
treatment plan and long-term
client communication
- May require behavior medication

Examples
Dog and Cat:
- Intra-or inter-specific aggression
Separation anxiety, severe
- Generalized anxiety
- Compulsive behaviors (e.g. spinning, flysnapping, feline hyperesthesia)
- Fear of people or other animals, severe
- Situational anxieties (e.g. vet visit, noise
phobia), severe
- Intractable periuria not due to a physical
illness

- Aggression directed toward
people including visitors, children,
etc.

DACVB or Non-Board-Certified
Veterinarian

DACVB or Non-Board-Certified
Veterinarian

Discuss short-term recommendations
Document recommendations, referrals and all client communication in chart
Consider discussing case via phone or email with a DACVB
- Veterinarian-to-veterinarian consult regarding treatment
- Recommendation regarding referral to non-DACVB

Figure 177.2 When to seek consultation with a veterinary behaviorist.

Veterinary Referrals
Veterinary Behaviorists

Board‐certified veterinary behaviorists (Diplomates
of the American College of Veterinary Behaviorists
[ACVB]) are veterinarians who have completed a residency training program, published behavioral
research and passed a qualifying exam covering medicine, ethology, pharmacology, and clinical behavior
of domestic and nondomestic species. As specialists,
they have a breadth of clinical experience and
advanced knowledge of behavioral treatment options.
Referral to a veterinary behaviorist is always appropriate and may be preferable in certain situations
(Box 177.1).
If a board‐certified veterinary behaviorist does not
practice within a reasonable distance of your clinic, consider a veterinarian‐to‐veterinary specialist consult via
phone or email to discuss the case or refer to a nonboarded veterinarian with behavioral experience in your
local area.

Nonboarded Veterinarian with Behavioral Experience

These are veterinarians who are not board certified but
are experienced with behavior cases. This category
includes, but is not limited to:
current veterinary behavior residents or residency‐
trained veterinarians. These are veterinarians currently
in their university or private practice residency programs or who have completed their residency but have
not yet passed their board‐administered examination
●● nonresidency‐trained
veterinarians with extensive
behavior education and experience. There are many
excellent veterinarians who have devoted their careers
to the study and practice of veterinary behavior but
have not completed a formal residency. They may have
behavior‐only private practices or see behavior cases
as part of their general practice.
●●

The American Veterinary Society of Animal Behavior
(AVSAB) is an organization consisting of veterinarians
and research professionals whose mission is to promote

1575

VetBooks.ir

1576

Section 15 Preventive Care

Box 177.1 Situations in which referral to a board‐
certified veterinary behaviorist is warranted
Involvement of a board‐certified veterinary behaviorist
may be preferable over that of a nonveterinarian when
one or more of the following factors are present.
Human‐directed aggression, particularly if aggression
is severe or involves children
●● Moderate to severe interdog or intercat aggression,
especially if fights have resulted in injuries to pets
or people
●● Physical
illness affecting the pet’s behavior or
treatment
–– Interplay between physical and behavioral issues
warrant close monitoring
–– Medical issues may affect behavioral treatment or
vice versa
●● Possible use of behavior‐modifying medication
–– Behavior is severe enough to warrant consideration
–– Owner inquires about medication
●● Legal issues: ongoing or possible legal action
●● Concerning client–patient dynamic
–– Human-animal bond is affected and/or euthanasia
is a consideration
–– Client appears to be in denial regarding the severity
of behavioral problem or risk involved
●●

applied animal behavior and animal welfare. Many nonboarded veterinarians with behavior experience belong
to the AVSAB.
Individual veterinarians’ background training, experience level, and continuing education vary widely.
Before referring to a nonboarded veterinarian, ask for
a copy of their curriculum vitae and speak to them
directly to ­discuss the case.
Nonveterinary Referrals
Certified Applied Animal Behaviorists (CAAB)

Most CAABs are not veterinarians but have a Master’s
or PhD degree in behavioral science, multiple scientific
publications, hands‐on experience with animals and
have met coursework and experience requirements for
certification as set forth by the Animal Behavior Society.
Their scientific background makes CAABs knowledgeable about learning theory, ethology, and animal behavior. However, the amount of clinical or practical
experience working with animals may vary by individual. Inquire as to their level of hands‐on experience with
clinical cases prior to referral.
Because most CAABs are not veterinarians, their
insight into the interaction between physical and

behavioral illness may be limited. It is therefore important that the referring veterinarian and CAAB work in
partnership so physical issues are not overlooked.
CAABs cannot prescribe medication and must refer
cases back to a veterinarian for a prescription. It is the
prescribing veterinarian’s duty to ensure that the medication prescribed is appropriate for the patient and
behavior being addressed. If the prescribing veterinarian is not familiar with psychopharmaceutical medications, it is appropriate to ask the CAAB for supporting
documentation (in the form of journal articles, book
references, etc.). The prescribing veterinarian must
also obtain informed consent from the client, including
discussing potential physical and behavioral adverse
effects and conducting appropriate tests to ensure the
health of the patient prior to starting medication.
Trainers and Animal Behaviorists

Many skilled, professional trainers and nonveterinary/
non‐CAAB animal behaviorists are available to help veterinarians, clients, and patients. These individuals may
provide a range of services that veterinary and CAAB
behaviorists do not, including private, in‐home training,
group classes, board and train, etc. Additionally, trainers
are often able to work with clients and their pets on a
more frequent and regular basis than a veterinary or
CAAB behaviorist could. This is extremely helpful especially for clients who require extensive, hands‐on training or encouragement to consistently comply with a
treatment plan.
As a group, trainers and nonveterinary/non‐CAAB
behaviorists are a valuable resource. However, it is
important to remember that individuals vary widely in
regard to their knowledge, experience, training techniques, and ethics. This spectrum exists because there is
no agency or governing body that oversees or regulates
the qualifications of these professions. Anyone may label
themselves a trainer or animal behaviorist regardless of
their background. Animal behavior and training certifications can be obtained through various programs, some
of which are more rigorous and require more education
and experience than others. Training philosophies, such
as the use of positive reinforcement versus punishment‐
based training techniques, also differ from school to
school.
Always research the individual before recommending
any trainer or animal behaviorist, veterinary or nonveterinary. Both the ACVB and AVSAB have published
guidelines for selecting and working with trainers on
their websites. These recommendations should be
applied to any behaviorist, veterinary or nonveterinary,
you may refer a client to. Because experience, training
methods, and skillsets of trainers and behaviorists vary

VetBooks.ir

177 Behavior Triage for Internists and the General Practitioner

widely, it is advisable to create different referral lists
depending on the needs of the clients and patients. For
example, some individuals may be highly accomplished
trainers (able to teach basic obedience, agility, nosework,
etc.) but do not have the background or education to
treat behavior problems. Other behaviorists may feel
comfortable treating “normal,” training‐related behavior
problems but not “aberrant/abnormal” cases such as
aggression or anxiety disorders. Some behaviorists specialize only in a ­particular species.
Summary
A team effort is required to successfully treat behavior
problems. Every member of the team – referring veterinarian, behaviorist, and client – should feel comfortable
working with each other for the pet’s benefit. Ask your
clients for feedback regarding their experience with the
behaviorist or trainer they worked with so you know
whom to refer to in the future. No matter to whom you
refer, referrals reflect on you and your practice.

­Safety and Avoidance: Short‐Term
Recommendations
Unless they have an interest in behavioral medicine, the
veterinarian should not feel obligated to provide a comprehensive behavioral treatment plan to the client.
However, the veterinarian should provide short‐term,
interim recommendations geared toward keeping the pet
and people safe and to prevent the pet’s behavior from
worsening until referral to a qualified individual occurs.
Treat physical conditions that affect the pet’s behavior.
Encourage clients to treat any medical problem that
may contribute to the behavioral disorder.
●● Avoid situations that cause the undesirable behavior to
occur. Avoiding situations that cause anxiety or aggression may be necessary to prevent the pet from becoming self‐injurious or harming other animals or people.
Avoidance also prevents the pet from developing a
progressively stronger averse response to the situation
due to repeated exposure (sensitization). Rather than
simply instructing clients not to let their dog or cat
become anxious or aggressive, provide specific avoidance recommendations tailored to the pet and behavior problem. Relevant guidelines may be found in
behavior textbooks.
●● Recognize early signs of fear, anxiety, and aggression.
Pets often exhibit subtle signs of discomfort before
their anxiety or aggression intensifies. Teach clients to
recognize physical cues such as pinned ears, crouched
●●

body posture and tucked or lashing tails as well as
behavioral signs including refusing treats, not following commands and displacement behaviors like yawning, lip licking, and grooming. Handouts on canine
and feline body language (available in behavior
­textbooks) may be sent home with clients to aid identification. To reduce the frequency and severity of
subsequent undesirable behaviors, clients should
remove their pet from the situation as soon as they
recognize the initial signs of impending aggression
or anxiety.
●● Do not use punishment or confrontational training
techniques as these may exacerbate fear, anxiety, and
aggression. Warn clients that physical corrections – such as hitting, swatting, kicking, forcibly holding the pet down (“alpha rolling”), choke or prong
collar use, scruffing, etc. – foster negative associations
with the client and create anxiety and mistrust. If
incorrectly used, punishment‐based techniques may
physically harm the pet and worsen their behavior. For
additional information on the hazards of punishment‐
based training, see the AVSAB Position Statement on
the use of punishment for behavior modification in
animals available on the AVSAB website.
●● Reward the pet for desirable behaviors. Encourage clients to reward their pet when it behaves appropriately
(positive reinforcement). Recommend that clients
think proactively rather than reactively by identifying
desirable behaviors, creating situations that allow their
pet to behave in an appropriate manner and rewarding
it when it does so. For example, rather than punishing
a dog for jumping on them, the client may preemptively instruct the dog to sit before he jumps up, and
then reward him with attention while he is seated.
Encourage clients to formally train their pets. Training
provides clients and their pets with a common language
in which to communicate. Dogs and cats can be taught
simple commands such as “sit,” “down,” “stay,” and “come”
which are used to facilitate behavior modification techniques such as desensitization and counterconditioning
to specific triggers. When positive reinforcement training techniques are used, the pet enjoys interacting with
the client and its anxiety decreases because interactions
are consistent, predictable, and rewarding.

­Managing Client Expectations
Many clients have unrealistic goals such as wanting
their pet “to be friendly with every person and animal”
or “to never to be anxious or aggressive again.”
Alternatively, clients may not realize that their dog or

1577

VetBooks.ir

1578

Section 15 Preventive Care

cat’s behavior puts the pet, people or other animals at
serious risk of injury. A frank discussion regarding risk
assessment and realistic prognosis may be necessary
before the client invests time, money, and emotional
effort in treating their pet’s behavior.
An in‐depth discussion of risk assessment is beyond
the scope of this chapter but is addressed in several
behavioral texts (see Further Reading).
Prognosis depends on the individual case but is usually guarded since most behavior problems cannot
be “cured.” Abnormal behavior problems not due to
­physical illness are caused by emotional and/or neurochemical disease states that cannot be fully eliminated.
The goal of treatment is remission – management of the
behavior and reduction in symptom severity and frequency such that the pet and client have an improved
quality of life.
In most situations, consulting with a behavior professional and compliance with a behavior modification plan
will improve the pet’s behavior. The veterinarian or behavior professional should establish reasonable short‐term
and long‐term goals for the pet. Ongoing communication

between the behavior professional and client along with
periodic recheck appointments are essential to ensure
that the treatment plan is successful or, if not, to adjust the
recommendations accordingly.

­Conclusion
The goals of both behavioral and internal medicine are
the same: establish a diagnosis and alleviate clinical
signs of the disease. When behavioral issues complicate
physical illness or vice versa, diagnosis and treatment
will not be successful without identifying and addressing both. Once a behavioral cause has been established,
veterinarians must be prepared to triage these cases and
provide the clients with short‐term recommendations
and referral to the appropriate behavior professional.
This multidisciplinary approach addresses both the
physical and behavioral components of the disease process and provides the best prognosis for successful resolution of ­clinical signs, thus improving the quality of life
for the pet and client.

Further Reading
American College of Veterinary Behaviorists. Decoding
Your Dog. New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2014.
Crowell‐Davis SL, Murray T de Souza Dantas LM
Veterinary Psychopharmacology. 2nd Ed. Ames, IA:
Blackwell Publishing, 2019.
Hart BL, Hart LA, Bain MJ. Canine and Feline
Behavioral Therapy, 2nd edn. Ames, IA: Blackwell
Publishing, 2006.
Herron ME, Shofer FS, & Reisner IR. Survey of the use and
outcome of confrontational and non-confrontational
training methods in client-owned dogs showing
undesired behaviors. Applied Animal Behaviour Science
2019; 117(1-2), 47–54.
Horwitz DF. Differences and similarities between behavior
and internal medicine. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000;
217(9): 1372–6.
Horwitz DF, Mills DS. BSAVA Manual of Canine and
Feline Behavioural Medicine, 2nd edn. Gloucester, UK:
British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2010.
Horwitz DF, . Blackwell’s Five Minute Veterinary Consult
Clinical Companion Canine and Feline Behavior. 2nd Ed.
Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing, 2018.

Landsberg GM, Horwitz DF, eds. Practical applications
and new perspectives in veterinary behavior.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2008;
38(5): 937–1172.
Landsberg GM, Tynes VV, eds. Behavior: a guide for
practitioners. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2014; 44(3): 379–644.
Landsberg G, Hunthausen W, Ackerman L. Behavior
Problems of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA:
Saunders Elsevier, 2013.
Plumb DC Plumb’s Veterinary Drug Handbook. 8th
Ed.,Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing, 2015.
Rodan I, Heath, S Feline behavioral health and welfare.
Elsevier Health Sciences, 2015.
Salman MD, Hutchison J, Ruch‐Gallie R, et al.
Behavioral reasons for relinquishment of dogs and cats to
12 shelters. J Appl Anim Welfare Sci 2000; 3(2): 93–106.
Stelow E, eds. Behavior as an illness indicator. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2018; 48(3): 339–496.
Waechter RA. Unusual reaction to acepromazine maleate
in the dog. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association, 1982; 180(1), 73–74.

VetBooks.ir

177 Behavior Triage for Internists and the General Practitioner

Websites
American College of Veterinary Behaviorists (ACVB):
www.dacvb.org
Information about the College of Veterinary
Behaviorists including practice location and contact
information for diplomates
●● Handouts including “ACVB Guidelines for Working
with a Trainer”
●●

American Veterinary Society of Animal Behavior
(AVSAB): https://avsab.org/
Information about AVSAB including a referral list of
veterinarians and behavior professionals who have a
special interest in clinical animal behavior, searchable
by zipcode
●● AVSAB Position Statements on punishment, dominance, puppy socialization and breed‐specific ­legislation
are available to the public
●● Members have access to a forum where they can ask
questions about cases, review notes from past veterinary
behavior symposia and access the newsletter and blog
Academy of Veterinary Behavior Technicians (AVBT):
www.avbt.net
●●

Information about AVBT, including a list of technicians who have obtained the Veterinary Technician
Specialist (Behavior) designation

●●

Resources for behavior information, especially for
technicians interested in animal behavior and training

Certified Applied Animal Behaviorists (CAAB): www.
corecaab.org
Information about CAABs including a membership
directory
●● Additional information on applied animal behavior and
CAAB requirements may be found at the Animal
Behavior Society website: animalbehaviorsociety.org
●●

Included below are websites containing additional
information about nonveterinary/non‐CAAB trainers and behaviorists. The veterinarian is highly
encouraged to research both the individual trainer
and certifying organization prior to referral
www.iaabc.org – International Association of Animal
Behavior Consultants
www.ccpdt.org – Certification Council for Pet Dog
Trainers
www.KarenPryorAcademy.com – Karen Pryor Academy
www.apdt.com ‐ Association of Pet Dog Trainers (APDT)

1579

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1581

Section 16
Laboratory Support

A list of commonly used veterinary laboratories with links to their websites for information concerning test offerings,
sample submission, and interpretation.
Idexx
www.idexx.com/en/veterinary/reference‐laboratories/
tests‐and‐services/
http://www.idexx.co.jp/pdf/ja_jp/smallanimal/vetlab/
catalyst/JP‐SAH‐Catalyst‐reference‐ranges.pdf
Antech Diagnostics
www.antechdiagnostics.com
Michigan State University Veterinary Diagnostic
Laboratory
www.dcpah.msu.edu/sections/endocrinology/
University of Tennessee College of Veterinary Medicine –
Clinical Endocrinology Service
https://vetmed.tennessee.edu/vmc/dls/endocrinology/
Pages/default.aspx
Colorado State University – Veterinary Diagnostic
Laboratories
http://csu‐cvmbs.colostate.edu/vdl/Pages/default.aspx
Cornell University – Animal Health Diagnostic Center
https://ahdc.vet.cornell.edu
MiraVista Veterinary Diagnostics
https://miravistavets.com
ZNLabs Veterinary Diagnostics
https://znlabs.com
Phoenix Lab
http://phoenixlab.com
North Carolina State University College of Veterinary
Medicine Vector Borne Disease Diagnostics
https://cvm.ncsu.edu/research/labs/clinical‐sciences/
vector‐borne‐disease/

Marshfield Labs
www.marshfieldlabs.org/lab‐services/vet‐lab
PennGen Laboratories
www.vet.upenn.edu/research/academic‐departments/
clinical‐sciences‐advanced‐medicine/research‐labs‐
centers/penngen
Texas A&M University – Gastrointestinal Laboratory
http://vetmed.tamu.edu/gilab
Auburn University College of Veterinary Medicine –
Molecular Diagnostics (FIP)
www.vetmed.auburn.edu/academic‐departments/dept‐
of‐pathobiolog y/diagnostic‐ser vices/molecular‐
diagnostics/
UC Davis School of Medicine – Coccidiodomycosis
Serology Laboratory
www.ucdmc.ucdavis.edu/medmicro/cocci‐lab.html
Washington State University Clinical Pharmacology
Laboratory (MDR‐1)
https://vcpl.vetmed.wsu.edu
Cornell University – Gastroenterology Research
Department of Veterinary Clinical Studies (FISH)
www2.vet.cornell.edu/research‐departments/labs/
simpson‐laboratory
Galaxy Diagnostics (Bartonella)
www.galaxydx.com
Kansas State University Clinical Immunology (Platelet
and RBC Surface Antibody)
www.ksvdl.org/laboratories/clinical‐immunology/

VetBooks.ir

VetBooks.ir

1583

Index
Page locators in bold indicate tables/boxes. Page locators in italics indicate figures. This index uses letter‐by‐letter
alphabetization.
6MWT see six‐minute walk test

a
AAFP see American Association of
Feline Practitioners
AAHA see American Animal Hospital
Association
ABC see airway, breathing, and
circulation; ATP‐binding cassette
abdominal distension 121, 449
abdominal focused assessment with
sonography for trauma
(AFAST) 406, 449
ABG see arterial blood gas
abnormal involuntary movements
(AIM) see movement disorders
ABP see aminobisphosphonates
abscesses
hepatobiliary disease 666–667
nonhemotropic Mycoplasma,
Ureaplasma, and L‐form
bacteria 934
prostatic diseases 1161–1163
ABT see aortic body tumors
AC see activated charcoal
A/C see assist/control
acanthomatous ameloblastoma 1253,
1256
accelerated gastric emptying 567
ACCF/AHA see American College of
Cardiology Foundation and
American Heart Association
ACCP see American College of Clinical
Pharmacology
ACE see angiotensin‐converting
enzyme
ACEI see angiotensin‐converting
enzyme inhibitors

acetate tape impressions 1391,
1457–1458
acetylcholine (ACh) 460, 803–808
AChEI see anticholinesterase inhibitors
acid–base balance
acute kidney injury 1096
chronic kidney disease 1172
critical care setting 350
dialysis 1178
urolithiasis 1132
Acinetobacter spp. 1060
acne 1465–1466, 1465
acoustic enhancement 663
acoustic shadowing 664
acquired hepatic
dysfunction 107–108
acquired megaesophagus 558–559
acquired portosystemic shunts
(APSS) 713–720
cirrhosis 706–708
classification and anatomy 713–714
diagnosis 716
etiology 713
history and clinical signs 716
liver disease 643
pathophysiology 714–715, 714
portal hypertension 715
prognosis 720
signalment 715
treatment 717–720
acral lick dermatitis (ALD) 1467, 1467
acromegaly 99–100
ACTH see adrenocorticotropic
hormone
actinomycosis 977–979
diagnosis 978
epidemiology 977
etiology/pathophysiology 977

Clinical Small Animal Internal Medicine Volume II, First Edition. Edited by David S. Bruyette.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/bruyette/clinical

history and clinical signs 977–978
pleural effusion 340–341
public health implications 979
signalment 977
treatment and prognosis 978, 978
activated charcoal (AC) 442–443
acupuncture 1204
acute blindness 90, 90
acute hypoperfusion 680
acute kidney injury (AKI)
1089–1099
acid–base balance 1096
diagnosis 1092–1094
dialysis 1098, 1176–1178,
1176–1177
diuretics 1095–1096
electrolyte balance 1096–1097
epidemiology 1089–1091, 1091
etiology/pathophysiology
1089, 1090
fluid therapy 1095
history and clinical
signs 1091–1092
hypoadrenocorticism 83
imaging 1093
laboratory tests 1092–1093
leptospirosis 946, 948
motility disorders 572
nutritional support 1097–1098
phosphorus homeostasis and
disorders 1083–1085
prognosis 1098
septic shock 423–424
signalment 1091
treatment 1094–1098, 1094
Acute Kidney Injury Network
(AKIN) 1091
acute lung injury (ALI) 423

VetBooks.ir

1584

Index

acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) 1223–1225, 1225
acute moist dermatitis 1461–1462,
1462
acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
1225–1227
acute neutrophilic cholangitis
(ANC) 687, 690
acute phase proteins (APP) 874, 1208
acute poisoning 437–444
blood decontamination 443–444
certain exposure to a known
toxin 438–440
certain exposure to an unknown
toxin 441
clinical approach 437–441
decontamination 441–444
diagnostic testing 437–438
dialysis 1179
gastrointestinal decontamination
441–443
history 437
ocular decontamination 441
physical examination 437
topical decontamination 441
uncertain exposure to a known
toxin 440–441
see also venomous snake bites
acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS)
acute respiratory failure 390
mechanical ventilation 393, 397
respiratory monitoring in critical
care 379
septic shock 423
acute respiratory failure 381–391
diagnosis 387
epidemiology 386–387
etiology/pathophysiology 381–386
history and clinical signs 387
hypercapneic respiratory
failure 381–383, 388–389
hypoxemia 397–398
hypoxemic respiratory failure
383–386, 384, 385, 389–390, 390,
397–398
prognosis 390
signalment 387
treatment 387–390
acute spinal cord dysfunction 818–819
ACVB see American College of
Veterinary Behaviorists
ACVIM see American College of
Veterinary Internal Medicine
Adams modified staging system
1257, 1257

Addison disease see
hypoadrenocorticism
adenohypophysis 35–36
adenoma/adenocarcinoma
gastritis and gastric ulceration 550
intestinal cancers 1287–1290, 1292
nonmelanoma skin cancers 1354
ocular adnexal tumors 1262
adenomatous polyps 1288, 1292
adenosine diphosphate (ADP) 446
adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
biology of cancer and cancer
genetics 1209–1210
heart failure 182
magnesium homeostasis and
disorders 1086
phosphorus homeostasis and
disorders 1079, 1082
shock 404
trauma and burns 446
ADH see alcohol dehydrogenase;
antidiuretic hormone
adhesions 495–496, 496
ADP see adenosine diphosphate
adrenal‐dependent
hyperadrenocorticism (ADH)
55, 56
adrenalectomy 57, 91
adrenal tumors 220
adrenocortical function testing 45
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
autoimmune polyglandular
syndromes 114
endocrine manifestations of
cancer 1213
endocrinology 29–32
esophageal disorders 559
feline acromegaly 45
hypoadrenocorticism 81, 84–89, 91
hypoglycemia 110
motility disorders 564
neuroendocrinology 39
pituitary‐dependent
hyperadrenocorticism 49–51,
53–54, 54–62
polyuria and polydipsia 67
septic shock 428
advanced life support (ALS) 367–369
adverse food reactions see cutaneous
adverse food reactions
AEC see articular‐epiphyseal complex
AED see antiepileptic drugs
AF see atrial fibrillation
AFAST see abdominal focused
assessment with sonography for
trauma

afterload 176
AG see aminoglycosides
aggression 893, 1574
aggressive diuresis 1149–1150
AIM see movement disorders
AIP see aryl‐hydrocarbon‐receptor
interacting protein
air embolism 356
airway, breathing, and circulation (ABC)
acute poisoning 437
acute respiratory failure 382–383
cardiopulmonary resuscitation 367
mechanical ventilation 399
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 289
spinal cord injury 745
trauma and burns 448–449
airway cancers 1277–1278
diagnosis 1277–1278
epidemiology 1277
etiology/pathophysiology 1277
history and clinical signs 1277
prognosis 1278
signalment 1277
treatment 1278
AKI see acute kidney injury
AKIN see Acute Kidney Injury
Network
alanine aminotransferase (ALT) see
enzyme markers of liver disease
albumin
chronic enteropathies 630–632
critical care setting 349
fluid therapy 360, 363
liver disease 649
trauma and burns 451
alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) 440
ALD see acral lick dermatitis
aldosterone 81, 89–92
aldosterone antagonists 183
alimentary lymphoma 1235–1239
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) see enzyme
markers of liver disease
alkalinization therapy 1172
ALL see acute lymphoblastic leukemia
allergen‐specific immunotherapy
1411–1412
allergen testing 1407–1408, 1407
allergic skin diseases 1413–1417
contact dermatitis
1414–1415, 1415
flea allergy dermatitis
1415–1417, 1416
urticaria and angioedema
1413–1414, 1414, 1414
alopecia 1433–1439

VetBooks.ir

Index

abnormal hair growth
1434–1435, 1435
alopecia X 1435, 1436
anagen/telogen defluxion 1437
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1386
atopic dermatitis 1406
autoimmune and immune‐mediated
skin disease 1424, 1426
bacterial pyodermas 1463–1464
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1488–1489, 1489
cyclic flank alopecia 1436, 1436
diagnosis 1438
distribution and pattern of
alopecia 1437–1438
ease of epilation 1437
etiology/pathophysiology
1433–1437
exocrine pancreatic cancer 1293
hair cycle arrest 1435
history and clinical
signs 1437–1438
inflammation‐induced
alopecia 1433, 1434, 1434
noninflammatory alopecia
1434–1437, 1436
onset of alopecia 1437
paraneoplastic syndromes
1221–1222
patterned alopecia 1436, 1436
postclipping hair follicle
arrest 1436–1437, 1437
prognosis 1438–1439
signalment 1437
trauma‐induced alopecia 1433
treatment 1438, 1438
alpha‐1‐proteinase inhibitors 633
alpha‐agonists 451, 1184
alpha‐fucosidosis 775
ALS see advanced life support
ALT see alternative lengthening of
telomeres
alternative lengthening of telomeres
(ALT) 1206
alveolar dead space 383
alveolar gas equation 376–377
amanita mushrooms 684
amaurosis 823
ambulatory 24‐hour Holter
recording 213
amebiasis 1019
American Animal Hospital Association
(AAHA) 1064
American Association of Feline
Practitioners (AAFP)

bartonellosis 924
feline leukemia virus 881
kennels and multicat
environments 1064
American College of Cardiology
Foundation and American Heart
Association (ACCF/AHA) 177
American College of Clinical
Pharmacology (ACCP) 321
American College of Veterinary
Behaviorists (ACVB) 1575
American College of Veterinary
Internal Medicine (ACVIM)
canine myocardial disease 254,
259–262
heart failure 177–178
pituitary‐dependent
hyperadrenocorticism 53
valvular heart disease 247–250
American Veterinary Dental College
(AVDC) 534
American Veterinary Society of
Animal Behavior (AVSAB)
1575, 1577
amino acid‐derived hormones 30
aminobisphosphonates (ABP)
1331–1332
aminoglycosides (AG) 957,
1041–1044
AML see acute myeloid leukemia
ammonium urate urolithiasis
1128–1129, 1128, 1141–1142
amputation 617–618, 1330–1331
amyloidosis
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1483–1484
hepatobiliary disease 665–666
metabolic diseases 680–681
anagen defluxion 1437
analgesia 735
see also pain and pain management
anal sac adenocarcinoma 609–610
anal sacculectomy 610–611
anal sac impaction 610–611
analysis of variability 9
anaphylactic/anaphylactoid
hypersensitivity reactions
462–463
anaplasmosis see ehrlichiosis and
anaplasmosis
anatomic shunting see right‐to‐left
shunting
ANC see acute neutrophilic cholangitis
anemia
acute kidney injury 1092
antimicrobials 1047

chronic kidney disease 1170–1171
feline leukemia virus 878
liver disease 652–653
metabolic diseases 680
paraneoplastic syndromes
1219–1220
shock 405
anesthesia
esophageal disorders 560–561
mechanical ventilation 397
rectoanal diseases 616
surgical, traumatic, and bite wound
infections 1031, 1034
trauma and burns 451–452
angioedema 1413–1414, 1414, 1414
angiogenesis 1208–1209
angiography
congenital heart disease 240, 242
pleural effusion 342–343
pulmonary thromboembolism
319–320
angiotensin‐converting enzyme
(ACE) 179–180
angiotensin‐converting enzyme
inhibitors (ACEI)
canine myocardial disease
259–262
chronic kidney disease
1168–1170, 1169
congenital heart disease 240–243
feline myocardial disease 273
glomerular disease 1104–1105
heart failure 183, 186, 188–190,
193, 197
systemic hypertension 222–224
valvular heart disease 248–250
angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB)
chronic kidney disease
1168–1170, 1169
glomerular disease 1104–1105
systemic hypertension 222, 224
Animal Trauma Triage (ATT)
Score 455, 456
anion gap 1092
anisocoria 737, 824
anorexia 255, 679–680
Anrep effect 176
antacids see gastroprotectants
anthrax 971–975
diagnosis 973
etiology/pathophysiology 971–972
history and clinical signs 972–973
prevention 974–975
public health implications 974
signalment 972, 972
treatment 973–974, 973

1585

VetBooks.ir

1586

Index

antiangiogenic therapy 1343–1344
antiarrhythmics
canine myocardial disease
260–265
supraventricular arrhythmias
212–214, 217
ventricular arrhythmias 200–204
antibacterials see antimicrobials;
individual classes/agents
antibiotic‐responsive diarrhea
(ARD) 627, 629, 636
antibiotics see antimicrobials;
individual classes/agents
antibody/antigen detection
canine brucellosis 964
feline coronavirus 874
feline leukemia virus 879–880
fungal infections 986, 991–992,
994–995
leptospirosis 946–947
Lyme borreliosis 942
protozoal and arthropod‐borne
infections 841–843
protozoal and protozoa‐like
infections 1004–1005
spotted fever and typhus group
Rickettsia 939
tularemia 957
viral infections 843–844
yersiniosis 953
anticholinesterase inhibitors
(AChEI) 805–806
anticoagulant rodenticide 439
anticoagulants 321–322
antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
heart failure 180
hypothermia 432
neuroendocrinology 39
pituitary‐dependent
hyperadrenocorticism 52
polyuria and polydipsia 65, 67
sodium and water
homeostasis 1069–1076, 1072
syndrome of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone
secretion 1214
antiemetics 1167–1168
antiepileptic drugs (AED) 761–766,
767, 771
antifungals see antimicrobials;
individual classes/agents
antigen delivery systems
1568–1569
antigenemia 878–880
antigen‐presenting cells (APC) 1208,
1567, 1569

antihistamines
allergic skin diseases 1414
atopic dermatitis 1409
feline bronchial asthma 302
miscellaneous skin diseases 1499
antihypertensives 1105–1106, 1105
antiinflammatory drugs
bacterial pyodermas 1467
canine chronic bronchitis 308
cutaneous adverse food
reactions 1422
meningoencephalitis and
meningomyelitis 800–801, 800
principles of therapy of dermatologic
diseases 1399–1400
spotted fever and typhus group
Rickettsia 939–940
see also nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs
antimicrobials
actinomycosis 978, 978
anthrax 973–974, 973
antimicrobial resistance 1030,
1045–1047
antimicrobial susceptibility
tests 845
atopic dermatitis 1410–1411
bacterial pyodermas 1462,
1464–1470
bartonellosis 924
canine chronic bronchitis 310
canine distemper virus 853–854
canine herpesvirus 856
canine infectious respiratory disease
complex 1037
canine inflammatory liver
disease 700–701, 703
canine parvovirus type 2 859
chronic enteropathies
627, 629, 636
cirrhosis 710
coccidia 1024–1026, 1025
common classes of antifungal
agents 1049–1053, 1050
common classes of antimicrobial
agents 1041–1048, 1042–1043
critical care setting 351
dysbiosis 625
ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis 911
esophageal disorders
559–560
exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency 588
feline inflammatory liver
disease 690–691, 691
feline leukemia virus 880

feline viral upper respiratory tract
disease 888
forebrain disorders 783–784
formulation,
indications,
and side‐effects 1050
fungal infections 986, 988–990,
992–993, 995, 997–999
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
ducts 725
gastritis and gastric ulceration 554
hemotropic Mycoplasma 929
leptospirosis 947–948
Lyme borreliosis 943
meningoencephalitis and
meningomyelitis 799, 799
miscellaneous skin diseases
1497–1498, 1505–1506
motility disorders 577
mycobacteriosis 982–983, 983
nocardiosis 978, 979–980
nonhemotropic Mycoplasma,
Ureaplasma, and L‐form
bacteria 934
optimizing antimicrobial
therapy 1041, 1048
oral cavity and salivary glands 536,
543–544
otitis externa 1474–1476, 1476,
1478–1479, 1479
parasitic skin diseases 1451–1460
pleural effusion 340–341
portosystemic shunts and
microvascular dysplasia 717
principles of therapy of dermatologic
diseases 1400–1402
prostatic diseases 1162, 1162
protozoal and protozoa‐like
infections 1005–1006,
1008–1009, 1014–1015,
1018–1019
Q fever 960
salmon poisoning disease 914
septic shock 427–428
side‐effects and drug–drug
interactions 1044
spotted fever and typhus group
Rickettsia 939–940
surgical, traumatic, and bite wound
infections 1030, 1032–1034
tetanus 968
trauma and burns 454
urinary tract infections 1191–1195
valvular heart disease 251
venomous snake bites 463
Wolbachia pipientis infection 918

VetBooks.ir

Index

yersiniosis 953
see also individual classes/agents;
nocosomial and multidrug‐
resistant infections
antioxidants
canine inflammatory liver
disease 700–701
chronic kidney disease 1172
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
ducts 725
antiplatelet agents 322–323
antipruritic agents 1400
antithrombin 315, 316
antithrombotics 188, 191–192, 1105
antithyroid drugs 78
antitoxin therapy 807–808
antivenins 462–464, 808
antivirals see antimicrobials; individual
classes/agents
anuria 1177–1178
anxiety 197
aortic body tumors (ABT) 1271
aortic insufficiency 147, 156–157
aortic thromboembolism (ATE) 320
APC see antigen‐presenting cells
apheresis 1369–1372
bone marrow transplantation 1371
cell separator machines 1369
companion animal apheresis
1370–1372
leukopheresis 1370, 1371
physician‐based applications
1369–1370
plateletpheresis 1369, 1372
apocrine gland adenoma/
carcinoma 1354
APP see acute phase proteins
appetite 584–585, 1167–1168
APS see autoimmune polyglandular
syndromes
APSS see acquired portosystemic
shunts
ARAS see ascending reticular activating
system
ARB see angiotensin receptor blockers
ARD see antibiotic‐responsive diarrhea
ARDS see acute respiratory distress
syndrome
arginine 678–679
arginine vasopressin (AVP) see
antidiuretic hormone
arrhythmias see electrocardiography;
supraventricular arrhythmias;
ventricular arrhythmias
arrhythmogenic right ventricular
cardiomyopathy (ARVC)

canine myocardial disease 263–265
cardiogenic shock 414
diagnosis 264–265
epidemiology 263–264
etiology/pathophysiology 263, 263
feline myocardial disease 267,
269–272
history and clinical signs 264
prognosis 265
signalment 264
treatment 265
arterial blood gas (ABG)
critical care setting 350
pulmonary thromboembolism 316
respiratory monitoring in critical
care 376–377, 376
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 293
shock 407–408
surgical approaches to thoracic
disease 328
arterial thromboembolism (ATE) 269,
270–271, 273
arterioportal fistulae 673
arthritis
Lyme borreliosis 941–943
nonhemotropic Mycoplasma,
Ureaplasma, and L‐form
bacteria 933
see also osteoarthritis
arthropod‐borne infections 839–843
see also individual agents/diseases
arthroscopy 1531, 1532, 1542–1545
articular‐epiphyseal complex
(AEC) 1511–1512
artifactual hypoglycemia 104–105
ARVC see arrhythmogenic right
ventricular cardiomyopathy
aryl‐hydrocarbon‐receptor interacting
protein (AIP) 43–44
ascending reticular activating system
(ARAS) 731, 753
ascites
cirrhosis 705–706, 709–710
feline inflammatory liver
disease 688, 693
pathophysiology 643
portosystemic shunts and
microvascular
dysplasia 715–716
aspartate aminotransferase (AST) see
enzyme markers of liver disease
aspergillosis 995–997
diagnosis 996
epidemiology and
signalment 995–996

etiology/pathophysiology 995
history and clinical signs 996, 996
public health implications 997
treatment and prognosis 997
aspiration pneumonia 558, 559
aspiration pneumonitis 292
assist/control (A/C) ventilation
394, 396
association measures 12–15
asthma see feline bronchial asthma
astrocytomas 779
asymptomatic bacteriuria 1191
ataxia 732
ATE see arterial thromboembolism
atelectasis 325
atopic dermatitis 1403–1412
allergen‐specific immunotherapy
1411–1412
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1376
diagnosis 1406–1408, 1407
epidemiology 1403–1404
etiology/pathophysiology 1403
feline bronchial asthma 300
history and clinical signs
1404–1406, 1404–1406
medical therapy 1408–1411
otitis externa 1471–1472
prognosis 1412
signalment 1404
treatment 1408–1412
ATP see adenosine triphosphate
ATP‐binding cassette (ABC)
proteins 1046
atresia ani 611–612, 611
atrial enlargement
cardiovascular disease 130,
134–137
electrocardiography 172, 173, 174
feline myocardial disease 271, 273
valvular heart disease 246–247
atrial fibrillation (AF) 212–215
canine myocardial disease
255–256
cardiogenic shock 415, 419–420
diagnosis 213, 214
epidemiology/signalment
212–213
etiology/pathophysiology 212
history and clinical signs 213
treatment and prognosis
213–215
atrial septal defect (ASD) 231–233,
237, 239, 241–243
atrioventricular (AV) block, cardiogenic
shock 413–414, 419

1587

VetBooks.ir

1588

Index

atrioventricular block 211–212
diagnosis 211, 212
epidemiology/signalment 211
etiology/pathophysiology 211
history and clinical signs 211
treatment and prognosis 212
atrioventricular septal defects
(AVSD) 233, 243
ATT see Animal Trauma Triage
atypical hypoadrenocorticism
87–88
auscultation
cardiovascular disease 122–125,
122, 124–125
congenital heart disease
235–237, 237
pleural effusion 335
respiratory auscultation
124–125
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 291–292
trauma and burns 448
valvular heart disease 247
autoagglutination 1219
autoimmune and immune‐mediated
skin disease 1423–1431
autoimmune subepidermal blistering
diseases 1427–1428, 1427
canine familial dermatomyositis
1423, 1424
cutaneous lupus erythematosus
1424–1427, 1426
erythema multiforme 1423–1424
pemphigus complex 1428–1430,
1429
toxic epidermal necrolysis 1424
uveodermatologic
syndrome 1430–1431
autoimmune polyglandular syndromes
(APS)
canine 113–116
diagnosis and prognosis 114
etiology/pathophysiology
113–114
history and clinical signs 114
treatment 114–115
autologous mesenchymal stem cell
therapy 538
autonomic nervous system (ANS) 404
autonomy principle 1561–1563
AV see atrioventricular
AVSAB see American Veterinary
Society of Animal Behavior
AVSD see atrioventricular septal defects
azoles/triazoles 1050–1052

azotemia
acute kidney injury 1092
acute poisoning 438, 440
dialysis 1176–1177
feline hyperthyroidism 79
glomerular disease 1103, 1106
hypoadrenocorticism 83, 90

b
BA see bile acids
babesiosis 1016–1017
diagnosis 1017
epidemiology 1016
etiology/pathophysiology 1016
history and clinical
signs 1016–1017
hypoglycemia 108
signalment 1016
treatment and prognosis 1017
bacillary angiomatosis 921, 922
Bacillus anthracis see anthrax
bacteremia 923, 923, 951
bacterial infections
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1393
bacterial meningoencephalitis 784
laboratory diagnosis 844–845
principles of therapy of dermatologic
diseases
1400–1401
see also individual agents/diseases
bacterial pyodermas see pyoderma
BAL see bronchoalveolar lavage
ballooning 561
bandages see wound care
barium‐impregnated polyethylene
spheres (BIPS) 568, 572
barometric whole‐body
plethysmography (BWBP) 299
baroreceptors 404
bartonellosis 919–924
diagnosis 922–923, 922–923, 923
epidemiology 919–920
etiology/pathophysiology 919, 920
history and clinical signs
920–921, 921–922, 921
hypoglycemia 109
prognosis 924
public health implications 924
signalment 920
treatment 923–924
valvular heart disease 250–251
basal cell tumors see trichoblastomas
basal energy requirement (BER)
362, 452–453

basic life support 366–367
basophilic leukemia 1228–1229
Bates bodies 492, 492
bats
Ebola virus 901
rabies 891–892, 894–896
BB see beta‐adrenergic blockers
Bcl‐2 proteins 75–76, 1207
behavioral problems 1571–1579
causing a physical illness 1572
diagnostics/treatment declined
because of preexisting
problem 1572
human‐directed aggression 1574
managing client
expectations 1577–1578
physical etiologies 1573–1574
preexisting problem hindering
diagnostics/treatment 1572
presentations 1571–1572
psychological etiologies 1574
rabies 893
referrals 1574–1577, 1575, 1576
safety and avoidance: short‐term
recommendations 1577
secondary to medical treatment
1572
secondary to physical illness
1571–1572
triage for internists and general
practitioners 1572–1574, 1573
beneficence principle 1561–1563
benign masses see mass lesions
benign nodular hyperplasia 668
benign prostatic hyperplasia
(BPH) 1157–1160
diagnosis 1158–1159, 1159, 1160
etiology 1157
history and clinical signs 1157
prognosis 1160
treatment 1159–1160
benzodiazepines 710, 1187
BER see basal energy requirement
beta‐adrenergic blockers (BB)
canine chronic bronchitis 308
canine myocardial disease 260
cardiogenic shock 419
congenital heart disease 240
feline bronchial asthma 300
heart failure 183, 187, 190–191
supraventricular arrhythmias
212, 214, 217
systemic hypertension 222–223
ventricular arrhythmias 204
beta‐lactams 1045

VetBooks.ir

Index

BHD see Birt–Hogg–Dubé
bias 8, 23–24
biceps reflex 735
bile acids (BA) 651–652
bile duct tumors 685, 1303–1304,
1306
biliary cystadenoma 667, 668
biliary system
canine inflammatory liver
disease 700
feline inflammatory liver
disease 688, 689
hepatobiliary disease 659–660, 664,
668–670, 669–670
bilious vomiting syndrome
(BVS) 549, 567
bilirubin
feline inflammatory liver
disease 688
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
ducts 723
liver disease 651, 653
metabolic diseases 677, 680
pleural effusion 338, 343
bilirubinuria 653
bilothorax 343
bioethical principles 1561–1564
biofilms 1029–1030
biologic safety levels (BSL) 900
biopsy
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1394–1396
autoimmune and immune‐mediated
skin disease
1423–1424, 1426–1430
bone and joint tumors 1329
canine inflammatory liver
disease 698–699, 699
chronic enteropathies 633–635
cirrhosis 708–709
endoscopy 510–511, 526–527, 527
esophageal and stomach
cancers 1284
feline inflammatory liver
disease 689
glomerular disease 1103
intestinal cancers 1289
liver disease 656–658
lymphomas 1236–1237
mast cell tumors 1361
miscellaneous skin diseases
1496–1497, 1503–1504
neuromuscular junction
diseases 805
nonmelanoma skin cancers 1355

ocular adnexal tumors 1262
pancreatic endocrine tumors 1300
pancreatitis 604
pericardial disease 279
prostatic diseases 1158–1159
soft tissue sarcomas 1334
sterile nodular panniculitis
1445–1446
superficial necrolytic
dermatitis 1492
see also histology/histopathology
bioterrorism
anthrax 974
disease monitoring and
surveillance 833
tularemia 956
BIPS see barium‐impregnated
polyethylene spheres
birds 973
Birt–Hogg–Dubé (BHD)
syndrome 1317
BISC see bowenoid in situ carcinoma
bisphosphonates 1207, 1245
bite wounds
diagnosis 1033
epidemiology 1033
etiology/pathophysiology 1033
history and clinical signs 1033
pleural effusion 340
prognosis 449, 451–452, 454–457
public health implications 1034
septic shock 424
signalment 1033
treatment and
prognosis 1033–1034
wound infections 1033–1034
see also venomous snake bites
black widow spider
envenomation 808
bladder tumors 1307–1308, 1309
blastomycosis 989–990
antifungal therapy 1050, 1052
diagnosis 989–990, 990
epidemiology and signalment 989
etiology/pathophysiology 989
history and clinical signs 989
public health implications 990
treatment and prognosis 990
blood chemistry/serology
acute kidney injury 1091–1093
acute poisoning 437
antimicrobials 1047
apheresis 1369–1372
approach to the cancer
patient 1201

arthropod‐borne
infections 841–843
bacterial infections 844
bartonellosis 920, 922–923
bone and joint tumors 1328
canine brucellosis 964
canine myocardial disease 256,
258–259, 264
cardiogenic shock 417
chronic kidney disease 1165, 1166
ehrlichiosis and
anaplasmosis 909–910
endocrine manifestations of
cancer 1214–1215
feline coronavirus 874
feline immunodeficiency virus 884
feline viral upper respiratory tract
disease 888
fungal infections 846, 991, 994, 996
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
ducts 723
glomerular disease 1102
hemotropic Mycoplasma 928
hepatobiliary tumors 1305–1306
intestinal cancers 1289
leptospirosis 946
liver disease 653
Lyme borreliosis 942–943
lymphomas 1233
markers of liver function 649–652
meningoencephalitis and
meningomyelitis 797
metabolic bone diseases 1523,
1525–1526
myopathies 812
neuromuscular junction diseases
804, 805
pancreatic endocrine tumors
1298, 1300
pancreatitis 602
plasma cell disorders 1243–1245
portosystemic shunts and
microvascular dysplasia 714,
716, 719
prostatic diseases 1158
protozoal and protozoa‐like
infections 841–843, 1004, 1006,
1008–1009, 1009, 1011,
1014–1015
pulmonary thromboembolism
318–319
rabies 894
salmon poisoning disease 914
seizures and movement
disorders 762

1589

VetBooks.ir

1590

Index

blood chemistry/serology (cont’d)
shock 406, 410
spotted fever and typhus group
Rickettsia 939
sterile nodular panniculitis
1445
surgical, traumatic, and bite wound
infections 1031
tularemia 957
urolithiasis 1133
viral infections 843–844
Wolbachia pipientis infection 918
yersiniosis 952
see also enzyme markers of liver
disease; individual biomarkers
blood decontamination 443–444
blood glucose monitoring 100
blood pressure monitoring
cardiogenic shock 418
chronic kidney disease 1165, 1167
critical care setting 349
direct arterial blood pressure
measurement 221–222
hypothermia 433
shock 405–406, 411
surgical approaches to thoracic
disease 327
see also hypertension; hypotension
blood products 410
bloodstream infections (BSI)
1058, 1060
blood transfusion 453, 1014
blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 714, 716,
719
blue algae 684
blunt trauma
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 294
septic shock 424
trauma and burns 446–449, 452,
454–457
B lymphocytes 1567, 1569
BMD see bone mineral density
BMP see bone morphogenetic proteins
bone and joint tumors 1327–1332
diagnosis/staging 1328–1330, 1329
epidemiology 1328
etiology/pathophysiology
1327–1328
history and clinical signs 1328
prognosis 1332
signalment 1328
treatment 1330–1332, 1330
bone cement 1516
bone marrow aspiration
mast cell tumors 1361

paraneoplastic syndromes 1219
plasma cell disorders 1244, 1244
bone marrow suppression 1044
bone marrow transplantation 1371
bone mineral density (BMD)
1523–1524, 1526–1527
bone morphogenetic proteins
(BMP) 1515
bones see skeletal development and
homeostasis
Bordetella bronchiseptica 1035–1037
Borrelia spp. 4
see also Lyme borreliosis
botulism
diagnosis 969–970
epidemiology 969
etiology/pathophysiology 969
history and clinical signs 969
neuromuscular junction
diseases 807–808
public health implications 970
signalment 969
treatment and prognosis 970
bougienage 561
Bowditch staircase effect 177
bowenoid in situ carcinoma
(BISC) 862–863
box and whisper plots 12, 12
BP see bullous pemphigoid
BPH see benign prostatic hyperplasia
bradycardia
cardiogenic shock 413, 415
heart failure 185
magnesium homeostasis and
disorders 1088
shock 405
trauma and burns 448
urethral obstruction 1110
brain hemorrhage 749
brain herniation 750, 750
brain injury 748–750, 750
brainstem reflexes 752–753
brain tumors 778–780
branching mineralization 663
Brazilian spotted fever 937
breath sounds 448
breath tests 569, 574
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)
canine chronic bronchitis
307, 310
canine infectious respiratory disease
complex 1036–1037
feline bronchial asthma 299
bronchodilators
canine chronic bronchitis 308
feline bronchial asthma 300–302

supraventricular arrhythmias 208
bronchopneumonopathy 307
bronchoscopy 298–299, 307
Brucella canis see canine brucellosis
BSI see bloodstream infections
BSL see biologic safety levels
B‐type natriuretic peptide (NT‐
proBNP)
atrial septal defect 239–240
canine chronic bronchitis 306
canine myocardial disease 256, 259
feline bronchial asthma 298
feline myocardial disease 271, 273
pulmonary
thromboembolism 318–319
buboes 952–953
bullous pemphigoid (BP) 542, 1427
BUN see blood urea nitrogen
burns see trauma and burns
butterfly‐type catheters 355
BVS see bilious vomiting syndrome
BWBP see barometric whole‐body
plethysmography

c
CAAB see Certified Applied Animal
Behaviorists
calcinosis cutis 1481–1482, 1482
calcitonin 1218, 1521–1522
calcitriol 1079–1081, 1172
calcium channel blockers (CCB)
heart failure 188, 191, 193
supraventricular arrhythmias
213–214, 217
calcium homeostasis and disorders
acute kidney injury 1096–1097
endocrinology 31–32
heart failure 175–176, 181–182
hypercalcemia 1217–1218, 1242,
1244
hypercalcuria 1126
hypocalcemia 1096–1097
metabolic bone diseases
1521–1527
paraneoplastic
syndromes 1217–1218
plasma cell disorders 1242, 1244
urolithiasis 1124–1127,
1129–1130, 1142–1143
calprotectin 634
calvarial herniation 750
Canadian Veterinary Urolith Centre
(CVUC) 1124–1132
cancellous bone 1513
cancer see individual cancer types;
malignancies and neoplasia

VetBooks.ir

Index

candidiasis 997–998
diagnosis 998
epidemiology and signalment 997
etiology/pathophysiology 997
history and clinical signs 997–998
public health implications 998
treatment and prognosis 998
canine acidophil cell hepatitis virus 695
canine adenovirus (CAV/CAV‐2) 696,
1035, 1037
canine brucellosis 963–965
diagnosis 964
epidemiology 963
etiology/pathophysiology 963
history and clinical signs 963–964
prognosis 965
public health implications 965
signalment 963
treatment 964–965
canine chronic bronchitis
(CCB) 305–311
airway sampling techniques 307,
309–310
diagnosis 306–308, 306, 307–308
differential diagnosis 306
epidemiology 305
etiology/pathophysiology 305, 306
history and clinical signs 305–306
prognosis 310
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 290–291
treatment 308–310
Canine Chronic Enteropathy Clinical
Activity Index (CCECAI)
629–630, 631
canine circovirus 858
canine distemper virus
(CDV) 851–853
canine infectious respiratory disease
complex 1035, 1037
canine viral enteritis 858
clinical signs 852
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1484–1485
diagnosis 852
epidemiology 852
etiology/pathophysiology 851–852
forebrain disorders 782
prevention 853
prognosis 853
public health implications 853
signalment 852
treatment 852–853
canine enteric coronavirus 858
canine familial dermatomyositis 1423,
1424

canine heartworm disease
414, 415
canine hepacivirus (CHV) 696
canine herpesvirus (CHV)
855–856
canine infectious respiratory disease
complex 1035, 1037
diagnosis 855–856
epidemiology 855
etiology/pathophysiology 855
history and clinical signs 855
prognosis 856
public health implications 856
signalment 855
treatment 856
canine hip dysplasia
(CHD) 1537–1540
diagnosis 1539–1540
epidemiology 1539
etiology/pathophysiology 1537–1539
history and clinical signs 1539
prevention 1540
signalment 1539
treatment and prognosis
1535–1536, 1540
canine histiocytic
disorders 1441–1444
cutaneous histiocytosis
1441–1442, 1442
histiocytic sarcoma
complex 1443–1444
systemic histiocytosis 1442–1443
canine hypothyroidism 71–74
additional considerations 72–73
ancillary testing 73
diagnosis 71–73
etiology/pathophysiology and
epidemiology 71
history and clinical signs 71
laboratory diagnosis 71–72
prognosis 73
treatment 73
canine idiopathic large bowel diarrhea
(CILBD) 572, 576–577, 578
canine idiopathic vestibular
disease 791
canine infectious respiratory disease
(CIRD) complex 1035–1038
canine chronic bronchitis 305
diagnosis 1036
epidemiology 1036
etiology/pathophysiology 1035–1036
history and clinical signs 1036
prognosis 1037
public health implications
1037–1038

signalment 1036
treatment and prevention
1036–1037
canine inflammatory liver disease
695–703
acute hepatitis 695, 702–703
autoimmunity 696
chronic hepatitis 695–703
copper storage diseases
696–697, 701
diagnosis 698–699, 699, 703
epidemiology 697, 702
etiology/pathophysiology 695, 702
history and clinical signs
697–698, 703
imaging 698, 703
infectious causes 695–696
prognosis 702, 703
signalment 697, 697, 702–703
treatment 699–702, 703
canine influenza virus
(CIV) 865–867
canine infectious respiratory disease
complex 1035–1037
diagnosis 866
epidemiology 865–866
etiology/pathophysiology 865
history and clinical signs 866
prognosis 867
public health implications 867
signalment 866
treatment 866–867
canine kobuvirus 858
canine malignant melanoma
(CMM) 1347–1351
canine pancreatic lipase (cPL)
594, 633
canine parvovirus type 2 (CPV‐2)
canine viral enteritis 857–860
diagnosis 859
epidemiology 857
etiology/pathophysiology 857, 857
feline parvovirus 869–870
history and clinical signs 859
prevention 859
prognosis 859
public health implications 859
signalment 857–859
treatment 859, 860
canine respiratory coronavirus
(CRCoV) 1035, 1037
canine rotavirus 858
canine viral enteritis see individual
viruses
capillary refill time (CRT) 360,
405, 448

1591

VetBooks.ir

1592

Index

capnography
cardiopulmonary
resuscitation 370–371
head trauma 756, 757
respiratory monitoring in critical
care 377
capsule endoscopy 531, 532
CAR see cortisol‐to‐ACTH ratio
carbamate toxicity 808
carbapenem‐resistant
Enterobacteriaceae (CRE) 1059
carbapenems 1045
carbohydrate metabolism 650
carcinoma
male reproductive system
tumors 1312
mammary cancer 1322–1323
nonmelanoma skin
cancers 1354–1355
carcinoma in situ 1288
cardiac cachexia 261
cardiac neoplasia 1271–1275
diagnosis 1272–1273
epidemiology 1271–1272
etiology/pathophysiology 1271
history and clinical signs 1272
prognosis 1274–1275
signalment 1272
treatment 1273–1274
cardiac output (CO) 403–405,
407–408, 413–414, 417
cardiac troponin (cTn) 318–319
cardiogenic shock 413–420
diagnosis 416–417
epidemiology 414–415
forward and backward failure 413
history and clinical signs 415–416
pathophysiology 413–414
prognosis 420
signalment 415
treatment 417–420
cardiomegaly 249
cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA) 365,
366, 370, 417–418
cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR) 365–371
advanced life support 367–369
airway 367
basic life support 366–367
chest compressions 366–367
critical care setting 347, 348
defibrillation 369–370
diagnosing cardiopulmonary
arrest 366
discontinuing CPR 371

incidence of cardiopulmonary
arrest 365
monitoring during CPR 370
open cardiac massage 370–371
postresuscitation care 371
principles of CPR 365–366
ventilation 367, 371
cardiovascular disease (CVD)
119–125
abdominal distension 121
advanced ultrasound techniques
152, 161–162
auscultation 122–124, 122,
124–125
cardiac radiography 127–134
case history and owner
complaints 120–121
common abnormal cardiac
radiographic patterns 130–132,
133, 134–139
conventional Doppler
echocardiography 137–151,
152–160
conventional echocardiography
134–137, 140–144, 146–150, 150
critical care setting 349
cyanosis 121
diagnostic imaging 127–164
dyspnea, tachypnea, and cough 120
evaluation of fluid
accumulation 122
exercise intolerance, weakness,
wasting, and syncope 120–121
generalized or localized heart
enlargement 133
left atrial enlargement 130,
134–137
left‐sided congestive heart
failure 131–132, 134, 136–137
left ventricular enlargement 130,
134–135, 137
mucous membranes 121
normal thoracic radiography
127–130, 128–130, 128, 131, 132
palpation of the precordium
122, 122
peripheral arterial
pulsations 121–122
physical examination 121–125
plasma cell disorders 1242
respiratory auscultation 124–125
right‐sided congestive heart
failure 132
right ventricular enlargement
132, 134, 138

signalment 119
systemic veins 121
vertebral heart score 128–130,
130, 131
see also individual diseases
carnitine 678–679
CARS see compensatory
antiinflammatory response
syndrome
case–control studies 16, 18, 21–23
castration 1312, 1314
cataracts 95–96, 95
catecholamines
endocrinology 30
hypothermia 432
trauma and burns 447–448
cathartics 443
catheters and catheterization
constrictive pericarditis 284–285
fluid therapy 355–356
mechanical ventilation 400
nocosomial and multidrug‐resistant
infections 1058
urethral obstruction 1111–1113,
1113–1114, 1117
cat scratch disease (CSD) 924
caudal vena cava (CVC) 671, 671
caval syndrome 414, 420
CAV/CAV‐2 see canine adenovirus
cavernous sinus syndrome 827–828
CBD see common bile duct
CBF see cerebral blood flow
CCB see calcium channel blockers;
canine chronic bronchitis
CCECAI see Canine Chronic
Enteropathy Clinical Activity Index
CDC see Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention
CDI see central diabetes insipidus
CDV see canine distemper virus
CDVD see chronic degenerative
valvular disease
CE see chronic enteropathies; cranberry
extract
cecal intussusception 504, 504
cell death 1206–1207
cell separator machines 1369
cell surface receptors 30–31
cellular energetics 1209–1210
cellular transplantation therapy 746
cellulitis 934
Center for Food Security and Public
Health 1065
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC)

VetBooks.ir

Index

anthrax 973
bartonellosis 924
rabies 892, 896
central diabetes insipidus (CDI) 65,
68, 1071
central nervous system (CNS)
acute poisoning 437, 442
antifungal therapy 1051
forebrain disorders 781–784
fungal infections 986, 989–990,
992–993
head trauma 748–758, 750,
751–752, 752, 754
meningoencephalitis and
meningomyelitis 795–801
myelopathy 816, 821
neurologic assessment 732
nonhemotropic Mycoplasma,
Ureaplasma, and L‐form
bacteria 933
rabies 891
septic shock 424
spinal cord injury 741–748,
742–745, 745–746, 747
spotted fever and typhus group
Rickettsia 938–939
vestibular disease 789–790,
792–794
central nervous system (CNS)
tumors 1247–1252
diagnosis 1248–1249, 1249
etiology/epidemiology/
signalment 1247–1248
history and clinical signs 1248
lymphomas 1237–1238
treatment and prognosis
1249–1252, 1251
central pontine demyelination
(CPD) 1073
central venous oxygen
saturation 411–412
central venous pressure (CVP)
327, 364
cephalosporins 1045
cerebellar ataxia 732
cerebellar‐related tremors 770
cerebral blood flow (CBF) 748
cerebral edema 749
cerebral perfusion pressure
(CPP) 748, 755
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
central nervous system
tumors 1248
forebrain disorders 775, 782–784,
787–788

head trauma 749–750
meningoencephalitis and
meningomyelitis 795, 797–799
myelopathy 820
protozoal and protozoa‐like
infections 1004–1006
seizures and movement
disorders 771
cerebrovascular accidents (CVA)
785–787
Certified Applied Animal Behaviorists
(CAAB) 1576
ceruminous gland adenoma 1474
CH see cutaneous histiocytosis
Chagas disease 1007–1008
CHD see canine hip dysplasia;
congenital heart disease
chemical burns 544
chemical load 382–383, 388–389
chemoembolization 1202
chemoradiotherapy 541
chemoreceptors 404
chemotherapy
airway and lung cancers 1278, 1280
approach to the cancer
patient 1202, 1203
biology of cancer and cancer
genetics 1206, 1209
bone and joint tumors 1331
cardiac neoplasia 1273–1274
central nervous system
tumors 1252
esophageal and stomach
cancers 1285
exocrine pancreatic cancer 1294
gynecologic cancers 1318–1320
hemangiosarcoma 1342,
1343–1344
hepatobiliary tumors 1306
intestinal cancers 1290–1291
intraocular tumors 1267
lymphoid leukemias 1225
lymphomas 1233–1235, 1234,
1238–1239, 1238
male reproductive system
tumors 1312, 1315
mammary cancer 1322–1324
mast cell tumors 1363–1364, 1363
melanoma 1349
myelodysplastic syndromes 1230
myeloid neoplasia 1227
nasal tumors 1258
nonmelanoma skin cancers
1356–1357
oral tumors 1255–1256

orbital and optic nerve
tumors 1269
plasma cell disorders 1245–1246
soft tissue sarcomas 1336–1337
urinary tract tumors 1308, 1310
chest compressions 366–367
chest wall 294–295
cheyletiellosis 1456–1457
diagnosis 1457
etiology/pathophysiology
1456–1457, 1456
history and clinical signs 1457, 1457
treatment and prognosis 1457
CHF see congestive heart failure
CHI see congenital hyperinsulinism
Chiari‐like malformation 1488
chigger mites see trombiculosis
cholangitis 669, 669, 721–722
cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis
see feline inflammatory liver
disease
cholecentesis 724–725
cholecystitis 670, 670
choleliths 721, 724
cholestasis 641–642
cholesteatoma 791
cholesterol 83, 650–651
chondrocytes 1510–1511
chondrosarcoma (CSA) 1327, 1332
choroidal melanocytoma/
melanoma 1264–1265
choroid plexus papillomas 779
chronic degenerative valvular disease
(CDVD) 178
chronic enteropathies (CE) 627–637
adjunctive therapy 637
antibiotic‐responsive diarrhea 627,
629, 636
antiinflammatory and
immunosuppressive
therapy 636
calprotectin and S100A12 634
canine pancreatic lipase 633
classification 627
C‐reactive protein 633
diagnostic imaging 635
diagnostic work‐up 629–630,
630, 631
diet and nutrition 635–636
epidemiology 629
etiopathogenesis 627–629, 628
fecal alpha‐1‐proteinase
inhibitor 633
food‐responsive diarrhea 627–629,
634–637

1593

VetBooks.ir

1594

Index

chronic enteropathies (CE) (cont’d)
genetics and genetic testing
627–628, 634–635
histology and WSAVA scoring 635
history and clinical signs
629–630, 629
immunohistochemistry
for P‐glycoprotein 634
intestinal microbiota 628–629
intestinal mucosal immune
system 628
perinuclear antineutrophilic
cytoplasmic antibodies 634
polymerase chain reaction for
antigen receptor
rearrangement 633
prognosis 637
serum albumin
concentration 630–632
serum and fecal markers of
disease 630–635
serum cobalamin
concentration 632
severe protein‐losing
enteropathy 636–637
steroid‐responsive diarrhea 627,
629, 634
supplementation recommendations
for cobalamin 632
treatment 635–637
work‐up and diagnostic tests 635
chronic gastric outlet 485, 485–486
chronic kidney disease
(CKD) 1165–1173
alkalinization therapy 1172
anemia 1170–1171
antinausea and appetite stimulant
therapy 1167–1168
antioxidant therapy 1172
calcitriol 1172
dialysis 1178–1179
diet and nutrition 1166
disease staging 1165, 1166, 1167
enteric dialysis and the
microbiome 1172
feline hyperthyroidism 79
fluid therapy 1170
gastritis and gastric ulceration 551
hypokalemia 1171
leptospirosis 946, 948
medical management 1166–1172
metabolic bone diseases 1522
mineral and bone disorder:
hyperphosphatemia 1171, 1171
monitoring CKD
patients 1172–1173

motility disorders 572
phosphorus homeostasis and
disorders 1083–1085
polyunsaturated fatty
acids 1169, 1172
prognosis 1173
proteinuria 1165, 1166,
1168–1170, 1169
systemic hypertension 220–221,
1165, 1167, 1168–1170
chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL) 1223–1225, 1224
chronic myelogenous leukemia
(CML) 1227–1228
chronic, recurrent pyoderma
1464–1465
CHV see canine hepacivirus; canine
herpesvirus
chylothorax 338, 341–343, 342
CILBD see canine idiopathic large
bowel diarrhea
CIRCI see critical illness‐related
corticosteroid deficiency
circulating biomarkers see blood
chemistry/serology
CIRD see canine infectious respiratory
disease
cirrhosis 705–711
acquired portosystemic
shunts 706–708
ascites 705–706, 709–710
coagulation disturbances
706–707, 711
cytology and fluid analysis 708
diagnosis 707–709
diagnostic imaging 666
etiology/pathophysiology
705–706, 706
gastrointestinal ulceration 706,
710–711
hepatic encephalopathy 706, 710
hepatobiliary disease 673
hepatoprotectants 711
histopathology 708–709
history and clinical signs 707
imaging 708
laboratory testing 707–708
metabolic diseases 681–683
monitoring 711
portal hypertension 705, 711
prognosis 711
signalment 707
treatment 709–711
cisterna chyli ablation 343
CIV see canine influenza virus
CK see creatine kinase

CKD see chronic kidney disease
cleaning and disinfection
endoscopy 511–512, 511–512
kennels and multicat
environments 1064–1065
nocosomial and multidrug‐resistant
infections 1061
client communication
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1396
behavioral problems 1577–1578
critical care setting 348
clindamycin 783–784
Clinical and Laboratory Standards
Institute (CLSI) 1192–1193
clinical decision making 17–25
case–control studies 18, 21–23
clinical trials 23–25
cohort studies 19–21, 20
cross‐over trials 24–25
hospital‐based cross‐sectional
studies 17–18
longitudinal observational studies
18–25
randomized masked clinical
trials 23–24
clinical trials
clinical decision making 23–25
cross‐over trials 24–25
randomized masked clinical
trials 23–24
clipping 615
CLL see chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Clostridium spp. 768–769,
807–808
see also botulism; tetanus
clot‐labeling techniques 319
clotting times 689
CLSI see Clinical and Laboratory
Standards Institute
CML see chronic myelogenous
leukemia
CMM see canine malignant melanoma
CMO see craniomandibular osteopathy
CO see cardiac output
coagulation and coagulopathies
acute poisoning 438, 439
canine inflammatory liver
disease 698
cirrhosis 706–707, 711
critical care setting 350
heat stroke 436
liver disease 644, 650, 656
mast cell tumors 1362
pathophysiology 644
septic shock 423, 426

VetBooks.ir

Index

trauma and burns 445
venomous snake bites 461,
463–464
cobalamin deficiency/supplementation
chronic enteropathies 632
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
583, 588–589
liver disease 650
pancreatitis 607–608
coccidia
Cryptosporidium spp. 1025–1026
Cystoisospora spp. 1023–1025
microspora 1026
coccidioidomycosis 994–995
diagnosis 994–995, 995
epidemiology and signalment 994
etiology/pathophysiology 994
history and clinical signs 994
public health implications 995
treatment and prognosis 995
cohort studies 19–21, 20
cold packing 462
colitis
gastrointestinal imaging 500, 501
motility disorders 577
rectoanal diseases 614
collarettes 1385, 1463
colloid oncotic/osmotic pressure
(COP) 357–360, 363, 451
colonic intussusception 504, 504
colonic volvulus/torsion 504, 505
colonoscopy 524–525, 525, 616
colopexy 618
comedones 1387
comfort rooms 1557
COMMD1 gene 681–682
common bile duct (CBD) 721–726
diagnosis 723–725
epidemiology 722
etiology/pathophysiology
721–722, 722
history and clinical signs 722–723
prognosis 726
signalment 722
treatment 725
compensatory antiinflammatory
response syndrome
(CARS) 422, 445
complement activation 445
complementary therapy 1344
complete blood count (CBC) see
hematology
complicated urinary tract
infections 1194
compression bandages 462
computed tomography (CT)

airway and lung
cancers 1278–1279
biology of cancer and cancer
genetics 1210
bone and joint tumors 1329–1330
canine chronic bronchitis 307, 307
central nervous system
tumors 1248–1249
cirrhosis 708
developmental orthopedic
diseases 1543–1548
esophageal and stomach
cancers 1284
esophagus 476, 478
feline acromegaly 45
forebrain disorders 776, 781,
783–786
fungal infections 996
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
ducts 724
gastrointestinal tract 469, 471–472,
472
head trauma 753–754, 754
hepatobiliary disease 659, 674
large intestine 500, 500
leptospirosis 946
meningoencephalitis and
meningomyelitis 798
metabolic bone diseases 1523–1524
motility disorders 569
myelopathy 819
nasal tumors 1257–1258
oral tumors 1254
orbital and optic nerve
tumors 1268
osteoarthritis 1531
pancreatitis 594, 605
pericardial disease 280
pituitary‐dependent
hyperadrenocorticism 57
pleural effusion 336–337, 340
rectoanal diseases 609, 619
spinal cord injury 743, 743–744
stomach 488–489
urolithiasis 1135
see also dual‐phase computed
tomography angiography
computed tomography pulmonary
angiography (CTPA) 319, 319
concentric hypertrophy 180–181
confounders 22
congenital heart disease
(CHD) 231–244
angiography 240, 242
atrial septal defect 231, 232–233,
237, 239, 241–243

atrioventricular septal defects 233
auscultation 235–237, 237
cross‐sectional imaging 240, 242
cyanotic heart disease 234
diagnosis 235–240
echocardiography 237, 240, 241
electrocardiography 237–238, 238
epidemiology 235
etiology 231–234
history and clinical signs 235
mitral and tricuspid valve
stenosis 234
patent ductus arteriosus 231,
235–237, 241–244
prognosis 244
pulmonary valve stenosis 231,
233–235, 238, 241, 243–244
signalment 119, 235, 236
subaortic stenosis 231, 233,
237, 243
surgical and interventional
therapy 243, 243
tetralogy of Fallot 234, 243
thoracic radiography 237, 238, 239
treatment 240–243
tricuspid valve dysplasia 231,
234, 237
vascular ring anomalies 234
ventricular septal defect 231, 232,
237, 241–243
congenital hepatic disease 103, 105
congenital hyperinsulinism
(CHI) 108–109
congenital hypoplasia 673
congenital megaesophagus 558
congenital portosystemic shunts
(CPSS) 713–720
classification and
anatomy 713–714
diagnosis 716
diagnostic imaging 670–672,
671–672
etiology 713
history and clinical signs 716
liver disease 644–645, 650, 653
pathophysiology 714–715, 714
portal hypertension 715
prognosis 720
signalment 715
treatment 717–720
congestive heart failure (CHF)
canine myocardial disease
254–255, 259–263
cardiogenic shock 413
case history and owner
complaints 120–121

1595

VetBooks.ir

1596

Index

congestive heart failure (CHF) (cont’d)
feline myocardial disease 267,
271, 273
left‐sided 131–132, 134, 136–137
management 185–197
right‐sided 132
sodium and water
homeostasis 1071
valvular heart disease 246–250
conjunctiva 1261–1262
consciousness 448, 753
constant rate infusion (CRI)
acute poisoning 444
cardiogenic shock 418
fluid therapy 363
phosphorus homeostasis and
disorders 1083
trauma and burns 451
venomous snake bites 464
constipation 572, 575–580, 612–613
constrictive pericarditis 284–285
diagnosis 284–285
etiology/pathophysiology 284
history and clinical signs 284
signalment 284
treatment and prognosis 285
contact dermatitis 1414–1415, 1415
continuous common source epidemic
curves 835, 835
continuous positive airway
pressure (CPAP) 388,
395–396, 402
continuous renal replacement therapy
(CRRT) 1098, 1150, 1175–1176
continuous spontaneous ventilation
(CSV) 394
contractility
canine myocardial disease 253–254
cardiogenic shock 418
heart failure 177
hypothermia 433
contrast radiography
esophageal disorders 558, 561–562
gastrointestinal imaging
469–471, 470, 480–483, 481,
490–491, 491, 499
motility disorders 564–565, 572,
573, 576–577
COP see colloid oncotic/osmotic
pressure
copper storage diseases
canine inflammatory liver
disease 696–697, 701
cirrhosis 709
metabolic diseases 681–683
corneal tumors 1261–1262

corticosteroids
canine inflammatory liver
disease 699–700, 703
gastritis and gastric ulceration 549
hemotropic Mycoplasma 929
metabolic bone diseases 1517
miscellaneous skin
diseases 1498–1500
neuromuscular junction
diseases 806
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 291
septic shock 425, 428
spinal cord injury 745
venomous snake bites 464
corticotroph cell marker 51
corticotrophy differentiation
markers 51
corticotropin‐releasing hormone
(CRH) 50, 81
cortisol 30, 30, 81, 84–85
cortisol‐to‐ACTH ratio (CAR) 84
cotton‐tipped applicator
smears 1391–1392
cough
canine chronic bronchitis 305–310
cardiovascular disease 120
feline bronchial asthma 297–298, 303
gastrointestinal imaging 478
heart failure 194
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 290–291
valvular heart disease 246–247
cough‐drop syndrome 306
COX/COX‐2 see cyclooxygenase
Coxiella burnetii see Q fever
CPA see cardiopulmonary arrest
CPAP see continuous positive airway
pressure
CPD see central pontine demyelination
cPL see canine pancreatic lipase
CPP see cerebral perfusion pressure
CPR see cardiopulmonary resuscitation
CPSS see congenital portosystemic
shunts
CPV‐2 see canine parvovirus type 2
crackles
cardiovascular disease 125
pleural effusion 335
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 289, 292
cranberry extract (CE) 1194
cranial nerves
cranial nerves IX, X, and XII 739
facial and trigeminal neurons
738–739

head trauma 752–753
neurologic assessment 735–739
nystagmus 738
palpebral fissure and third eyelid 737
strabismus 737–738
vestibular disease 789–790
vision ‐ menace and
pupils 736–737
craniomandibular osteopathy
(CMO) 1548–1549
CRCoV see canine respiratory
coronavirus
CRE see carbapenem‐resistant
Enterobacteriaceae
C‐reactive protein (CRP) 633
creams 1398, 1469
creatine kinase (CK) 461, 812
creatinine 1165, 1166
CRH see corticotropin‐releasing
hormone
CRI see constant rate infusions
cricopharyngeal chalasia 474
cricopharyngeal dysphagia 474
critical care setting 347–353
albumin 349
analgesia 351–352
assessment 348
bandage and wound care 352
blood pressure and perfusion 349
cardiac function 349
client communication 348
coagulation 350
drug metabolism and dosage 351
electrolyte and acid–base
balance 350
euthanasia 352
fluid therapy 347–349
gastrointestinal motility and
integrity 351
glucose 350
history 348
immune status and antibiotic
coverage 351
mentation and intracranial
pressure 347, 350
motility disorders 571–572
nursing care and patient
mobility 352
nutrition 351
oncotic pull 349
oxygenation and ventilation 350
physical examination 347–348
record keeping 348
red blood cell and hemoglobin
concentration 350–351
referral 348–349

VetBooks.ir

Index

renal function and urine
output 351
respiratory monitoring in critical
care 373–380
Rule of 20, 349–352
tender loving care 352
critical illness‐related corticosteroid
deficiency (CIRCI) 428
cross‐over trials 24–25
cross‐sectional imaging 240, 242
cross‐sectional studies 17–18
CRP see C‐reactive protein
CRRT see continuous renal replacement
therapy
CRT see capillary refill time
crusts
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1386
atopic dermatitis 1406
autoimmune and immune‐mediated
skin disease 1426, 1428–1429,
1429
cutaneous adverse food
reactions 1420
superficial necrolytic
dermatitis 1492
cryosurgery 1263–1264
cryotherapy 863
cryptococcosis 992–994
diagnosis 993, 993
epidemiology and signalment 992
etiology/pathophysiology 992
history and clinical signs 992–993
public health implications 994
treatment and prognosis 993–994
Cryptosporidium spp. 1025–1026
diagnosis 1026
epidemiology 1026
etiology/pathophysiology 1025
history and clinical signs 1026
public health implications 1026
signalment 1026
treatment and prognosis 1026
crystallization‐inhibition
theory 1123
crystalloid fluids 358–359, 409
acute kidney injury 1095
glomerular disease 1106
head trauma 755
septic shock 426
trauma and burns 450–451
urethral obstruction 1112
crystalluria 1132, 1136
CSA see chondrosarcoma
CSD see cat scratch disease
CSF see cerebrospinal fluid

CSV see continuous spontaneous
ventilation
CT see computed tomography
CTL see cytotoxic T lymphocytes
cTn see cardiac troponin
CTPA see computed tomography
pulmonary angiography
cumulative incidence 13–14
Cushing disease see pituitary‐dependent
hyperadrenocorticism
Cushing reflex 748, 755
cutaneous adverse food reactions
1419–1422
acute poisoning 441
choice of elimination diet 1421
diagnosis 1421–1422
duration and execution of
elimination diet 1421–1422
etiology/pathophysiology
1419, 1420
history and clinical signs
1419–1420, 1420
interpretation of outcome of
elimination diet 1422
prognosis 1422
treatment 1422
cutaneous histiocytosis (CH)
1441–1442, 1442
cutaneous lupus erythematosus
1424–1427, 1426
cutaneous lymphoma 1235
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1481–1490
gastritis and gastric ulceration 551
hormonal and metabolic
disorders 1481–1484
immune‐mediated systemic
diseases 1487–1488
neoplastic and paraneoplastic
disorders 1488–1490
neurologic disorders 1488
nutritional disorders 1486–1487
systemic infectious disease
1484–1486
cutaneous trunci reflex 735
Cuterebra spp. 785, 788
CVA see cerebrovascular accidents
CVC see caudal vena cava
CVD see cardiovascular disease
CVP see central venous pressure
CVUC see Canadian Veterinary
Urolith Centre
cyanosis 121
cyanotic heart disease 234
cyanuric acid urolithiasis 1132, 1132
cyclic flank alopecia 1436, 1436

cyclooxygenase (COX/COX‐2)
inhibitors
biology of cancer and cancer
genetics 1208
gynecologic cancers 1320
male reproductive system
tumors 1313
melanoma 1349
nonmelanoma skin
cancers 1356–1357
osteoarthritis 1533
urinary tract tumors 1308
cystic lesions 667
cystine urolithiasis 1130–1131, 1134,
1136, 1143
cystocentesis 1112, 1117, 1191
Cystoisospora spp. 1023–1025
diagnosis 1024, 1024
epidemiology 1023–1024
etiology/pathophysiology 1023
history and clinical signs 1024
public health implications 1025
signalment 1024
treatment and prognosis
1024–1025, 1024, 1025
cystotomy tubes 1308
Cytauxzoon felis see feline
cytauxzoonosis
cytochrome P450 (CYP450) enzymes
antifungal therapy 1051
antimicrobials 1044, 1046
atopic dermatitis 1410–1411
autoimmune polyglandular
syndromes 113
cytology
acute kidney injury 1094
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1385
bacterial infections 844
bone and joint tumors 1328–1329
canine chronic bronchitis 307, 308,
309–310
canine distemper virus 852
canine histiocytic disorders 1441,
1443–1447
cardiac neoplasia 1273
cirrhosis 708
exocrine pancreatic cancer 1294
feline bronchial asthma 299
fungal infections 845–846, 846,
985–991, 990–991, 994–996, 995,
998–1000, 999
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
ducts 725
hemangiosarcoma 1341
hemotropic Mycoplasma 928

1597

VetBooks.ir

1598

Index

cytology (cont’d)
liver disease 655–656
lymphoid leukemias 1224,
1224–1225
lymphomas 1232
mammary cancer 1322
mast cell tumors 1359–1360, 1360,
1365–1366
meningoencephalitis and
meningomyelitis 798–799
miscellaneous skin diseases
1496, 1504
mycobacteriosis 982, 982
nonmelanoma skin cancers 1355
otitis externa 1474, 1474–1475,
1475, 1476
pancreatitis 596–597
pleural effusion 340, 340,
342, 342
prostatic diseases 1159, 1160, 1162
protozoal and arthropod‐borne
infections 839–841
protozoal and protozoa‐like
infections 1009
rectoanal diseases 609
viral infections 843
yersiniosis 953
cytoscopic‐guided basket
removal 1147
cytoscopy 1183
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) 1568

d
DAG see diacylglycerol
Darrow–Yannet diagram
1069–1070, 1070
DC cardioversion 217–218
DCM2 mutation 253, 259
D‐dimers 315, 316
debridement 1031
defibrillation 369–370, 419–420
degenerative myelopathy (DM) 820
dehydration see hydration and
dehydration; sodium and water
homeostasis
delayed gastric emptying 567
delayed resuscitation 361
demodicosis 1449–1454
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1376, 1392–1393
canine 1449–1452
diagnosis 1451, 1453
etiology/pathophysiology 1449,
1450, 1452–1453

feline 1452–1454
history and clinical signs 1449–1451,
1450–1451, 1453, 1453
treatment and prognosis
1451–1452, 1453–1454
demyelinating leukoencephalomyelitis
(DL) 851–852
dentigerous cysts 539
deranged nitrogen metabolism 714
Dermanyssus gallinae 1458–1459
diagnosis 1459
etiology/pathophysiology 1458
history and clinical signs 1458
treatment and prognosis 1459
dermatologic disease
antibacterial agents 1400–1401
antifungal agents 1401
antiinflammatory agents
1399–1400
antiparasitic agents 1401–1402
antipruritic agents 1400
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1375–1396
biopsy and histopathology
1394–1396
categories and indications for
therapeutic approach 1399–1402
common formulations of topical
agents 1397–1399
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1481–1490
diagnostic tests and
techniques 1383–1396
distribution of lesions 1383,
1388–1391
epidemiology 1375
history and clinical signs
1375–1381, 1396
immunosuppressive agents 1400
miscellaneous skin
diseases 1495–1506
morphology of lesions 1382,
1382–1383, 1383–1387
physical examination 1381–1383
principles of therapy of dermatologic
diseases
1397–1402
pruritus 1376
screening tests 1385–1394
signalment 1375–1376, 1377–1381
systemic medications for hormonal
disorders 1402
systemic therapy 1399
tests of noncutaneous organs 1396

therapeutic plan and client
education 1396
topical therapy 1397–1399
treatment trials 1394
see also individual conditions/agents
dermatomyositis (DM) 1423, 1424
dermatophytosis 987–988
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1393–1394
diagnosis 987
epidemiology and signalment 987
etiology/pathophysiology 987
history and clinical signs 987, 987
public health implications 988
treatment and prognosis 988
descriptive statistics 10–12, 11–13
detrusor atony 1186
detrusor hyperreflexia 1186
detrusor urethral dyssynergy
(DUD) 1186–1187
developmental orthopedic diseases
(DOD) 1537–1551
breed dispositions 1538
canine hip dysplasia 1534–1540
craniomandibular
osteopathy 1548–1549
elbow dysplasia 1542–1544
hypertrophic osteodystrophy
1549–1550
Legg–Calvé–Perthes disease
1547–1548
osteochondrosis 1540–1542, 1541
osteochondrosis dissecans of the
hock joint 1544–1545
osteochondrosis dissecans of the
shoulder joint 1542
osteochondrosis dissecans of the
stifle joint 1544
panosteitis 1549
patella luxation 1546–1547
retained cartilaginous
core 1545–1546
slipped capital femoral
epiphysis 1550–1551
DEXA see dual‐energy X‐ray
absorptiometry
dexamethasone suppression testing see
high‐dose dexamethasone
suppression; low‐dose
dexamethasone suppression
dextrans 359
DFA see direct fluorescent antibody
DGGR‐based lipase activity 593,
604–605, 608

VetBooks.ir

Index

DI see diabetes insipidus; distraction
index
diabetes insipidus (DI) 65–66, 66, 68
diabetes mellitus (DM) 93–102
autoimmune polyglandular
syndromes 113–115
cataracts 95–96, 95
classification 93
diabetic ketoacidosis 100
diabetic neuropathy 96, 96
diagnosis 96–97
endocrinology 32
epidemiology 94
etiology/pathophysiology 93, 94
feline acromegaly 43–48
hepatic lipidosis 678
hepatomegaly 95
history and clinical signs 94–96,
95, 96
insulin resistance 93, 99–100
pancreatitis 608
polyphagia 94
polyuria and polydipsia 65
polyuria and polydypsia 94, 96
prognosis 100–101
signalment 94
sodium and water homeostasis 1071
superficial necrolytic
dermatitis 1491–1493
systemic hypertension 220
treatment 94, 97–100, 98–100
weight change 94
diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) 100, 592
diabetic neuropathy 96, 96
diacylglycerol (DAG) 179
dialysis 1175–1180
acute intoxications and therapeutic
plasma exchange 1179–1180
acute kidney injury 1098,
1176–1178, 1176–1177
availability and prognosis 1180
azotemia/uremia 1176–1177
chronic kidney disease 1172,
1178–1179
continuous renal replacement
therapy 1098, 1150, 1175–1176
fluid overload/oliguria/
anuria 1177–1178
hyperkalemia 1177–1178
intermittent hemodialysis
1149–1150, 1175–1176
modalities 1175–1176
peritoneal dialysis 1175–1176
severe acidemia 1178

diaphragm 295
diarrhea
chronic enteropathies 627–629,
634–637
exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency 584–585
feline inflammatory liver
disease 688
feline parvovirus 870
motility disorders 570–572,
574–577
nocosomial and multidrug‐resistant
infections 1058
rectoanal diseases 615
DIC see disseminated intravascular
coagulation
diet and nutrition
acute kidney injury 1097–1098
atopic dermatitis 1409–1410
canine inflammatory liver disease
701, 703
chronic enteropathies 627–629,
634–637
chronic kidney disease 1166
cirrhosis 710
critical care setting 351
cutaneous adverse food
reactions 1419–1422
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1486–1487
developmental orthopedic
diseases 1540–1541, 1548
diabetes mellitus 97–101
dysbiosis 623
end‐of‐life care 1559
enteral nutrition 452–453,
679, 1097
exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency 583, 589
feline hyperthyroidism 76, 78–79
feline inflammatory liver
disease 691–693
forebrain disorders 780
gastritis and gastric ulceration 554
glomerular disease 1105
heart failure 188, 192
metabolic diseases 679, 682–683
motility disorders 577
osteoarthritis 1532–1533
pancreatic endocrine
tumors 1299–1300
pancreatitis 597–599, 606–608
phosphorus homeostasis and
disorders 1079–1080, 1085

pleural effusion 342
polyuria and polydipsia 66
portosystemic shunts and
microvascular dysplasia 717
rectoanal diseases 610, 612, 614,
616, 619
septic shock 428
superficial necrolytic
dermatitis 1492–1493
urolithiasis 1137–1144
vestibular disease 793–794
diffuse iris melanomas 1265, 1265
diffuse parenchymal disease 665–666
diffusion impairment 386
1,25‐dihydroxyvitamin D
1521–1522, 1525–1527
dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)
canine myocardial disease
253–262
cardiogenic shock 413–415
cardiovascular disease 119,
122–124, 137
diagnosis 255–259, 255–257, 258
electrocardiography 174
epidemiology 254
etiology/pathophysiology 253–254
feline myocardial disease 267,
269–271
heart failure 178, 189–190, 192,
194, 196
history and clinical signs 254–255
lymphomas 1234
prognosis 262
signalment 254
treatment 259–262, 260
ventricular arrhythmias 200, 201
dilated pupil syndrome 828
direct fluorescent antibody (DFA)
test 894, 953
direct oral anticoagulants
(DOAC) 321
discoid lupus erythematosus
(DLE) 1424–1425, 1426
disease‐modifying osteoarthritis agents
(DMOA) 1534–1536
disease surveillance 4
disinfection see cleaning and
disinfection
displacement of the colon 505
disseminated intravascular coagulation
(DIC)
cirrhosis 706
Ebola virus 901
hyperthermia 434

1599

VetBooks.ir

1600

Index

disseminated intravascular
coagulation (DIC) (cont’d)
liver disease 644
pulmonary thromboembolism
316–317
septic shock 423, 426
trauma and burns 445, 453–454
yersiniosis 952
distraction index (DI) 1540
distribution 10–12, 11–13
distribution‐free tests 10
disuse osteoporosis 1527
diuretics
acute kidney injury 1095–1096
acute respiratory failure 388–389
canine inflammatory liver
disease 701
cardiogenic shock 417
feline myocardial disease 273
glomerular disease 1106
head trauma 756
heart failure 186, 187, 192–196, 195
magnesium homeostasis and
disorders 1088
pericardial disease 280
urolithiasis 1138–1139
valvular heart disease 249
diverticulum 505
DKA see diabetic ketoacidosis
DL see demyelinating
leukoencephalomyelitis
DLE see discoid lupus erythematosus
DM see degenerative myelopathy;
dermatomyositis; diabetes
mellitus
DMOA see disease‐modifying
osteoarthritis agents
DOAC see direct oral anticoagulants
DOD see developmental orthopedic
diseases
dopamine
acute kidney injury 1098
heart failure 196
neuroendocrinology 41
pituitary‐dependent
hyperadrenocorticism 50–51
supraventricular arrhythmias 212
dopaminergic D2 antagonists 575,
579–580
Doppler echocardiography 137–151
advanced ultrasound techniques
152, 161
basic principles 138
color flow mode 139
common abnormal flow
patterns 145–151, 155–160

mitral and triscuspid diastolic
inflows 141–142, 147–149, 153,
158–159
nonvalvular abnormal flows
149–151, 160
normal transvalvular flows
139–145, 152–154
physiologic regurgitations
144, 154
pulmonary and aortic systolic
flows 141, 145–147, 152,
155–156
pulsed‐wave and continuous‐wave
modes 138–139, 145
quantitative measurements
144–145, 159
standard Doppler modes
138–139, 145
Doppler
sphygmomanometry 221–222
double balloon enteroscopy 531–532
double‐contrast crystography
1134, 1135
DPCTA see dual‐phase computed
tomography angiography
dried solidified blood calculi 1131
drug/drug metabolite urolithiasis 1132
drug‐induced neuromuscular
blockade 808
drug‐induced
osteoporosis 1527–1528
drug‐induced tremors 770
drug metabolism and dosage 351
drug toxicity
antifungal therapy 1049,
1051–1052
antimicrobials 1041–1048, 1044
neuromuscular junction
diseases 808
toxic diseases of the liver 683–684
vestibular disease 792–794
dual‐energy X‐ray absorptiometry
(DEXA/DXA) 1523–1524
dual‐phase computed tomography
angiography (DPCTA) 716,
718, 720
DUD see detrusor urethral dyssynergy
duodenograstric reflux 567
duodenoscopy 520–522, 521–522
duodenum 487, 488
DXA see dual‐energy X‐ray
absorptiometry
dysautonomia 570, 828, 1188
dysbiosis 621–626
antibiotics 625
chronic enteropathies 628–629

chronic kidney disease 1172
clinical data on probiotics in
veterinary medicine 625–626
etiology/pathophysiology
622–623, 623
exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency 583, 588, 622
healthy dogs and cats 621–622
importance of gastrointestinal
microbiota 621
inflammatory bowel disease
621–622, 623, 624–625
probiotics, prebiotics, and
synbiotics 623–624
selection of probiotics 624–625
therapeutic approach 623–625
dysphagia
esophageal disorders 557
gastrointestinal imaging 473–474
neuromuscular junction
diseases 807
dysphonia 807
dyspnea
cardiovascular disease 120
chest wall 294–295
diaphragm 295
feline bronchial asthma 297
initial approach and
examination 289
lower airway 290–291
nonrespiratory causes 295
pleural effusion 338
pleural space 291–292
pulmonary parenchyma
292–293, 293
pulmonary
thromboembolism 293–294
respiratory monitoring in critical
care 373, 375–376
respiratory pattern‐based
approach 289–296
surgical approaches to thoracic
disease 329
upper airway 289–290, 290
dysregulated immunity 422
dystrophic mineralization
661–663, 662

e
ear canal tumors 1355–1356
ear clean solutions 1398–1399,
1474–1475, 1476, 1478
EBA see epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
EBC see exhaled breath condensate
Ebola virus 901–902
clinical signs 902

VetBooks.ir

Index

diagnosis 902
epidemiology 901–902
etiology/pathophysiology 901
prognosis 902
public health implications 902
treatment 902
E‐cadherin 1210
eccrine gland adenoma/
carcinoma 1354
ECF see extracellular fluid
ECG see electrocardiography
echinocandins 1052
echocardiography
advanced ultrasound techniques
152, 162
canine myocardial disease 255,
257–258, 257, 258
cardiac neoplasia 1273
cardiogenic shock 416–417
cardiovascular disease 134–137
congenital heart disease
237, 240, 241
feline myocardial disease 270, 272
fungal infections 995
general principles and
technique 134–136
main parasternal long‐axis views
136–137, 146–150, 150
main parasternal short‐axis views
136, 140–144
M‐mode imaging 134–135,
137, 151
pericardial disease 278–279,
279–281, 284
pulmonary hypertension 227,
228–229
pulmonary thromboembolism 315,
318, 318
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 293–294
supraventricular arrhythmias 210,
211, 216
two‐dimensional imaging
134–137, 140–144,
146–150, 150
valvular heart disease 247, 247,
249, 251, 251
see also Doppler echocardiography
ECLE see exfoliative cutaneous lupus
erythematosus
ECM see extracellular matrix
ECV see effective circulating volume
edema 463–464
see also pulmonary edema
educated guesses 1135–1136, 1136
EEG see electroencephalography

effective circulating volume
(ECV) 360
effect measures 12–15
effusion fluid 874
EGF see epidermal growth factor
EGFR see epidermal growth factor
receptor
EHBO see extrahepatic biliary
obstruction
EHL see intracorporeal lithotripsy
ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis
903–912
diagnosis 909–911, 909–910
epidemiology 905–908, 905, 907
etiology/pathophysiology
903–905, 903, 906
history and clinical signs 908,
908, 909
prognosis 911
public health implications
911–912
signalment 908
treatment 911
Einthoven’s triangle 165, 165
elbow dysplasia 1542–1544
diagnosis 1543
etiology/pathophysiology
1542–1543
history and clinical signs 1543
signalment 1543
treatment and prognosis
1543–1544
electrical cardioversion 419
electric burns 544, 545
electrocardiography (ECG)
165–174
canine myocardial disease
255–256, 255, 263, 263
cardiac neoplasia 1272
cardiogenic shock 416, 419–420
conduction abnormalities or
bundle branch block 172–173,
172–174
congenital heart disease
237–238, 238
criteria for heart enlargement 172,
173, 174
ECG paper, sensitivity, and speed of
recording 169, 169
Einthoven’s triangle 165, 165
evaluation of the ECG 168–172
feline hyperthyroidism 76–77
genesis of ECG deflections 167
heart rate 169–170, 170
hemangiosarcoma 1341
hypoadrenocorticism 84–85, 89

indications for ECG recordings 165
lead terminology and acquisition
technique 165–167
mean electrical axis 170–173,
171–172
pericardial disease 279, 282
precordial/chest leads and electrode
positions 166, 167
PR interval 167–168
pulmonary hypertension 227, 228
pulmonary thromboembolism
319
P‐wave 167, 170, 173, 174
QRS complex 168, 170–173,
171–174
rhythm 170, 170
six limb leads and terminals
165–166, 166, 166
supraventricular arrhythmias 205,
207, 207–208, 210–216, 210, 212,
214–215
surgical approaches to thoracic
disease 327
trauma and burns 454
T‐wave 168, 170
urethral obstruction 1110, 1110
venomous snake bites 461–462
ventricular arrhythmias 200,
201–203
waveform morphology and intervals
167–168, 167, 167, 169
electroencephalography (EEG)
762, 777
electrolytes
acute kidney injury 1096–1097
critical care setting 350
ff 357
forebrain disorders 777–778
heart failure 195–196
hypoadrenocorticism 83
metabolic diseases 680
motility disorders 564
sodium and water
homeostasis 1073, 1076
urethral obstruction 1111–1112,
1115
electromyography (EMG)
myopathies 812–813
neuromuscular junction
diseases 804–805, 807
seizures and movement
disorders 768, 770–771
tetanus 969
electronic medical records 17
electroretinography (ERG) 823
elimination diets 1421–1422

1601

VetBooks.ir

1602

Index

ELISA see enzyme‐linked
immunosorbent assay
EM see erythema multiforme
emesis see vomiting
EMG see electromyography
EMP see extramedullary
plasmacytoma
emptying disorders
detrusor atony 1186
dysautonomia 1188
functional urethral obstruction/
detrusor urethral dyssynergy
1186–1187
micturition and associated
disorders 1186–1188
neurogenic functional urethral
obstruction 1187
EN see enteral nutrition
encephalitis 781–782
Encephalitozoon caniculi 1026
endocarditis 920–921, 921
endochondrial ossification
(EO) 1509–1511, 1540–1542
endocrine manifestations of
cancer 1213–1216
Cushing syndrome 1213–1214
erythrocytosis 1214–1215
syndrome of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone
secretion 1214
Zollinger–Ellison syndrome
1215–1216
endocrinology 29–33
alopecia 1438
amino acid‐derived hormones 30
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1396
chemical classes of
hormones 29–30
endocrine disease 32
hormone receptors 30–31
hormones in circulation 30, 30
measurement of hormones 32–33
protein/polypeptide hormones 29
regulation of hormone secretion
31–32, 32
septic shock 423
steroids 30
see also neuroendocrinology
end‐of‐life care 1555–1564
approach to the cancer
patient 1204
bioethical principles 1561–1564
esophageal and stomach
cancers 1285

evaluating and monitoring quality of
life 1557–1561, 1557, 1558,
1559–1561
exocrine pancreatic cancer 1294
happiness 1560
human–animal bond 1560–1561,
1563–1564, 1563
hunger 1559
hydration 1559, 1559
hygiene 1559–1560
male reproductive system
tumors 1313
mobility 1560, 1560
more good days than
bad 1560–1561
pain and pain management
1555–1556, 1558–1559, 1559
pericardial disease 284
veterinary palliative care and hospice
care 1555–1564
see also euthanasia; palliative
radiation therapy
endoscopic nephrolithotomy
1155
endoscopy
biopsy 510–511, 526–527, 527
biopsy instruments and working
channel use 510–511
capsule endoscopy 531, 532
chronic enteropathies 635
cleaning and maintenance
511–512, 511–512
colonoscopy 524–525, 525
double balloon
enteroscopy 531–532
duodenoscopy 520–522, 521–522
equipment options 507–508,
508–509
erosions 513, 514, 521–522
esophageal stricture
management 530
esophagoscopy 515–517, 516
foreign body removal
529–530, 530
friability 512–513, 513,
521–522, 526
future directions 530–532
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
ducts 724
gastrointestinal tract 507–532
gastroscopy 517–519, 519
general manipulations 510, 510
granularity 513, 513, 521–522, 526
hyperemia 515
ileoscopy 525–526

interventions 527–530
large intestinal and distal
small intestinal
procedures 522–526
lymphatic dilation 513–514, 514
mass effects 514–515, 514
patient preparation/positioning
515, 517, 520, 522–525
PEG‐J tube placement 529
PEG tube placement 527–529
protoscopy 523–524
record keeping 508–510
technique for endoscope
handling 510–512
terminology 512–515, 512,
513–514
upper gastrointestinal procedures
515–522
endothelins 225
endotoxins 683
endotracheal intubation 399
endotracheal wash (ETW) 307,
309–310
end‐tidal CO2 327, 370–371, 377
enteral nutrition (EN) 452–453,
679, 1097
enteric dialysis 1172
enterococci 1059–1060
enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA)
canine brucellosis 964
canine influenza virus 866
ehrlichiosis and
anaplasmosis 909–910
endocrinology 33
feline immunodeficiency
virus 884
feline leukemia virus 879
fungal infections 991–993, 996
leptospirosis 947
pancreatitis 594
protozoal and protozoa‐like
infections 1004–1006,
1008–1009, 1011, 1014
tetanus 969
viral infections 843–844
enzyme markers of liver disease
646–649
canine inflammatory liver
disease 698
cirrhosis 707
feline inflammatory liver
disease 688
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
ducts 723

VetBooks.ir

Index

hypoadrenocorticism 83
metabolic diseases 677, 680,
682–683
seizures and movement
disorders 764
statistical interpretation for
practitioners 8–10
venomous snake bites 461
EO see endochondrial ossification
eosinophilic dermatitis 1498–1500
diagnosis 1499
etiology/pathophysiology
1498–1499
history and clinical signs
1499, 1499
prognosis 1499–1500
signalment 1499
treatment 1499
eosinophilic gastritis 487, 488
eosinophilic granuloma
complex 1503–1505
diagnosis 1504
etiology/pathophysiology 1503
history and clinical signs
1503–1504, 1503–1504
oral cavity and salivary glands
541–542, 541
prognosis 1505
signalment 1503
treatment 1504–1505
eosinophilic leukemia 1228–1229
eosinophilic plaques 1504, 1504
EPC see exocrine pancreatic cancer
ependymomas 779
EPI see exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency
epibulbar melanoma 1263–1264
epidemic curves 834–835, 835
epidermal collarettes 1385, 1463
epidermal growth factor (EGF) 1209
epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) 52
epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) agonists 62
epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
(EBA) 1427–1428, 1427
epilepsy see seizures/epilepsy
epiphysial growth center 1509, 1510,
1511–1512
epulides 1253, 1256
equine tetanus antitoxin 968
ERG see electroretinography
erosions
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1385

autoimmune and immune‐mediated
skin disease 1429
endoscopy 513, 514, 521–522
superficial necrolytic dermatitis
1492
erythema
atopic dermatitis 1404–1406
cutaneous adverse food
reactions 1420
superficial necrolytic
dermatitis 1492
venomous snake bites 461
erythema multiforme (EM) 543, 543,
1423–1424
erythrocytosis 1214–1215
erythroderma 1499
ESBL see extended‐spectrum
beta‐lactamase
Escherichia coli 1059, 1194
esophageal and stomach cancers
1283–1286
diagnosis 1284
epidemiology 1283
etiology/pathophysiology 1283
history and clinical signs 1283–1284
prognosis 1285
signalment 1283
treatment 1284–1285
esophagitis/gastroesophageal reflux
disease 560–562
endoscopy 516, 516
gastrointestinal imaging 478
motility disorders 564–567
esophagoscopy 515–517, 516,
558, 562
esophageal and stomach
cancers 1284
motility disorders 565
esophagostomy 452, 691
esophagus
abnormalities of the
gastroesophageal junction
479, 479
diagnostic approach 558–562
disorders 557–562
diverticulae 516
dysphagia 474
endoscopy 515–517, 516, 530
fistula 478
foreign bodies 476–477,
477–478, 558, 560–562
gastrointestinal imaging
474–479, 475–478
generalized esophageal
dilation 475–476, 475–476

megaesophagus 558–560, 564
motility disorders 563–565
normal anatomy and
physiology 557
prognosis for animals with
esophageal disorders 559–560
recognition of esophageal
disorders 557–558
strictures 478, 530, 561, 1047
treatment of esophageal
disorders 559–561
tumors of the esophagus 478–479
upper gastrointestinal tract
radiography/esophagram
474–475
vascular ring anomalies 476,
477, 562
essential fatty acids see polyunsaturated
fatty acids
essential thrombocytopenia 1228–1229
essential tremor syndromes
769–770
estrogen therapy 1160, 1184
ESWL see extracorporeal shock wave
lithotripsy
ethylene glycol 439–440, 1092–1094
ETW see endotracheal wash
European Advisory Board on Cat
Disease 956–957
euthanasia
approach to the cancer
patient 1204
critical care setting 352
end‐of‐life care 1555–1557,
1560–1564
mycobacteriosis 983–984
rabies 894
trauma and burns 455
Eutrombicula alfreddugesi
1459–1460, 1500
excoriations 1385, 1405
exercise and activity
modification 1533–1534
exercise intolerance 120–121, 264
exfoliative cutaneous lupus
erythematosus (ECLE)
1425–1426, 1426
exhaled breath condensate
(EBC) 299
exocrine pancreatic cancer
(EPC) 1293–1295
diagnosis 1293–1294
epidemiology 1293
etiology/pathophysiology 1293
history and clinical signs 1293

1603

VetBooks.ir

1604

Index

exocrine pancreatic cancer (EPC)
(cont’d)
prognosis 1294–1295
signalment 1293
treatment 1294
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
(EPI) 583–589
antibacterials 587–589
clinical features 584–585
cobalamin deficiency/
supplementation 583,
588–589
diabetes mellitus 94
diagnosis 585–587
dietary modification 589
dysbiosis 583, 588, 622
etiology 583–584
histamine‐2 receptor agonists and
proton pump inhibitors 589
histopathology 586–587
pancreatic enzyme
supplementation 586–588
pancreatic fecal elastase 586
pancreatitis 608
pathogenesis 583
prognosis 589
routine clinical pathology 585
signalment 584
treatment 587–589, 587
trypsin‐like
immunoreactivity 585–586
extended‐spectrum beta‐lactamase
(ESBL) 1059
external ophthalmoplegia 824–825
external validity 7–8
extraaxial hematomas 757
extracellular fluid (ECF) 357–358,
1069–1070, 1073, 1079–1085
extracellular matrix (ECM) 182
extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy
(ESWL) 1119–1120, 1145–1146,
1146, 1156–1157
extrahepatic biliary obstruction
(EHBO) 593, 669, 669
extrahepatic cholestasis 669, 669
extramedullary plasmacytoma
(EMP) 1241–1246, 1242,
1283–1285
extranodal lymphoma 1235, 1236
exudative effusions 334, 337–338
eyes and eyelids 400, 441, 1261–1262
see also ocular

f
facial nerve 738–739, 826
FAD see flea allergy dermatitis

FAIDS see feline acquired immune
deficiency syndrome
falcine herniation 750
false negatives 10, 24–25
false positives 10, 24
familial glomerulopathies
1101, 1102
fasciculations 769
FAST see focused assessment with
sonography for trauma
fat overload syndrome (FOS) 444
fatty acid oxidation 182–183
FCoV see feline coronavirus
FCV see feline calicivirus
fecal alpha‐1‐proteinase
inhibitors 633
fecal examination
coccidia 1024, 1024, 1026
protozoal and protozoa‐like
infections 1019, 1019
salmon poisoning disease 914
FECV see feline enteric coronavirus
feeding tubes 452, 1097–1098
feline acquired immune deficiency
syndrome (FAIDS) 884
feline acquired skin fragility
syndrome 1482, 1482
feline acromegaly 43–48
diagnosis 44–45
etiology/pathophysiology and
epidemiology 43–44
history and clinical signs 44
medical treatment 45–46
radiation therapy 47
surgical treatment 46
treatment 45–47
feline bronchial asthma 297–303
diagnosis 298–300
epidemiology 297
etiology/pathophysiology 297
history and clinical signs
297–298
monitoring and response to
therapy 303
prognosis 303
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 290
treatment 300–303
feline calicivirus (FCV) 887–889
diagnosis 888
epidemiology 887
etiology/pathophysiology 887
history and clinical signs 887–888
oral cavity and salivary
glands 536–537
prevention 889

prognosis 888
public health significance 889
signalment 887
treatment 888
feline cardiomyopathies
cardiovascular disease 119,
123–124
electrocardiography 172, 172
heart failure 178–179
feline coronavirus (FCoV) 873–876
diagnosis 874–875
epidemiology 873
etiology/pathophysiology 873
history and clinical signs 873–874
prevention 875
prognosis 875
public health implications 875
signalment 873
treatment 875
feline cytauxzoonosis 1014–1016
diagnosis 1015
epidemiology 1015
etiology/pathophysiology
1014–1015
history and clinical signs 1015
signalment 1015
treatment and prognosis
1015–1016
feline enteric coronavirus (FECV)
782, 873–875
feline gastrointestinal eosinophilic
sclerosing fibroplasia
(FGESF) 549
feline herpesvirus (FHV‐1) 887–889
cutaneous manifestations of
systemic disease
1484, 1484
diagnosis 888
epidemiology 887
etiology/pathophysiology 887
history and clinical signs 887–888
oral cavity and salivary
glands 536–537
prevention 889
prognosis 888
public health significance 889
signalment 887
treatment 888
feline hyperthyroidism 75–80
concurrent kidney disease 79
diagnosis 77
etiology/pathophysiology and
epidemiology 75–76
history and clinical signs
76–77, 76
prognosis 79

VetBooks.ir

Index

systemic hypertension 220, 223
treatment 77–79, 77
feline idiopathic cystitis
(FIC) 1109–1110
feline idiopathic vestibular
syndrome 791
feline immunodeficiency virus
(FIV) 883–885
atopic dermatitis 1410
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1484
diabetes mellitus 97
diagnosis 884
epidemiology 884
etiology/pathophysiology
883–884
hemotropic Mycoplasma 927
history and clinical signs 884
laboratory diagnosis 843–844
lymphomas 1236–1238
oral cavity and salivary glands 534,
536–537
prognosis 885
public health implications 885
signalment 884
treatment and prevention
884–885
feline infectious peritonitis
(FIP) 873–875
forebrain disorders 782–783
meningoencephalitis and
meningomyelitis 795, 801
seizures and movement
disorders 761
feline inflammatory liver
disease 687–693
diagnosis 688–690, 690
epidemiology 687–688
etiology/pathophysiology 687
history and clinical signs 688, 689
lymphocytic cholangitis
687–690, 693
neutrophilic cholangitis
687–690, 693
prognosis 693
signalment 688
treatment 690–693, 691, 692
feline ischemic encephalopathy
(FIE) 787–788
feline leukemia virus (FeLV) 877–881
atopic dermatitis 1410
central nervous system
tumors 1247–1248
clinical decision making 18
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1484

diabetes mellitus 97
diagnosis 879–880
epidemiology 878
etiology/pathophysiology 877
hemotropic Mycoplasma 927
history and clinical signs 878–879
intestinal cancers 1287–1288
laboratory diagnosis 843–844
lymphomas 1236–1238
oral cavity and salivary
glands 536–537
prevention and control 880–881
prognosis 880
public health implications 881
signalment 878
soft tissue sarcomas 1333
treatment 880
feline pancreatic lipase (fPL)
603–604
feline pansteatitis 1487
feline parvovirus (FPV) 869–871
diagnosis 870
epidemiology 869
etiology/pathophysiology 869
history and clinical signs 869–870
prevention 870
prognosis 870
public health implications 870
signalment 869
treatment 870
feline sarcoma virus (FeSV) 1333
FeLV see feline leukemia virus
femoral head and neck ostectomy
(FHNO) 1540
FeSV see feline sarcoma virus
fever 434–435
FGESF see feline gastrointestinal
eosinophilic sclerosing
fibroplasia
FGF23 see fibroblast growth factor 23
FHNO see femoral head and neck
ostectomy
FHV‐1 see feline herpesvirus
fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23)
1079–1081, 1521–1522, 1527
fibrocartilaginous embolic
myelopathy 821
fibrosarcoma (FSA) 1327
feline leukemia virus 878
oral tumors 1253–1256
fibrosis
canine inflammatory liver
disease 698, 700
cirrhosis 705, 708–709
feline inflammatory liver
disease 687, 691, 693

fibrous osteodystrophy
(FOD) 1522–1524
diagnosis 1523–1524, 1523
etiology/pathophysiology 1522
history and clinical signs
1522–1523
signalment 1522
treatment and prognosis 1524
FIC see feline idiopathic cystitis
FIE see feline ischemic encephalopathy
fine needle aspiration (FNA)
airway and lung cancers
1279–1280
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1392
hepatobiliary disease 675
hepatobiliary tumors 1305
intraocular tumors 1266
lymphomas 1232, 1236–1237
male reproductive system tumors
1313, 1315
ocular adnexal tumors 1262
orbital and optic nerve tumors 1268
salmon poisoning disease 914
soft tissue sarcomas 1334
FIP see feline infectious peritonitis
first aid 462
FISH see fluorescence in situ
hybridization
fissures 1385
fistula 478
FIV see feline immunodeficiency virus
flail chest 294–295
Flavivirus spp. see West Nile virus
flea allergy dermatitis (FAD)
1415–1417, 1416
fleas 951–954
flow cytometry 1232
fluid accumulation 122
fluid analysis 279
fluid overload 1177–1178
fluid resuscitation 360–361
fluid therapy 355–364
acute kidney injury 1095
acute respiratory failure 388–389
albumin 360, 363
body fluid compartments 356–358
body water distribution 356–357
canine inflammatory liver
disease 703
canine parvovirus type 2 859
catheter‐related
complications 356
catheter types 355–356
chronic kidney disease 1170
coccidia 1026

1605

VetBooks.ir

1606

Index

fluid therapy (cont’d)
constant rate infusions 363
critical care setting 347–349
crystalloid fluids 358–359
dehydration 361–362, 364
ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis 911
end‐of‐life care 1559
feline inflammatory liver
disease 690
feline viral upper respiratory tract
disease 888
fever 434–435
glomerular disease 1106
head trauma 755
heat stroke 435–436
hypothermia 432–433
indications for fluid
therapy 360–363
intravenous fluid types 358–360
maintenance fluids 362
metabolic diseases 680
monitoring of fluid
therapy 363–364
motility disorders 577–579
pancreatitis 597, 606
rapid volume expansion 360–361
septic shock 426
shock 409–410
spotted fever and typhus group
Rickettsia 939–940
surgical approaches to thoracic
disease 328–329
synthetic colloids 359–360
trauma and burns 450–451, 453
urethral obstruction 1111–1112
vascular access 355–356
water movement 357–358
fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) 960
fluoroquinolones 310, 924,
1045–1046
fluoroscopy
canine chronic bronchitis
306–307
congenital heart disease
243, 243
hepatobiliary disease 672, 672
motility disorders 566, 572
ureteral obstruction 1120–1121,
1121
FMCP see fragmented medial coronoid
process
FNA see fine needle aspiration
focal ischemic alopecia 1433

focal/localized intrathoracic airway
narrowing/collapse 383
focal/multifocal parenchymal
disease 666–667
focused assessment with sonography
for trauma (FAST)
pleural effusion 336
shock 406
surgical, traumatic, and bite wound
infections 1033
trauma and burns 449
FOD see fibrous osteodystrophy
follicle‐stimulating hormone
(FSH) 29, 36–38
follicular casts 1387, 1496
food‐responsive diarrhea (FRD)
627–629, 634–637
foramenal herniation 750
forebrain disorders 773–788
anatomy/function 773
anomalous causes 775–776
cerebrovascular accidents 785–787
clinical signs 774
degenerative and developmental
causes 775
differential diagnosis 774
electrolyte disturbances 777–778
etiology/pathophysiology 773, 774
feline ischemic
encephalopathy 787–788
hepatic and uremic
encephalopathy 776–777
hydrocephalus 775–776, 776
infectious diseases 781–784
inflammatory/idiopathic
causes 780–784
L2‐hydroxyglutaric aciduria
775, 775
metabolic causes 776–778
neoplastic causes 778–780
nutritional causes 780
storage diseases 775
vascular causes 785–788
foreign bodies
endoscopy 516, 519, 529–530, 530
esophagus 476–477, 477–478, 558,
560–562
fluid therapy 356
large intestine 502–504, 503
linear foreign bodies 494, 494
motility disorders 571
oral cavity and salivary glands 542
rectoanal diseases 615–616
small intestine 493–494, 494

stomach 486–487, 486–487
FOS see fat overload syndrome
fPL see feline pancreatic lipase
FPV see feline parvovirus
fractures 1518–1519
fragmented medial coronoid process
(FMCP) 1542–1544
Francisella tularensis see tularemia
Frank–Starling curves 181–183, 181
FRD see food‐responsive diarrhea
free water deficit 362
friability 512–513, 513, 521–522, 526
FSA see fibrosarcoma
FSH see follicle‐stimulating hormone
functional ileus 497
functional urethral obstruction
1186–1187
fungal infections 985–1001
antifungal therapy 1049–1053
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1393
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1485, 1485
diagnosis 985–986
epidemiology and signalment 985
etiology/pathophysiology 985
history and clinical signs 985
laboratory diagnosis 845–847, 846
miscellaneous fungus‐like
infections 999–1000
principles of therapy of dermatologic
diseases 1401
public health implications 987
treatment and prognosis 986–987
see also individual agents/diseases
furunculitis/furunculosis 1451–1452,
1452, 1465

g
gag reflex 739
gait and posture
myelopathy 817–818
neurologic assessment 731–732
osteoarthritis 1531
gallbladder 721–726
diagnosis 723–725
epidemiology 722
etiology/pathophysiology
721–722, 722
hepatobiliary disease 669–670, 670
history and clinical signs 722–723
liver disease 651–652
prognosis 726
signalment 722

VetBooks.ir

Index

treatment 725
gallops 255, 270–271, 273
gamma‐glutamyl transferase (GGT) see
enzyme markers of liver disease
gas exchange efficiency 378–379
gastric adenocarcinomas 1284
gastric dilation 483, 483
gastric dilation‐volvulus (GDV)
acute poisoning 442
gastritis and gastric ulceration 550
gastrointestinal imaging
483–485, 484
motility disorders 567
pulmonary thromboembolism 318
gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP)
49–50
gastric lavage 442
gastrinoma 1215–1216, 1300
gastritis and gastric ulceration
547–555
ancillary diagnostic testing 553
cirrhosis 706, 710–711
clinicopathologic examination 552
diagnostic approach 552–553
endoscopy 513, 518–519, 519
epidemiology 549–550
etiology/pathophysiology
547–549, 548
gastrointestinal imaging 487, 488
histopathology 552–553
history and clinical signs 550–551
imaging 552
normal gastric mucosal barrier
function 547
prognosis 555
treatment 553–554, 554
gastroduodenal ulceration 644
gastroenteritis 550–551
gastroesophageal intussusception 479
gastroesophageal junction 479, 479
gastroesophageal reflux 478,
560–561
gastroesophageal sphincter
(GES) 563–564
gastrography 480–483
gastrointestinal eosinophilic sclerosing
fibroplasia 491
gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding
gastrointestinal imaging 489
hypoadrenocorticism 82, 85
paraneoplastic syndromes 1220
gastrointestinal (GI) tract
acute poisoning 437, 438,
441–443

canine distemper virus 851–852
chronic enteropathies 627–637
cirrhosis 706, 710–711
computed tomography 469,
471–472, 472
dysbiosis 621–626
general imaging
principles 469–473
imaging contrast agents and
pharmacoradiology 469
intraluminal contrast agents
470–471, 470
magnetic resonance imaging
469, 472
motility disorders 563–581
radiography 469–471, 470
scintigraphy 472–473
septic shock 424
shock 405, 406
trauma and burns 453
ultrasonography 471
see also endoscopy; individual
anatomical components
gastrointestinal motility and
integrity 351
gastrointestinal perforation 486–487
gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST)
1283–1285, 1287–1290, 1291
gastroprotectants 693, 701, 1216
gastroscopy 517–519, 519,
552–553, 1284
GCS see Glasgow Coma Scale
GDV see gastric dilation‐volvulus
gelatins 360
gels 1398, 1469
generalizability see external validity
generalized deep pyoderma
1465, 1465
generalized esophageal dilation
475–476, 475–476
generalized hepatomegaly 661, 662
generalized systemic tumors 686
general proprioceptive (GP)
system 732–734, 816
general somatic afferent (GSA)
neurons 735
general somatic efferent (GSE)
neurons 735
general visceral efferent (GVE)
neurons 737
genetics and genetic testing
activating invasion and
metastasis 1210
avoiding immune destruction 1208

biology of cancer and cancer
genetics 1205–1211
canine myocardial disease
259, 265
chronic enteropathies 627–628,
634–635
deregulating cellular
energetics 1209–1210
enabling replicative
immortality 1205–1206
evading growth suppressors 1206
genome instability and
mutation 1207
inducing angiogenesis 1208–1209
liver disease 653
metabolic bone
diseases 1526–1527
nonmelanoma skin cancers 1353
pituitary‐dependent
hyperadrenocorticism 50–51, 51
resisting cell death 1206–1207
sustaining proliferative
signaling 1209
tumor promoting
inflammation 1207–1208
GERD see esophagitis/gastroesophageal
reflux disease
GES see gastroesophageal sphincter
gestational diabetes 93
GFR see glomerular filtration rate
GH see growth hormone
GHRH see growth hormone‐releasing
hormone
GI see gastrointestinal
giant migrating contractions
(GMC) 574
giardiasis 1018–1019
diagnosis 1018
epidemiology 1018
etiology/pathophysiology 1018
history and clinical signs 1018
signalment 1018
treatment and prognosis
1018–1019
gingival hyperplasia 534–535
gingivitis 533–536, 535
GIP see gastric inhibitory polypeptide
GIST see gastrointestinal stromal
tumors
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)
751–752, 752, 758
see also Modified Glasgow Coma
Scale
gliomas 1267

1607

VetBooks.ir

1608

Index

globulins 649–650
glomerular disease 1101–1107
diagnosis 1102–1103
etiology/pathophysiology 1101,
1102
history and clinical signs 1102
prognosis 1107
signalment 1101
treatment 1103–1107, 1104, 1105
glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
acute kidney injury 1089–1091,
1093, 1095
feline hyperthyroidism 79
hypothermia 432
phosphorus homeostasis and
disorders 1083–1084
ureteral obstruction 1118
urethral obstruction 1112
urolithiasis 1149, 1151
glomerulonephropathy
(GN) 1169–1170
glucagonoma 1299–1300, 1492
glucocorticoid receptors (GR) 50
glucocorticoids
allergic skin diseases
1414–1415, 1417
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1395
atopic dermatitis 1409–1410
canine chronic bronchitis 308
canine hypothyroidism 72
cirrhosis 709
cutaneous adverse food
reactions 1422
diabetes mellitus 93
feline bronchial asthma
300–301, 303
hypoadrenocorticism
81, 84–88
hypoglycemia 107
juvenile cellulitis 1446–1448
meningoencephalitis and
meningomyelitis 800–801
metabolic bone diseases 1517
metabolic diseases 677–678
miscellaneous skin diseases
1499, 1504
oral cavity and salivary glands
537, 543
otitis externa/media 1475,
1477, 1479
paraneoplastic syndromes 1218
pituitary‐dependent
hyperadrenocorticism 51–52
urolithiasis 1126–1127

glucose metabolism 1209–1210
see also hyperglycemia;
hypoglycemia
glycated hemoglobin 96–97
glycogen storage disease
(GSD) 105–106
glycoprotein hormones 36–38
glycosuria 66
GMC see giant migrating contractions
GME see granulomatous
meningoencephalitis
GN see glomerulonephropathy
gonadotropin‐releasing hormone
(GnRH) 37–38, 1160
GP see general proprioceptive
G‐protein 31, 75–76
GR see glucocorticoid receptors
granularity 513, 513, 521–522, 526
granulomas 667
granulomatous meningoencephalitis
(GME) 780, 797, 799, 801
gross deformities 449–450
growth hormone (GH) 38, 44–47
growth hormone‐releasing hormone
(GHRH) 38, 43
growth plates 1509–1511, 1510
GSA see general somatic afferent
GSD see glycogen storage disease
GSE see general somatic efferent
gut microbiota see dysbiosis
GVE see general visceral efferent
gynecologic cancers 1317–1320
diagnosis 1317–1320
epidemiology 1317–1319
etiology/pathophysiology
1317–1319
history and clinical signs
1317–1319
ovarian tumors 1319–1320
prognosis 1318–1320
signalment 1317–1319
treatment 1318–1320
uterine tumors 1317–1318
vaginal tumors 1318–1319

h
H2RA see histamine‐2 receptor
antagonists
H3N2 virus 865–867, 1036
H3N8 virus 865–867, 1036
HA see hydroxyapatite
HAC see hyperadrenocorticism
HAI see nocosomial and multidrug‐
resistant infections
happiness 1560

hazard rates see incidence rates
HBT see heart‐based tumors
HCC see hepatocellular carcinoma
HCM see hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy
HDDS see high‐dose dexamethasone
suppression
HDO see high‐definition oscillometry
HE see hepatic encephalopathy
head trauma 748–758
clinical assessment 750–753,
751–752, 752
confirmation of injury and
diagnosis 753–755, 754
injury‐related intracranial
physiology 748
monitoring parameters 751
pathophysiology of brain
injury 748–750, 750
prognosis 758
refractory head trauma 757–758
treatment 755–757
hearing 739
heart‐based tumors
(HBT) 1271–1275
heart failure (HF)
acute life‐threatening heart
failure 194–197, 195
additional therapies 197
antithrombotics 188, 191–192
beta‐adrenergic blockers 187,
190–191
calcium channel blockers 188, 191,
193
cardiogenic shock 415
chronic heart failure 185–192,
187–188
classification 177–178
compensatory phase 179–181
components of the circulatory
system 175
cough suppression 194
determinants of normal cardiac
function 175–177
determinants of ventricular systolic
function 176–177
dietary modifications 188, 192
diuretics 186, 187, 192–196, 195
etiology 176
failing heart 177–183
hemodynamics and development of
pulmonary edema 183
initial insult 178–179
long‐term adaptive
responses 180–181

VetBooks.ir

Index

management 185–197
origin of ventricular
contraction 175–176
pathophysiology 175–184
phases of heart failure 178–183
positive inotropes 187, 189–190,
194, 195, 196
refractory chronic heart
failure 192–194
septic shock 423
short‐term adaptive
responses 179–180
therapeutic implications of
pathophysiologic
mechanisms 183
transition phase 181–183, 181
vasodilators 186, 187, 188–189,
193–194, 195, 196–197
see also congestive heart failure
heart rate/rhythm 123, 169–170, 170
see also electrocardiography
heart sounds 123–124, 448
heat stroke 435–436
etiology/pathophysiology 435
prognosis 436
treatment 435–436
Helicobacter spp. 549, 553–554
helminths 913–915
helper T lymphocytes (Th) 1403,
1568–1569
hemagglutination inhibition
assay 866
hemangiosarcoma (HSA)
1339–1345
cardiac neoplasia 1271–1274
diagnosis/staging 1341–1342, 1342
epidemiology 1340
etiology/pathophysiology
1327–1328, 1339–1340
feline 1340–1341
hepatobiliary disease 668
history and clinical signs
1340–1341
liver disease 685–686
nonmelanoma skin cancers
1355–1356
ocular adnexal tumors 1261–1262
pericardial disease 279
prognosis 1344–1345
signalment 1340
treatment 1342–1344, 1342
hematology
acute poisoning 437
antimicrobials 1047
canine chronic bronchitis 306

chronic kidney disease 1165, 1167,
1170–1171
cirrhosis 707
endocrine manifestations of
cancer 1215
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
ducts 723
glomerular disease 1102–1103
hemangiosarcoma 1341
hypoadrenocorticism 83, 89
hypoglycemia 107–108, 110
liver disease 652–653
Lyme borreliosis 942–943
lymphoid leukemias 1224
lymphomas 1233
meningoencephalitis and
meningomyelitis 797
motility disorders 564
myelodysplastic syndromes 1230
myopathies 812
neuromuscular junction
diseases 804
pancreatitis 602
plasma cell disorders 1243–1245
polyuria and polydipsia 66
prostatic diseases 1158
protozoal and protozoa‐like
infections 1013–1015,
1013, 1018
pulmonary thromboembolism 317
spotted fever and typhus group
Rickettsia 939
surgical, traumatic, and bite wound
infections 1031
tularemia 957
urolithiasis 1133
valvular heart disease 251
hematomas 667
hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (HSCT)
1202, 1225
hemiwalking 733
hemodialysis 440, 443
hemodynamic compromise 400
hemodynamics 183, 200, 204
hemoglobin
critical care setting 350–351
shock 411–412
statistical interpretation for
practitioners 9–10
hemoperfusion 443
hemorrhage
head trauma 749
pericardial disease 277
venomous snake bites 459

vestibular disease 793
hemorrhagic parenchymal
contusions 757
hemorrhagic stroke 785–786
hemothorax 343
hemotropic Mycoplasma 927–930
diagnosis 928, 929
epidemiology 927, 928
etiology/pathophysiology 927
history and clinical signs 927
prognosis 929
public health implications 929
signalment 927
treatment 928–929
hepatic congestion 672
hepatic encephalopathy (HE)
cirrhosis 706, 710–711
feline inflammatory liver
disease 691
forebrain disorders 776–777
metabolic diseases 679, 682
pathophysiology 643–644, 644
hepatic lipidosis 678–680
hepatic portal vein (HPV) 671, 671,
673, 673
hepatitis
canine inflammatory liver
disease 695–703
cirrhosis 705, 707, 709, 711
diagnosis 653
diagnostic imaging 666, 666
feline inflammatory liver
disease 687
metabolic diseases 681–683
signalment 645
toxic diseases of the liver 683
hepatobiliary disease
advanced imaging techniques 659,
673–675
anatomy and physiology 641
biliary system 659–660, 664,
668–670, 669–670
classification 659
computed tomography 659, 674
diagnosis 658
diagnostic imaging 659–675
fluoroscopy 672, 672
history and clinical signs 645
image‐guided sampling 675
imaging features of
hepatobiliary disease 664–673
lymphatic drainage 660
lymph nodes 664
magnetic resonance imaging
659, 675

1609

VetBooks.ir

1610

Index

hepatobiliary disease (cont’d)
neoplastic disease 667–668,
667–668
normal hepatobiliary
anatomy 659–660
parenchymal disease 664–667,
665–666
parenchymal structure 664
radiography 659, 660–663,
661–662
scintigraphy 659, 674
ultrasonography 659, 663–674,
663, 665–671, 673
vasculature 660, 664, 670–673,
671–673
hepatobiliary tumors 1303–1306
bile duct tumors 1303–1304, 1306
diagnosis 1305
epidemiology 1304
etiology/
pathophysiology 1303–1304
hepatocellular tumors 1303,
1305–1306
history and clinical signs
1304–1305
mesenchymal tumors/
sarcomas 1304, 1306
neuroendocrine tumors 1304, 1306
signalment 1304
treatment and prognosis
1305–1306
hepatocellular adenoma 1303
hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) 684–685
diagnosis 1305
diagnostic imaging 667, 667
etiology/pathophysiology
1303–1304
signalment 1304
treatment and
prognosis 1305–1306
hepatocutaneous syndrome
666, 666
hepatomegaly 95, 661, 662
hepatotoxicity 1051
hepatozoonosis 1011–1014
diagnosis 1013–1014, 1013
epidemiology 1012
etiology/pathophysiology
1011–1012
history and clinical signs 1013
signalment 1013
treatment and prognosis 1014
herbal remedies 580
hereditary nephritis 1101

HES see hydroxyethyl starches
HF see heart failure
hiatal hernia 479, 479
HIF‐1 see hypoxia inducible factor‐1
high‐definition oscillometry
(HDO) 221–222
high‐dose dexamethasone suppression
(HDDS) 53–54, 56
high‐fiber diet 589
histamine‐2 receptor antagonists
(H2RA)
esophageal disorders 560
exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency 588–589
gastritis and gastric ulceration 553
motility disorders 575, 580
histamine receptors 1362
histiocytic sarcoma (HS) 1327,
1443–1444
histograms 11–12, 11
histology/histopathology
acute kidney injury 1094
airway and lung cancers 1280
alopecia 1438
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1394–1396
bacterial infections 844
canine distemper virus 852
canine histiocytic disorders
1442–1448
cardiac neoplasia 1273
central nervous system
tumors 1248–1249
chronic enteropathies 636
cirrhosis 708–709
esophageal and stomach
cancers 1284
exocrine pancreatic cancer 1293
exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency 586
feline acromegaly 45
feline coronavirus 875
forebrain disorders 775, 775
fungal infections 845, 985–987,
993, 993, 998, 1000, 1000
gastritis and gastric ulceration
552–553
hemangiosarcoma 1341
intestinal cancers 1288
liver disease 656–658
lymphomas 1232, 1237
mammary cancer 1322
mast cell tumors 1361–1362, 1365
miscellaneous skin
diseases 1496–1497

myopathies 813
pancreatic endocrine tumors 1299
pancreatitis 596–597, 604
protozoal and arthropod‐borne
infections 839–841
rabies 894
soft tissue sarcomas 1335
superficial necrolytic
dermatitis 1492
urinary tract tumors 1308
viral infections 843
histoplasmosis 990–992
antifungal therapy 1050, 1052
diagnosis 991–992, 991
epidemiology and signalment 991
etiology/pathophysiology
990–991
gastritis and gastric ulceration 550
history and clinical signs 991
public health implications 992
treatment and prognosis 992
HLA see human leukocyte antigen
Ho:YAG laser lithotripsy
1146–1147, 1146
HO see hypertrophic osteopathy
HOAC see hypoadrenocorticism
HOD see hypertrophic
osteodystrophy
Holter recording 213, 256
homeopathy 1344
hopping responses 733
hormone receptors 30–31
hormone replacement therapy
(HRT) 1170
hormones and hormonal disorders
canine hypothyroidism 73
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1481–1484
diabetes mellitus 93, 94
endocrinology 29–33, 30, 32
neuroendocrinology 35–41, 37
principles of therapy of dermatologic
diseases 1402
Horner syndrome 737, 827, 827
hospice care 1555–1564
hospital‐acquired infections (HAI) see
nocosomial and multidrug‐
resistant infections
hospital‐based cohort studies 20–21
hospital‐based cross‐sectional
studies 17–18
HPV see hepatic portal vein
HRIG see human anti‐rabies immune
globulin
HRT see hormone replacement therapy

VetBooks.ir

Index

HS see histiocytic sarcoma
HSA see hemangiosarcoma; human
serum albumin
HSCT see hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation
HT see systemic hypertension
human–animal bond
behavioral problems 1572
end‐of‐life care 1560–1561,
1563–1564, 1563
human anti‐rabies immune globulin
(HRIG) 897
human‐directed aggression 1574
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) 113
human melanoma
immunotherapy 1351
human serum albumin (HSA) 363
humidification 399
hunger 1559
HVS see hyperviscosity syndrome
hydration and dehydration
acute kidney injury 1092
chronic kidney disease 1170
end‐of‐life care 1559, 1559
fluid therapy 361–362, 364
see also sodium and water
homeostasis
hydrogen peroxide 442
hydroxyapatite
(HA) 1129–1130, 1512
hydroxyethyl starches (HES) 359
hygiene 1559–1560
hypalgesia 735
hyperadrenocorticism (HAC)
endocrine manifestations of
cancer 1213
endocrinology 30, 32
hepatobiliary disease 662
pituitary‐dependent
hyperadrenocorticism 49–63
polyuria and polydipsia 67
systemic hypertension 220, 223
urolithiasis 1126–1127
see also Cushing disease
hyperaldosteronism 89–92, 220
hyperbilirubinemia 651, 874
hypercalcemia see calcium homeostasis
and disorders
hypercapneic respiratory failure
381–383, 388–389
hypercapnia see hypoventilation
hypercholesterolemia 651
hypercoagulability 316–317, 317
hypercorticolism 1481–1482
hyperemia 515

hypereosinophilic syndrome 549
hyperesthesia 818
hyperglobulinemia 649–650, 874
hyperglycemia
critical care setting 350
diabetes mellitus 93–94, 96–101
metabolic diseases 679
hyperinflated lungs 298
hyperkalemia see potassium
homeostasis and disorders
hyperkeratosis 1492, 1502
hyperkinetic movement
disorders 768–769, 768, 771
hyperlipidemia 593, 599
hypermagnesemia see magnesium
homeostasis and disorders
hypernatremia see sodium and water
homeostasis
hyperoxaluria 1126
hyperparathyroidism 1082,
1522–1523
hyperphosphatemia see phosphorus
homeostasis and disorders
hyperpigmentation/hypermelanosis
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1387
atopic dermatitis 1405
bacterial pyodermas 1463–1464
cutaneous adverse food
reactions 1420
hyperproteinemia 298
hypersensitivity reactions
allergic skin diseases 1414–1415,
1415
antimicrobials 1045, 1047
feline bronchial asthma 297
venomous snake bites 461,
462–463
hypertension
chronic kidney disease 1165, 1167,
1168–1170
critical care setting 349
glomerular disease 1105–1106,
1105
head trauma 755, 757
vestibular disease 792–793
see also systemic hypertension
hyperthermia 433–434
etiology/pathophysiology
433–434
head trauma 750
surgical approaches to thoracic
disease 330
treatment 434
hyperthyroidism

metabolic bone diseases
1527–1528
metabolic diseases 678
statistical interpretation for
practitioners 15
see also feline hyperthyroidism
hypertonic saline 358–359, 360,
409, 755
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)
canine myocardial disease 265
cardiogenic shock 415
cardiovascular disease 123, 136
feline myocardial disease
267–273
heart failure 178, 190
myelopathy 821
hypertrophic osteodystrophy
(HOD) 1549–1550
hypertrophic osteopathy
(HO) 1220, 1279
hyperventilation 367, 757
hyperviscosity syndrome
(HVS) 1241, 1244
hypoadrenocorticism
(HOAC) 81–92
atypical hypoadrenocorticism
87–88
autoimmune polyglandular
syndromes 113–115
cats 88–92
diagnosis 82–85, 88–91
dogs 81–88
epidemiology/signalment
82, 88, 90
etiology/pathophysiology 81,
88–90
history and clinical signs 82, 88, 90,
90, 90
hyperaldosteronism in cats
89–92
hypoglycemia 107
motility disorders 564
polyuria and polydipsia 67, 86, 88
prognosis 87, 89, 92
treatment 85–87, 89, 91
hypoalbuminemia
feline coronavirus 874
hypoadrenocorticism 83
liver disease 649
metabolic diseases 682
septic shock 425
hypoalbuminuria 1102–1103
hypocalcemia see calcium homeostasis
and disorders
hypocholesterolemia 83

1611

VetBooks.ir

1612

Index

hypoglycemia 103–111
acquired hepatic
dysfunction 107–108
artifactual hypoglycemia 104–105
clinical signs 104, 109
congenital hepatic disease
103, 105
critical care setting 350
diabetes mellitus 99–101
diagnostic approach to
associated disorders 106–107,
109, 110
etiology/pathophysiology
104–111, 104
forebrain disorders 777
glycogen storage disease 105–106
heat stroke 436
history 105
hypoadrenocorticism 83, 85, 107
liver disease 650
maintenance of normal glucose
concentrations 103–104
microvascular dysplasia 105
neonatal and juvenile
hypoglycemia 106
nonislet tumor‐induced
hypoglycemia 106–107
pancreatic endocrine tumors
1297–1298
paraneoplastic syndromes 1218
persistent hyperinsulinemic
hypoglycemic syndrome
108–109
portosystemic vascular
anomalies 103, 105
renal failure 107
sepsis‐induced hypoglycemia 108
signalment 105
treatment and prognosis
106–107, 109–110
virulent babesiosis 108
xylitol toxicity 109–110
hypokalemia see potassium homeostasis
and disorders
hypomagnesemia see magnesium
homeostasis and disorders
hyponatremia see sodium and water
homeostasis
hypoparathyroidism 1084
hypophosphatemia see phosphorus
homeostasis and disorders
hypophosphatemic rickets 1527
hypophysectomy 46
hypopigmentation/hypomelanosis

approach to the dermatologic
patient 1387
autoimmune and immune‐mediated
skin disease 1426
bacterial pyodermas 1464
hypotension
critical care setting 349
head trauma 755
pulmonary thromboembolism 319
septic shock 421, 426–427
surgical approaches to thoracic
disease 326
hypotensive resuscitation 361
hypothalamus 35, 36, 41, 50
hypothermia 431–433
cardiopulmonary
resuscitation 371
etiology/pathophysiology
431–432
head trauma 750, 757
prognosis 433
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 292, 295
surgical approaches to thoracic
disease 326, 329
treatment 432–433
hypothesis testing
clinical decision making 20–21
infectious disease 835–836
statistical interpretation for
practitioners 8–10
hypothyroidism
antimicrobials 1047
autoimmune polyglandular
syndromes 114–115
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1482–1483
vestibular disease 792–793
see also canine hypothyroidism
hypoventilation
acute respiratory failure 382–384
mechanical ventilation 393
respiratory monitoring in critical
care 378
surgical approaches to thoracic
disease 325–326
hypovolemic shock
hypoadrenocorticism 82, 89
portosystemic shunts and
microvascular dysplasia 715
septic shock 422
sodium and water
homeostasis 1071
trauma and burns 453

hypoxemia
acute respiratory failure 383–386,
384, 385, 389–390, 390, 397–398
canine chronic bronchitis 308
feline bronchial asthma 299
mechanical ventilation 393,
397–398
pulmonary thromboembolism
313, 319
respiratory monitoring in critical
care 375–379
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 293
surgical approaches to thoracic
disease 325–326
hypoxia
hypothermia 432
metabolic diseases 680
pulmonary hypertension 225
shock 403–404
hypoxia inducible factor‐1
(HIF‐1) 1209

i
IBD see inflammatory bowel disease
IBS see irritable bowel syndrome
ICD see implantable cardioverter
defibrillators
ICF see intracellular fluid
ICGN see immune complex‐mediated
glomerulonephritis
ichthyosis 1500–1503
diagnosis 1503
etiology/pathophysiology
1500–1501
history and clinical signs
1501–1503, 1501–1502
prognosis 1503
signalment 1501
treatment 1503
ICP see intracranial pressure
icterus 642, 642, 721, 723
ICU see intensive care unit
idiopathic megaesophagus
559, 564
idioventricular rhythm 200, 203
IE see infectious endocarditis
I:E see inspiratory:expiratory
IFA see immunofluorescence
assay; immunofluorescent
antibody
IFN see interferons
IGF see insulin‐like growth factor
IHC see immunohistochemistry

VetBooks.ir

Index

IHD see intermittent hemodialysis
IL see interleukins; intermediate lobe
ILAE see International League Against
Epilepsy
ileoscopy 525–526
image‐guided sampling 675
IMHA see immune‐mediated hemolytic
anemia
immune complex‐mediated
glomerulonephritis (ICGN)
1101, 1103, 1106–1107
immune‐mediated hemolytic anemia
(IMHA)
chronic enteropathies 634
clinical decision making
19–23, 20
paraneoplastic syndromes
1219–1220
pulmonary thromboembolism 319
immune‐mediated thrombocytopenia
(ITP) 23, 1220
immune system
biology of cancer and cancer
genetics 1208
canine inflammatory liver
disease 696
chronic enteropathies 628
critical care setting 351
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1487–1488
ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis
903–905
neuromuscular junction
diseases 804–806
oral cavity and salivary glands
542–544, 543
rectoanal diseases 614, 615
tularemia 955
see also autoimmune and
immune‐mediated skin disease;
vaccination
immunization see vaccination
immunofluorescence assay (IFA)
canine distemper virus 852
ehrlichiosis and
anaplasmosis 909–910
protozoal and protozoa‐like
infections 1004, 1004, 1006,
1008, 1011, 1014
immunoglobulins 1241–1242, 1428
immunohistochemistry (IHC)
canine histiocytic
disorders 1442–1444
chronic enteropathies 634

feline coronavirus 875
intestinal cancers 1287–1292
male reproductive system
tumors 1314–1315
mast cell tumors 1364
melanoma 1347
oral cavity and salivary
glands 537, 542
papillomaviruses 863
plasma cell disorders 1245
rabies 894
immunophenotyping 1224,
1233, 1237
immunosuppression/immunotherapy
atopic dermatitis 1411–1412
autoimmune and immune‐
mediated skin disease
1423–1431, 1425
bartonellosis 924
bone and joint tumors 1331
canine distemper virus 851–852
canine herpesvirus 855–856
canine histiocytic
disorders 1442–1448
chronic enteropathies 636
chronic kidney disease 1170
feline coronavirus 875
feline inflammatory liver
disease 693
feline leukemia virus 878
forebrain disorders 781
fungal infections 986–988
glomerular disease 1106–1107
hemangiosarcoma 1343
hemotropic Mycoplasma
927–928
Lyme borreliosis 943
melanoma 1349–1351, 1350
meningoencephalitis
and meningomyelitis
800–801, 800
miscellaneous skin
diseases 1498–1500
mycobacteriosis 980
nocardiosis 980
nocosomial and multidrug‐resistant
infections 1058
nonmelanoma skin cancers
1356, 1357
oral tumors 1255
papillomaviruses 863
paraneoplastic syndromes 1220
principles of therapy of dermatologic
diseases 1400

protozoal and protozoa‐like
infections 1019
spotted fever and typhus group
Rickettsia 939–940
impetigo 1463
implantable cardioverter defibrillators
(ICD) 204
impression smears 1387–1391
IMRT see intensity‐modulated radiation
therapy
incidence odds/odds ratios 15–16
incidence rates 14–15, 21–22
incontinence 1184–1188
indolent ulcer 1504–1505, 1504
inducible nitric oxide synthase
(iNOS) 423
infectious disease
advantages/disadvantages of
diagnostic methods 840
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1376
bacterial infections 844–845
canine inflammatory liver
disease 695–696
communicating findings 836
confirming presence of disease
outbreak 834
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1484–1486
descriptive epidemiology
834–835, 835
disease monitoring and
surveillance 833–834
epidemiology 833–837
esophageal and stomach
cancers 1283–1284
establishing a case definition 834
establishing an investigation
team 834
fever 434
fluid therapy 356
forebrain disorders 781–784
formulating and testing
hypotheses 835–836
fungal infections 845–847, 846
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
ducts 721–722, 725
gastritis and gastric
ulceration 549–553
implementing control and prevention
measures 836
kennels and multicat
environments 1063–1066
laboratory diagnosis 839–847

1613

VetBooks.ir

1614

Index

infectious disease (cont’d)
liver disease 653
male reproductive system
tumors 1314–1315
meningoencephalitis and
meningomyelitis 795–801
myelopathy 821
nonmelanoma skin cancers
1354–1355, 1357
One Health 3–5
oral cavity and salivary
glands 533–538
outbreak investigations 834–836
pleural effusion 340–341
protozoal and arthropod‐borne
infections 839–843
sample collection, processing, and
transport 841
seizures and movement
disorders 762, 768–769
septic shock 421–428
soft tissue sarcomas 1333
surgical approaches to thoracic
disease 330
surgical, traumatic, and bite wound
infections 1029–1034
trauma and burns 454–457
urolithiasis 1126–1128, 1137,
1139–1143
venomous snake bites 463
vestibular disease 791–792
viral infections 843–844
see also individual agents/diseases;
individual diseases/agents
infectious endocarditis (IE)
diagnosis 251, 251
epidemiology 250
etiology/pathophysiology 250
history and clinical signs 250–251
prognosis 251
treatment 251
valvular heart disease 250–251
infectious vaccines 1568–1569
infiltrates 315
infiltration 356
infiltrative neoplasia 668
inflammation and inflammatory
disease
alopecia 1433, 1434, 1434
atopic dermatitis 1403
biology of cancer and cancer
genetics 1207–1208
canine inflammatory liver
disease 695–703

chronic enteropathies 627–628, 636
feline inflammatory liver
disease 687–693
forebrain disorders 780–784
gastritis and gastric
ulceration 547–555
glomerular disease 1101
large intestine 500, 501
meningoencephalitis and
meningomyelitis 798–799
myelopathy 821
myopathies 811–813
neuroophthalmology 823
oral cavity and salivary glands
534, 536–537, 543–544
pancreatitis 592–593, 599–600, 608
rectoanal diseases 614, 615
skeletal development and
homeostasis 1516
small intestine 491–492, 492
stomach and duodenum 487, 488
trauma and burns 445–446
vestibular disease 791–794
see also individual disorders
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
chronic enteropathies 627–637
dysbiosis 621–622, 623, 624–625
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
ducts 722
gastritis and gastric ulceration 548,
551–552
metabolic bone diseases 1527
motility disorders 572
inflammatory carcinomas
1322–1323
influenza viruses
canine infectious respiratory disease
complex 1035–1037
canine influenza virus 865–867
One Health 4–5
inguinal panniculitis 982
innate immunity 421–422
iNOS see inducible nitric oxide
synthase
inositol triphosphate (IP3) 179
inspiratory:expiratory (I:E) ratio 396
insulin
acute kidney injury 1096
diabetes mellitus 93, 94, 97–101,
97–99
feline acromegaly 45–46
hypoadrenocorticism 85
hypoglycemia 107
insulin resistance 93, 99–100, 679

pancreatic endocrine tumors 1298
insulin‐like growth factor (IGF)
endocrinology 29
feline acromegaly 43–47
hypoglycemia 106
paraneoplastic syndromes 1218
insulinoma 32, 1297–1299
integument hemangiosarcoma
1340–1341, 1345
intensity‐modulated radiation therapy
(IMRT) 1203, 1257
intensive care unit (ICU) 347,
571–572
interdigital pyoderma 1466–1467,
1466
interferons (IFN)
atopic dermatitis 1403
feline immunodeficiency virus 885
hemangiosarcoma 1344
oral cavity and salivary
glands 537–538
interleukins (IL) 1403
intermediate lobe (IL) 35–36
intermittent common source epidemic
curves 835, 835
intermittent hemodialysis
(IHD) 1149–1150, 1175–1176
intermittent positive pressure
ventilation (IPPV)
acute respiratory failure 389, 398
complications 400–401
indications for mechanical
ventilation 394
nursing care 402
settings 395–397
internal ophthalmoplegia
824–825, 825
internal validity 8
International League Against Epilepsy
(ILAE) 759–760
International Renal Interest Society
(IRIS) 1091, 1105–1106, 1105,
1165, 1166, 1178
interstitial cell tumors 1311
interstitial lung disease 229
intertrigo 1462–1463, 1462–1463
intervertebral disc disease
(IVDD) 819
intestinal cancers 1287–1292
diagnosis 1289
epidemiology 1288
etiology/pathophysiology
1287–1288
history and clinical signs 1289

VetBooks.ir

Index

prognosis 1291–1292
signalment 1288–1289
treatment 1289–1291
intestinal herniation 496
intestinal intussusception 494–495,
495, 571
intestinal mucosal immune
system 628
intestinal pseudoobstruction 571
intestinal volvulus/torsion 496–497
intraabdominal hypertension 295
intraaxial hematomas 757
intracardiac neoplasia 414–415
intracellular fluid (ICF) 357,
1069–1070
intracorporeal lithotripsy
(EHL) 1146–1147
intracranial disease 295
intracranial neoplasia see central
nervous system tumors
intracranial pressure (ICP)
critical care setting 347, 350
forebrain disorders 785
head trauma 748, 749–750,
754–757
vestibular disease 790
intradermal allergen testing
1407–1408, 1407
intraluminal contrast agents
470–471, 470
intramembranous ossification
(IO) 1509
intraocular tumors 1264–1267
diagnosis 1266
history and clinical signs 1266
primary tumors 1264–1266,
1264–1266
prognosis 1267
secondary uveal neoplasms 1267
treatment 1266–1267
intrapericardial cysts 275
intravascular contrast agents 471
intravenous catheters 355
intravenous lipid emulsions
(IVLE) 443–444
intussusception
gastroesophageal 479
large intestine 504, 504
motility disorders 571
small intestine 494–495, 495, 571
invasion 1210
IO see intramembranous ossification
iodinated contrast agents
470–471, 482

iodine 78–79
IP3 see inositol triphosphate
IPPV see intermittent positive pressure
ventilation
iridociliary epithelial tumors
1265–1266, 1266
IRIS see International Renal Interest
Society
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) 576
ischemia 446
ischemic stroke 785
isolation/culture
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1393–1394
bacterial infections 844–845
bacterial pyodermas 1468–1469
canine distemper virus 852
fungal infections 846–847,
985–986, 998
nonhemotropic Mycoplasma,
Ureaplasma, and L‐form
bacteria 934, 934
prostatic diseases 1159
protozoal and arthropod‐borne
infections 843
urolithiasis 1132–1133
viral infections 844
yersiniosis 953
isoxazolines 1452–1454
ITP see immune‐mediated
thrombocytopenia
IVDD see intervertebral disc disease
IVLE see intravenous lipid emulsions

j
Jarisch–Herxheimer reaction 924
jaundice 642, 642, 721, 723
jejunal lymph nodes 492
jejunojejunal intussusception
494–495, 495
J‐tubes 529
junctionopathies 382
justice principle 1561–1563
juvenile cellulitis 1447–1448
clinical signs 1447
diagnosis 1447–1448
pathogenesis 1447
signalment 1447
treatment and prognosis 1448
juvenile hypoglycemia 106

k
Kaplan–Meier survival curves
20, 248, 248

20–21,

KCS see keratoconjunctivitis sicca
kennels and multicat
environments 1063–1066
cleaning and
disinfection 1064–1065
culture of compliance 1065
managing outbreaks 1065
modes of transmission 1063
prevention of disease transmission
1063–1064
protection from zoonotic
pathogens 1065–1066
risks 1063
vaccination 1064
keratoconjunctivitis sicca
(KCS) 1047
Key–Gaskell syndrome 828

l
L2‐hydroxyglutaric aciduria
775, 775
lactate 406, 411
lactulose 710, 717
LAD see linear IgA disease
lagenidiosis 1485–1486
lamellar bone 1513
laparoscopic‐assisted
cystoscopy 1149
laparoscopic biopsy 657–658
laparotomy and laparoscopy 725
large cell lymphoma 1238–1239
large intestine
cecal or colonic intussusception
504, 504
colonic volvulus/torsion 504, 505
computed tomography 500, 500
congenital abnormalities of the
colon 504–505
displacement of the colon 505
endoscopy 522–526
gastrointestinal imaging
498–505, 500–505
inflammatory disorders 500, 501
intestinal cancers 1287–1292
megacolon 500–504, 502–503
pneumocolonography 499
radiography 498–500, 501–505
tumors of the large intestine
500, 501
ultrasonography 498–500,
501, 503
laser ablation 538
laser therapy 1267
latex agglutination assay 993

1615

VetBooks.ir

1616

Index

lavage 1032
see also bronchoalveolar lavage
laxatives 612–613, 616
LC see lymphocytic cholangitis
L‐carnitine deficiency 188, 192
LCP see Legg–Calvé–Perthes
LDDS see low‐dose dexamethasone
suppression
LDL see low‐density lipoprotein
left atrial enlargement
cardiovascular disease 130,
134–137
feline myocardial disease
271, 273
valvular heart disease 246–247
left bundle branch block (LBBB)
172–173, 174
left‐sided congestive heart
failure 131–132, 134, 136–137
left ventricular eccentric
hypertrophy 246
left ventricular enlargement 130,
134–135, 137
left ventricular hypertrophy 268
left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT)
obstruction 265, 415
Legg–Calvé–Perthes (LCP)
disease 1547–1548
leiomyoma/leiomyosarcoma
esophageal and stomach
cancers 1283, 1285
intestinal cancers 1287, 1289,
1291–1292
leishmaniosis 1009–1011
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1485, 1486
diagnosis 1010–1011
epidemiology 1010
etiology/pathophysiology 1009–1010
history and clinical signs 1010
signalment 1010
treatment and prognosis 1011
LEM see leukoencephalomyelopathy
lens‐induced uveitis 95
leprosy/leproid granuloma
syndromes 980–983
leptospirosis 945–949
acute kidney injury 1091, 1093,
1098
canine inflammatory liver disease
696, 702
diagnosis 946–947
epidemiology 945–946
etiology/pathophysiology 945
history and clinical signs 946
prevention 948

prognosis 948
public health implications
948–949
signalment 946
treatment 947–948
leukemia see feline leukemia virus
leukemia inhibitory factor and receptor
(LIF/LIFR) 51
leukoencephalomyelopathy
(LEM) 782
leukopenia 870
leukopheresis 1370, 1371
leuteinizing hormone (LH)
36–38
level of consciousness (LOC)
448, 753
L‐form bacteria 931–935
LH see luteinizing hormone
lice see pediculosis
lichenification
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1386
atopic dermatitis 1405
cutaneous adverse food
reactions 1420
LIF/LIFR see leukemia inhibitory factor
and receptor
limbal melanoma 1263–1264
limb function assessment 752, 752
lincosamides 1046
linear foreign bodies 494, 494
linear IgA disease (LAD) 1428
lingual hemangiosarcoma 1341
lipid metabolism 650–651
see also hepatic lipidosis
liver disease 641–658
acquired portosystemic shunts 643
anatomy and physiology 641
ascites 643
biochemical evaluation 645–652
canine inflammatory liver
disease 695–703
cholestasis 641–642
coagulopathy 644
cytology 655–656
diagnosis 645–658
feline inflammatory liver
disease 687–693
gastroduodenal ulceration 644
genetics and genetic testing 653
hematology 652–653
hepatic encephalopathy 643–644,
644
histopathology 656–658
history and clinical signs 645, 646
icterus 642, 642

imaging 653
interpretation of clinical
pathology 653, 654
malignancies/neoplasia 684–686
metabolic diseases 677–683
newer tests 653
pathophysiology of important clinical
presentations 641–644
portal hypertension 643
septic shock 423
serology 653
signalment 644–645
toxic diseases 683–684
urinalysis 653
urolithiasis 1129
see also hepatic; hepatobiliary
disease
liver failure 1071
liver flukes 690
liver function tests 649–652,
707–708
liver lobe torsion 667
liver pseudofunction tests 707
livestock 4–5
LMN see lower motor neuron
LMWH see low molecular weight
heparin
lobular orbital adenoma 1267
LOC see level of consciousness
localized hepatomegaly 661, 662
longitudinal observational studies
case–control studies 21–23
clinical decision making 18–25
clinical trials 23–25
cohort studies 19–21, 20
loop diuretics 417
loss of nociception 818
lotions 1398
low‐density lipoprotein (LDL) 1370
low‐dose dexamethasone
suppression (LDDS) 31–32,
32, 53–54, 54, 56
lower airway 290–291
lower motor neuron (LMN)
731–735, 807, 1184–1186
lower urinary tract (LUT) 1124,
1127–1128, 1136–1149
low‐fat diet 589
low molecular weight heparin
(LMWH) 321–322
L‐type calcium channels 175–176
lung cancers
diagnosis 1279–1280
epidemiology 1278–1279
etiology/pathophysiology 1278
history and clinical signs 1279

VetBooks.ir

Index

prognosis 1280, 1281
signalment 1279
statistical interpretation for
practitioners 7
treatment 1280
lung‐digit syndrome 1489–1490
LUT see lower urinary tract
luteinizing hormone (LH) 29
LVOT see left ventricular
outflow tract
Lyme borreliosis 941–944
diagnosis 942–943
epidemiology 941
etiology/pathophysiology 941
history and clinical signs
941–942
Lyme arthritis 941–943
Lyme nephritis 942, 943
One Health 4
prevention 942, 943
prognosis 943
public health implications 944
signalment 941
treatment 943
lymphadenitis 951
lymphadenomegaly 1348
lymphangiectasia 522, 522
lymphatic dilation 513–514, 514
lymphatic drainage 660
lymph nodes
biology of cancer and cancer
genetics 1210
bone and joint tumors 1328–1329
hepatobiliary disease 664
mast cell tumors 1360
melanoma 1348
oral tumors 1254
rectoanal diseases 609–610
soft tissue sarcomas 1334
lymphocytic cholangitis (LC)
687–690, 693
lymphoid leukemias 1223–1225
diagnosis 1224–1225, 1224–1225
epidemiology 1223–1224
etiology/pathophysiology 1223
feline leukemia virus 878
history and clinical signs 1224
prognosis 1225
signalment 1224
treatment 1225
lymphoma/lymphosarcoma
1231–1239
airway and lung cancers
1277–1278
canine lymphomas 1231–1236
cardiac neoplasia 1271–1274

diagnosis/clinical staging
1232–1233, 1232, 1236–1238
epidemiology 1231, 1236
etiology/pathophysiology
1231, 1236
extranodal forms of
lymphoma 1235–1237
feline leukemia virus 878
feline lymphomas 1236–1239
history and clinical signs
1231–1232, 1232, 1236
intestinal cancers 1287–1292
prognosis 1235–1236, 1239
signalment 1231, 1236
treatment 1233–1235, 1234,
1238–1239, 1238
lymphopenia 859
Lynxacarus radovsky 1457–1458
diagnosis 1457–1458
etiology/pathophysiology 1457
history and clinical signs
1457, 1458
treatment and prognosis 1458
Lyssavirus spp. see rabies

m
macrocirculation 405
macrocyclic lactones 1452
macrolides 1046
macronodular hyperplasia 56
macrophage colony‐stimulating factors
(M‐CSF) 1514–1515, 1515
macules
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1383
atopic dermatitis 1404
miscellaneous skin diseases 1499
magnesium homeostasis and
disorders 1085–1088
biologic importance of
magnesium 1085–1086
distribution in the body 1085
etiology/pathophysiology
1086–1087, 1087
hypermagnesemia 1087–1088
hypomagnesemia 1086–1087
laboratory assessment 1086
regulation of magnesium 1086
treatment 1087
magnesium sulfate
supplementation 203–204
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
airway and lung cancers
1278–1279
bone and joint tumors 1330
cardiac neoplasia 1272–1273

central nervous system tumors
1248–1249, 1249
cirrhosis 708
esophageal and stomach
cancers 1284
feline acromegaly 45
forebrain disorders 775–776, 781,
783–787
fungal infections 996
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
ducts 724
gastrointestinal imaging 469, 472
head trauma 750, 753–754, 754
hepatobiliary disease 659, 675
meningoencephalitis and
meningomyelitis 798
motility disorders 569
myelopathy 819
neuroophthalmology 823, 825, 827
oral tumors 1254
orbital and optic nerve
tumors 1268
osteoarthritis 1531
pancreatitis 594
pericardial disease 280
pituitary‐dependent
hyperadrenocorticism 57
pulmonary thromboembolism 319
seizures and movement
disorders 762
spinal cord injury 743–744, 744
vestibular disease 792–794
maintenance fluids 362
major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) 1567–1569
Malassezia spp. 988–989
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1376, 1391
bacterial pyodermas 1462, 1466
diagnosis 988–989
epidemiology and signalment 988
etiology/pathophysiology 988
history and clinical signs 988
miscellaneous skin diseases
1495–1498, 1502, 1502
otitis externa 1474, 1474
public health implications 989
treatment and prognosis
989, 1052
male feminizing syndrome 1488
male reproductive system
tumors 1311–1315
diagnosis 1311–1315, 1315
epidemiology 1311–1314
etiology/pathophysiology
1311–1314

1617

VetBooks.ir

1618

Index

male reproductive system tumors (cont’d)
history and clinical signs
1311–1314
penis, prepuce, and scrotal
tumors 1313–1314
prognosis 1312–1315
prostate tumors 1312–1313
signalment 1311–1314
testicular tumors 1311–1312
transmissible venereal
tumor 1314–1315
treatment 1312–1315
malignancies and neoplasia
activating invasion and
metastasis 1210
adjunctive therapies 1204
advanced diagnostics 1201
approach to the cancer
patient 1199–1204
avoiding immune
destruction 1208
biology of cancer and cancer
genetics 1205–1211
chemotherapy 1202
clinical features and diagnostic
testing 1200
concepts and definitions 1199
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1488–1490
deregulating cellular
energetics 1209–1210
diagnosis 1201
enabling replicative
immortality 1205–1206
end‐of‐life management 1204
endoscopy 517, 518–519
esophagus 478, 479
evading growth suppressors 1206
exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency 584
feline immunodeficiency virus 884
feline leukemia virus 878
forebrain disorders 778–780
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
ducts 721–722
gastritis and gastric ulceration 548,
550–551, 553
genome instability and
mutation 1207
grading 1200–1201
hepatobiliary disease 667–668,
667–668
history 1200
imaging 1201
inducing angiogenesis 1208–1209
initial assessment 1200

large intestine 500, 501
liver disease 684–686
meningoencephalitis and
meningomyelitis 798–799
metabolic bone diseases
1522, 1527
motility disorders 571
myelopathy 820–821
neurologic assessment 737
oral cavity and salivary glands
534, 538–541, 540, 545
pain and pain management 1203
palliative care 1204
palliative radiation therapy
1203–1204
papillomaviruses 861–863
patient evaluation 1200
pericardial disease 284
prostatic diseases 1163
radiation therapy 1202–1203
recent treatment advances 1202
rectoanal diseases 609–610,
618–620, 619
resisting cell death 1206–1207
small intestine 491–492, 495, 496
staging 1200
stomach 487–489, 488
surgical management 1202
sustaining proliferative
signaling 1209
treatment 1201–1203
tumor promoting
inflammation 1207–1208
ureteral obstruction
1117–1119, 1121
urethral obstruction 1109–1111,
1115, 1117
vestibular disease 791, 793
see also individual types
malignant arrhythmias 461–462
malignant hyperthermia (MH) 376,
389, 433–434
malignant lymphoma 686
malignant melanoma (MM) 539,
1253–1256
MALT see mucosa‐associated lymphoid
tissue
mammary cancer 1321–1325
canine mammary cancer
1321–1323
diagnosis/staging 1322, 1322,
1323–1324, 1324
epidemiology 1321, 1323
etiology/pathophysiology
1321, 1323
feline mammary cancer 1323–1324

history and clinical signs
1321–1322, 1323
prognosis 1323–1324
signalment 1321, 1323
treatment 1322–1324
manometry 565, 566
margination changes 663
mass effects 514–515, 514
mass lesions
approach to the cancer
patient 1199
endoscopy 519, 525
gastritis and gastric
ulceration 548–549
vestibular disease 793
mast cell tumors (MCT) 1359–1367
biology of cancer and cancer
genetics 1209
canine 1359–1365, 1360,
1363–1364
diagnosis/staging 1359–1362, 1360,
1361, 1365–1366
epidemiology 1359, 1365
esophageal and stomach
cancers 1283, 1285
etiology/pathophysiology 1359
feline 1365–1366, 1363
history and clinical signs 1359,
1360, 1365, 1365
intestinal cancers 1292
male reproductive system
tumors 1313–1314
prognosis 1365–1366
signalment 1359, 1365
statistical interpretation for
practitioners 7–8
treatment 1362–1366,
1363–1364, 1363
masticatory muscle myositis
(MMM) 812
mastocytosis 552–553
MAT see microscopic agglutination test
matching controls 22
matrix metalloproteinases (MMP)
heart failure 182
hemangiosarcoma 1344
valvular heart disease 245
matrix‐nucleation theory 1123
MCM‐7 see minichromosome
maintenance‐7
M‐CSF see macrophage colony‐
stimulating factors
MCT see mast cell tumors
MDR see multidrug‐resistant
MDS see myelodysplastic syndromes
MEA see mean electrical axis

VetBooks.ir

Index

mean arterial pressure (MAP) 406
mean electrical axis (MEA)
170–173, 171–172
mechanical ileus 492–493, 493
mechanical load 382–383, 388–389
mechanical ventilation 393–402
adjustments to improve PaCO2 398
adjustments to improve PaO2 398
airway pressure settings 395
airway suctioning 399
anesthesia 397
catheter care 400
complications 400–401
eye care 400
general guidelines for initial
ventilator settings 396–397
goals 398
hemodynamic compromise 400
humidification 399
hypoxemic respiratory failure
397–398
indications for mechanical
ventilation 393–394
initial stabilization 397–398
inspiratory:expiratory ratio and
respiratory rate setting 396
nursing care 398–400, 402
oral care 400
oxygen toxicity 401
pneumothorax 401
positive end‐expiratory pressure
settings 396
recumbent patient care 400
tidal volume settings 395
tracheal tube management 399
trigger settings 395–396
ventilator‐associated
pneumonia 400
ventilator breath types 394–395
ventilator‐induced lung
injury 401
ventilator settings 394–397
weaning from mechanical
ventilation 401–402
see also individual techniques
mediastinal neoplasia 335,
1236–1237, 1239
mediastinitis 477
medical wipes 1398
Mediterranean spotted fever 937
megacolon
gastrointestinal imaging
500–502, 502–503
motility disorders 576, 579
rectoanal diseases 612–613, 613
megaesophagus 558–560

acquired megaesophagus
558–559
congenital megaesophagus 558
gastrointestinal imaging
475–476, 475–476
idiopathic megaesophagus 559, 564
motility disorders 564
treatment 559
meibomian gland adenoma/
epithelioma 1261
melamine urolithiasis 1132, 1132
melanocytoma/melanoma
1347–1352
anatomic site 1351–1352
diagnosis/pathology/molecular
biology 1347–1348
etiology/pathophysiology/
epidemiology 1347
intraocular tumors 1264–1265,
1264–1265
male reproductive system
tumors 1313–1314
ocular adnexal tumors 1262
prognosis 1351–1352
signalment 1347
staging 1348, 1352, 1352
treatment 1348–1351, 1350
melanotroph cell marker 51
MEN see multiple endocrine
neoplasia
menace response 736–737
meningioma 761, 779, 1267
meningitis 781–782
meningoencephalitis and
meningomyelitis 795–801
diagnosis 797–799
epidemiology 796–797
etiology/pathophysiology
795–796, 796
history and clinical signs 797
prognosis 801
signalment 797
treatment 799–801
meningoencephalitis of unknown
etiology (MUE) 799
meningoencephalitis of unknown origin
(MUO) 780–781, 799
mentation see neurologic assessment
Merkel cell tumors 1355
mesenchymal tumors see sarcomas
mesenteric fat necrosis 492, 492
mesenteric lymphangiography
342–343
mesenteric portovenography 672
mesothelial cells 334
mesothelioma 339, 1272–1275

metabolic bone diseases 1521–1528
calcium and phosphorus
physiology 1521–1522
fibrous osteodystrophy
1522–1524
osteoporosis 1527–1528
rickets and osteomalacia
1524–1527
metabolic diseases 677–683
amyloidosis 680–681
copper storage diseases 681–683
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1481–1484
forebrain disorders 776–778
hepatic lipidosis secondary to
diabetes mellitus 678
hepatic lipidosis/steatosis in
cats 678–680
liver changes due to anemia and
shock 680
liver in hyperthyroidism 678
myelopathy 820
oral cavity and salivary glands 544
vacuolar hepatopathy and liver
changes in Cushing
disease 677–678
vestibular disease 792
see also individual disorders
metaphyseal vessels 1513–1514
metastases
airway and lung cancers
1277, 1279
approach to the cancer
patient 1199
biology of cancer and cancer
genetics 1207, 1210
bone and joint tumors
1328–1329, 1331
exocrine pancreatic
cancer 1294–1295
gynecologic cancers 1320
hemangiosarcoma 1340–1342
hepatobiliary disease 668, 668
hepatobiliary tumors 1304
intestinal cancers 1287, 1292
liver disease 686
male reproductive system
tumors 1312–1314
mammary cancer 1322–1324
mast cell tumors 1360–1362
melanoma 1347, 1351–1352
oral tumors 1255
pancreatic endocrine
tumors 1298–1299
paraneoplastic syndromes 1222
soft tissue sarcomas 1338

1619

VetBooks.ir

1620

Index

methicillin‐resistant (MR)
staphylococci 1059, 1467–1468
methylxanthine bronchodilators 301
metronomic chemotherapy
approach to the cancer
patient 1203
biology of cancer and cancer
genetics 1209
cardiac neoplasia 1274
hemangiosarcoma 1344
male reproductive system
tumors 1312
soft tissue sarcomas 1336–1337
MG see myesthenia gravis
MGCS see Modified Glasgow
Coma Scale
MGUS see monoclonal gammopathy of
unknown significance
MH see malignant hyperthermia
MHC see major histocompatibility
complex; myosin heavy chain
MI see mitotic index
MIC see minimum inhibitory
concentration
microarray‐based technology, biology
of cancer and cancer genetics
1207
Microbial Threats to Health:
Emergence, Detection, and
Response (IoM) 3
microcirculation 405
microhepatica 661, 662
micrometastatic disease
1329, 1331
microscopic agglutination test
(MAT) 946–948
microscopic examination see cytology;
histology/histopathology
microspora 1026
microvascular dysplasia
(MVD) 713–720
classification and anatomy
713–714
diagnosis 716
etiology 713
history and clinical signs 716
hypoglycemia 105
pathophysiology 714–715, 714
portal hypertension 715
prognosis 719–720
signalment 715
therapeutic decision making 719
treatment 717–720
micturition and associated
disorders 1181–1188

anatomy and physiology
1181, 1182
detrusor atony 1186
detrusor hyperreflexia/overactive
bladder 1186
detrusor urethral dyssynergy
1186–1187
dysautonomia 1188
emptying disorders 1186–1188
lower motor neuron bladder
1184–1186
neurogenic functional urethral
obstruction 1187
storage disorders 1181–1186
urethral sphincter mechanism
incompetence 1182–1184, 1184,
1185
migrating motor complex
(MMC) 565
mineralocorticoids 86
minichromosome maintenance‐7
(MCM‐7) 51
minimum dermatology database 1438
minimum inhibitory concentration
(MIC) 845, 1192
Minnesota Urolith Center
(MUC) 1127–1132
mirror‐image artifacts 663, 663
mites see individual diseases
mitotic index (MI) 7–8
mitral valve insufficiency
246, 251, 305
mitral valve regurgitation 147–148,
159, 246
mitral valve stenosis (MVS) 234, 237
mixed/compound uroliths
1143–1144
mixed venous oxygen saturation
411–412
MLO see multilobular
osteochondrosarcoma
MM see multiple myeloma
MMC see migrating motor complex
MMM see masticatory muscle myositis
MMP see matrix metalloproteinases;
mucous membrane pemphigoid
MMVD see myxomatous mitral valve
disease
mobility 352, 1560, 1560
Modified Glasgow Coma Scale
(MGCS) 455, 456, 751–752,
752, 758
modified live vaccines 1569
MODS see multiple organ dysfunction
syndrome

molecular diagnostics
actinomycosis 978
bacterial infections 844–845
fungal infections 846–847
mycobacteriosis 982
nocardiosis 979
protozoal and arthropod‐borne
infections 843
viral infections 844
see also genetics and genetic testing;
individual techniques
monoclonal gammopathy of
unknown significance
(MGUS) 1244–1245
monoclonal theory 50–51
Monro–Kellie hypothesis 749–750
morulae 909–910
motilin‐like drugs 575, 579
motility disorders 563–581
associated diseases 570–572, 576
causes 563–564, 567
clinical signs 563, 565–567, 570,
574–576
diagnostic tests 564–569, 566, 568,
572–574, 573, 576–577
dysautonomia and other
neuromuscular diseases 570
esophagus 563–565
intestinal pseudoobstruction 571
large intestine 574–579
physiology 563, 565, 569, 574
postoperative ileus and short bowel
syndrome 570–571
prokinetics 574, 575, 579–580
secondary small intestinal
hypomobility 571–572
small intestine 569–574
stomach 565–569
treatment 565, 569, 574, 575,
577–579, 578
mousses 1398
movement disorders 766–771
diagnosis 770–771
etiology/pathophysiology 766–770
fasciculations and myokimia 769
history 766
hyperkinetic movement
disorders 768–769, 768, 771
treatment 771
tremor syndromes 769–770
MPN see myeloproliferative neoplasms
MR see methicillin‐resistant
MRI see magnetic resonance imaging
MUC see Minnesota Urolith Center
mucoceles 721, 722, 724

VetBooks.ir

Index

mucocutaneous pyoderma
1464, 1464
mucosa‐associated lymphoid tissue
(MALT) 1287
mucous membrane pemphigoid
(MMP) 542, 1428
mucous membranes 121
MUE see meningoencephalitis of
unknown etiology
multicat environments see kennels and
multicat environments
multidrug‐resistant (MDR)
staphylococci 1467–1468
see also nocosomial and multidrug‐
resistant infections
multilobular osteochondrosarcoma
(MLO) 1327, 1332
multiple endocrine neoplasia
(MEN) 1297
multiple myeloma (MM)
1241–1246, 1243
multiple organ dysfunction syndrome
(MODS) 952
MUO see meningoencephalitis of
unknown origin
mural masses 519
murmurs
canine myocardial disease 255
cardiovascular disease 120,
123–124, 124–125
feline myocardial disease
270–271, 273
pleural effusion 335
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 292
valvular heart disease 247
muscle fasciculations 769
muscle size/tone 732–735
muscle weakness 82, 120–121
muscular contractions 574
muscular dystrophy 570
MVD see microvascular dysplasia
MVS see mitral valve stenosis
mycobacteriosis 980–984
diagnosis 982, 982
epidemiology 980–981, 981
etiology/pathophysiology 980
history and clinical signs 982, 982
public health implications
983–984
signalment 981
treatment and prognosis
982–983, 983
Mycoplasma spp. 1035, 1037
hemotropic Mycoplasma 927–930

nonhemotropic Mycoplasma,
Ureaplasma, and L‐form
bacteria 931–935
mycotic meningoencephalitis 784
mycotoxin toxicity 441
mydriasis 824
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS)
1229–1230
diagnosis 1230
epidemiology 1229
etiology/pathophysiology 1229
history and clinical signs 1230
signalment 1229
treatment and prognosis 1230
myelography 797–798, 819
myeloid neoplasia 1225–1229
acute myeloid leukemia 1225–1227
basophilic/eosinophilic leukemia and
essential thrombocytopenia
1228–1229
chronic myelogenous leukemia
1227–1228
myeloproliferative neoplasms
1227–1229
polycythemia vera 1228
myelopathy 815–822
acute spinal cord dysfunction
818–819
anomalies 820
clinical signs 815–818, 816–817
degenerative myelopathy 820
diagnostic approach 819–820
differential diagnosis 816,
820–822
general proprioceptive ataxia 816
history 815
hyperesthesia 818
inflammatory disease 821
loss of nociception 818
metabolic disease 820
neoplasia 820–821
paresis/plegia 816–817, 821
pathophysiology 815
postural abnormalities 817–818
spinal reflex abnormalities 818
trauma 821
treatment 822
vascular occlusive
disorders 821–822
myeloproliferative neoplasms
(MPN) 1227–1229
myesthenia gravis (MG) 803–806
acquired myesthenia
gravis 804–805
clinical presentation 803–804

congenital myesthenia gravis 805
esophageal disorders
558–560, 564
paraneoplastic syndromes
1220–1221
seronegative myesthenia gravis
805–806
treatment 806
myocardial disease
arrhythmogenic right ventricular
cardiomyopathy 263–265, 263,
267, 269–272
arterial thromboembolism 269
canine 253–265
diagnosis 255–259, 255–257, 258,
264–265, 270–272, 271–272
dilated cardiomyopathy 253–262,
255–257, 258, 260, 267, 269–271
epidemiology 254, 263–264,
269–270
etiology/pathophysiology
253–254, 263, 263, 267–270, 268
feline 267–274
history and clinical signs
254–255, 264, 270
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 265,
267–273
prognosis 262, 265, 273
restrictive cardiomyopathy 267,
269–270
signalment 254, 264, 270
treatment 259–262, 260, 265,
272–273
unclassified cardiomyopathy
267, 270
myocardial hemangiosarcoma 1340,
1344
myocarditis 414, 859
myoclonus 769
myocytes 181
myokymia 460, 769
myopathies 811–814
acute respiratory failure 382
diagnosis 812–813
epidemiology 811
etiology/pathophysiology 811
history and clinical signs
811–812
prognosis 813
signalment 811, 812
treatment 813
myosin heavy chain (MHC)
isoform 181
myotonia 768
myrdiasis 753

1621

VetBooks.ir

1622

Index

myxomatous mitral valve disease
(MMVD) 245–250
cardiogenic shock 414
cardiovascular disease 119,
122–124
classification/staging 247
diagnosis 247–248, 247
epidemiology 246
etiology/pathophysiology
245–246
heart failure 189–190, 193–194
history and clinical signs
246–247
prognosis 248, 248
treatment 248–250

n
nAChR see nicotinic acetylcholine
receptors
nasal lymphoma 1237, 1239
nasal mycotic rhinitis 1485, 1485
nasal tumors 1256–1258
diagnosis/staging 1257, 1257
epidemiology 1257
etiology/pathophysiology
1256–1257
history and clinical signs 1257
prognosis 1258
signalment 1257
treatment 1257–1258
nasoesophageal/nasogastric feeding
tubes 452, 1097–1098
nasopharyngeal polyps 791, 1477
NC see neutrophilic cholangitis
N‐cadherin 1210
NDI see nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
necrosis
esophageal disorders 562
oral cavity and salivary
glands 544, 545
pancreatitis 593
surgical, traumatic, and bite wound
infections 1031
venomous snake bites 463
necrotizing leukoencephalitis
(NLE) 780–781, 799–801
necrotizing meningoencephalitis
(NME) 780–781, 795,
799–801
negative contrast agents 470, 481
neonatal hypoglycemia 106
neoplasia see malignancies and
neoplasia
Neorickettsia helminthoeca see salmon
poisoning disease

neosporosis 1005–1006
diagnosis 1006
epidemiology 1005
etiology/pathophysiology 1005
history and clinical signs
1005–1006, 1006
signalment 1005
treatment and prognosis 1006
neostigmine bromide 806
Neotrombicula autumnalis
1459–1460
nephritic syndrome 1103
nephritis 942, 943
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
(NDI) 65–66, 66, 68
nephroliths 1124, 1149–1156
nephrotoxicity
acute kidney injury 1090
antifungal therapy 1049
antimicrobials 1041, 1044
neuroendocrine tumors 1304,
1306, 1355
neuroendocrinology 35–41
adenohypophysis and intermediate
lobe 35–36
anatomy and physiology 35–40
glycoprotein hormones 36–38
hypothalamic‐pituitary hormones
and their primary functions 37
hypothalamus 35, 36, 41
oxytocin 40
pituitary gland 35–41, 36
proopiomelanocortin‐derived
peptides 38–39
regulation of hormone secretion 41
regulation of the neuroendocrine
system 40, 40
somatomammotropic hormones 38
vascular supply 41
vasopressin, antidiuretic hormone,
arginine vasopressin 39
neurogenic functional urethral
obstruction 1187
neurogenic pulmonary edema
388–389
neurogenic shock 818
neurohypophysis 39–40
neurologic assessment 729–739
anatomic diagnosis 729–730
botulism 969
components of the neurologic
examination 731–739
cranial nerves 735–739
critical care setting 347, 350
differential diagnosis 730

feline leukemia virus 879
fungal infections 992
gait and posture 731–732
gastritis and gastric ulceration 551
head trauma 751–752, 752, 758
muscle size/tone and spinal
reflexes 732–735
myelopathy 815–816, 817,
818–819, 821
portosystemic shunts and
microvascular dysplasia
714, 718
postural reactions 732–733
record keeping 730
sensorium/mental attitude 731
shock 406
trauma and burns 448
neurologic disease 883–884, 1488
neuromuscular disease 570, 770
neuromuscular junction (NMJ)
diseases 803–809
anatomy and physiology 803
black widow spider
envenomation 808
drug‐induced neuromuscular
blockade 808
myesthenia gravis 803–806
postsynaptic disorders 808
presynaptic disorders 807–808
snake envenomation 809
neuroophthalmology 823–828
amaurosis 823
anisocoria 824
cavernous sinus
syndrome 827–828
dysautonomia 828
facial nerve paralysis 826
Horner syndrome 827, 827
internal and external
ophthalmoplegia 824–825, 825
optic neuritis 823, 824
trigeminal nerve deficit
825–826, 826
neurotoxicity
antimicrobials 1046
botulism 968–970
neuromuscular junction
diseases 807
neurotrophic/neuroparalytic
keratitis 825–826, 826
neutraceuticals 1344
neutrophilic cholangitis (NC)
687–690, 693
New York Heart Association
(NYHA) 177–178

VetBooks.ir

Index

NFkappaB see nuclear factor kappa B
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
(nAChR) 803–807
NICTH see nonislet tumor‐induced
hypoglycemia
nitric oxide
pulmonary hypertension 225
pulmonary thromboembolism 320
septic shock 423
nitrogen wash‐out 325
NLE see necrotizing leukoencephalitis
NME see necrotizing
meningoencephalitis
NMJ see neuromuscular junction
diseases
nocardiosis 979–980
diagnosis 979
epidemiology 979
etiology/pathophysiology 979
history and clinical signs 979
public health implications 980
signalment 977, 979
treatment and prognosis
979–980
nocosomial and multidrug‐resistant
infections 1057–1062
antimicrobials 1045–1047, 1060
cleaning and disinfection 1061
colonization versus infection 1061
concepts and definitions 1057
hand hygiene and contact
precautions 1061
identification of hospital‐acquired
infections 1057
management 1060–1062, 1060
pathogens of concern 1059–1060
patient housing 1061
presentations and risk
factors 1058
zoonotic infections 1061–1062
nodular dermatofibrosis 1489
nodules 1384, 1466
nonhemotropic Mycoplasma,
Ureaplasma, and L‐form
bacteria 931–935
abscesses and cellulitis in cats 934
arthritis in cats/dogs caused by
mycoplasmas 933
CNS Mycoplasma infections in cats/
dogs 933
diagnosis 934, 934
epidemiology 931–932
etiology 931, 932
history and clinical signs
932–934

ocular Mycoplasma infections in
cats 932–933
public health implications 934
respiratory Mycoplasma infections in
cats/dogs 933
signalment 932
treatment 934
urogenital Mycoplasma infections in
dogs 933
non‐immune complex‐mediated
glomerulonephritis
(non‐ICGN) 1101
noninfectious vaccines 1568
nonislet tumor‐induced hypoglycemia
(NICTH) 106–107
nonmaleficence principle
1561–1563
nonmelanoma skin cancers
1353–1357
diagnosis 1355–1356
epidemiology 1353–1355
etiology/pathophysiology 1353
history and clinical signs 1355
prognosis 1357
signalment 1355
treatment 1356–1357
nonparametric analysis 10, 11, 25
nonpyogenic hypothermia 295
nonregenerative normocytic
normochromic anemia
1241–1242
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
(NSAID)
developmental orthopedic
diseases 1540, 1542–1545,
1548–1550
endoscopy 513, 518–519
fever 435–436
gastritis and gastric ulceration
549–550, 552–553
intestinal cancers 1287, 1291
nonmelanoma skin cancers
1356–1357
osteoarthritis 1533
septic shock 424–425
skeletal development and
homeostasis 1518
toxic diseases of the liver 684
trauma and burns 452
venomous snake bites 464
NT‐proBNP see B‐type natriuretic
peptide
nuclear factor kappa B
(NFkappaB) 31
nuclear scintigraphy see scintigraphy

nucleoside analogs 875
nursing care
critical care setting 352
mechanical ventilation
398–400, 402
surgical approaches to thoracic
disease 329
trauma and burns 454–455
nutrient artery 1513
nutrition see diet and nutrition
NYHA see New York Heart Association
nystagmus 738, 791

o
OA see osteoarthritis
OAB see overactive bladder
obesity
cardiovascular disease 128
diabetes mellitus 93–94
osteoarthritis 1532–1533
obstipation 612–613
obstructive uropathy see ureteral
obstruction; urethral obstruction
OC see osteochondrosis
OCD see osteochondrosis dissecans
ocular adnexal tumors 1261–1264
diagnosis 1262
eyelids, third eyelid,
conjunctiva, and cornea
1261–1262, 1262
history and clinical signs 1262
limbal/epibulbar melanoma
1263–1264
prognosis 1263, 1269
secondary orbital tumors 1269
treatment 1262–1263
ocular decontamination 441
ocular Mycoplasma infections
932–933
ocular posttraumatic sarcoma 1266
oculocephalic reflex 753
odds/odds ratios 15–16, 22
odontogenic tumors and cysts
538–539
ODS see osmotic demyelination
syndrome
OER see oxygen extraction ratio
OG see osmole gap
ointments 1398, 1469
olfactory glial cell transplantation
746
oligodendrogliomas 779–780
oliguria 1177–1178
omega 3 fatty acids see polyunsaturated
fatty acids

1623

VetBooks.ir

1624

Index

OMM see oral malignant melanoma
oncotic pull 349
One Health 3–5
animal domain 4
factors driving One Health 3
human domain 3–4
role for companion animal
experts 4
open cardiac massage 370–371
OPG see osteoprotegerin
opioid analgesics 410, 410
opossums 892
optic neuritis 823, 824
oral cavity and salivary glands
533–546
burns 544, 545
eosinophilic granuloma
541–542, 541
etiology/pathophysiology
533, 533
foreign bodies 542
gingivitis and periodontitis
533–536, 535
healthy oral tissues and
glands 533
immune‐mediated and
autoimmune diseases
542–544, 543
malignant melanoma 539
mechanical ventilation 400
metabolic disease 544
odontogenic tumors and
cysts 538–539
salivary gland disease 545–546
squamous cell carcinoma
539–541, 540
stomatitis 536–538, 537–538
oral malignant melanoma
(OMM) 1347–1348
oral nitrates 193
oral rabies vaccines (ORV) 896
oral tumors 1253–126
diagnosis/staging 1254, 1254
epidemiology 1253
etiology/pathophysiology 1253
history and clinical signs 1254
prognosis 1255–1256
signalment 1254
treatment 1254–1255
orbital and optic nerve tumors
1267–1269
diagnosis 1268, 1268
history and clinical signs
1267–1268

primary orbital tumors 1267
treatment 1268–1269
organophosphate toxicity 388, 808
oropharyngeal dysphagia
473–474, 557
Ortoloni sign 1539
ORV see oral rabies vaccines
OSA see osteosarcoma
oscillometry (OSC) 221–222
osmolality 65, 440, 1070–1076
osmolarity 65
osmole gap (OG) 440
osmotic demyelination syndrome
(ODS) 1073
osteoarthritis (OA) 1529–1536
developmental orthopedic
diseases 1534–1544
diagnosis 1531, 1532
epidemiology 1530
etiology/pathophysiology
1529–1530, 1530
exercise and activity modification
1533–1534
history and clinical signs 1531
pharmacologic/nonpharmacologic
agents 1534–1535
prognosis 1536
signalment 1530–1531
treatment: multimodal
management pyramid
1531–1536, 1533
weight control 1532–1533
osteoblasts 1512, 1521
osteocalcin 1512
osteochondrosis dissecans (OCD)
elbow dysplasia 1542–1544
hock joint 1544–1545
shoulder joint 1542
stifle joint 1544
osteochondrosis (OC) 1540–1542
epidemiology 1542
etiology/pathophysiology
1541–1542
manifestations 1541
osteoclasts 1512–1513, 1521
osteolytic bone lesions 1242
osteomalacia see rickets and
osteomalacia
osteomyelitis 921, 923
osteonectin 1512
osteopontin 1512
osteoporosis 1244, 1244
osteoprotegerin (OPG) 1514–1515,
1515, 1521–1522

osteosarcoma (OSA) 1327–1332
OT see oxytocin
otic cytology 1391–1392
otitis externa 1471–1476
cutaneous adverse food reactions
1419, 1420
diagnosis 1473–1474,
1474–1475, 1475
etiology/pathophysiology
1471, 1472, 1472
history and clinical signs 1472–1473,
1472–1473, 1473–1474
signalment 1471–1472
treatment and prognosis
1474–1476, 1476, 1476
vestibular disease 791, 792
otitis media 1477–1479
diagnosis 1477–1478, 1478
etiology/pathophysiology 1477
history and clinical signs 1477
signalment 1477, 1477
treatment and prognosis 1477,
1478–1479, 1479
vestibular disease 791, 792
Otobius megnini 1460
Otodectes cynotis 1471, 1474
ototoxicity 1041
ovarian tumors 1319–1320
ovariohysterectomy 1318,
1321–1324
overactive bladder (OAB) 1186
over‐the‐needle catheters 355
oxalate urolithiasis 1093, 1124–1127,
1126, 1137–1139
Oxalobacter formigenes 1126
oxygen extraction ratio
(OER) 411–412
oxygen supplementation
acute respiratory failure
389–390, 390
cardiogenic shock 417
critical care setting 350
feline bronchial asthma 300
head trauma 756
heart failure 197
hypothermia 433
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 290–291, 294
shock 408
surgical approaches to thoracic
disease 329
trauma and burns 450
oxygen toxicity 401
oxytocin (OT) 40, 41

VetBooks.ir

Index

p
p53 75–76, 1206–1207
PAA see pancreatic acinar atrophy
PAC see plasma aldosterone
concentration
pacemakers
cardiogenic shock 419–420
supraventricular arrhythmias 208,
210–212, 210
pain and pain management
approach to the cancer
patient 1203
critical care setting 351–352
end‐of‐life care 1555–1556,
1558–1559, 1559
feline inflammatory liver
disease 690
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
ducts 723
myelopathy 818
oral cavity and salivary glands
537–538, 544
pancreatitis 597, 599, 606
paraneoplastic syndromes 1220
pleural effusion 335
rectoanal diseases 613–614
shock 406, 410, 410
spinal cord injury 745, 745
surgical approaches to thoracic
disease 326, 328
trauma and burns 450–452
urethral obstruction 1114
venomous snake bites 463–464
palliative care see end‐of‐life care
palliative radiation therapy (PRT)
approach to the cancer patient
1203–1204
bone and joint tumors 1331
nasal tumors 1258
soft tissue sarcomas 1336
palpation
cardiovascular disease 122, 122
pleural effusion 335
rectoanal diseases 609, 610, 615
trauma and burns 448–449
palpebral fissure 737
pANCA see perinuclear
antineutrophilic cytoplasmic
antibodies
pancreatic acinar atrophy (PAA)
584, 608
pancreatic elastase (PE‐1) 594
pancreatic endocrine
tumors 1297–1301

diagnosis 1298–1300
epidemiology 1297, 1299–1300
etiology/pathophysiology 1297,
1299–1300
gastrinoma 1300
glucagonoma 1299–1300
history and clinical signs 1297,
1299–1300
insulinoma 1297–1299
prognosis 1298–1300
signalment 1297, 1299–1300
treatment 1298–1300
pancreatic enzyme supplementation
586–588
pancreatic fecal elastase 586
pancreatic lipase deficiency
584–586
pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor
(PSTI) 591
pancreatitis
acute pancreatitis 591–599,
601–602
biopsy and histology 604
canine 591–600
characterization in cats 602
chronic pancreatitis 584, 591–594,
599–602, 607–608
complications 608
cytology and histology 596–597
diagnosis 593–597, 598,
602–605
epidemiology 592
etiology/pathophysiology
591–592
exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency 584
feline 601–608
history and clinical signs 592–593,
593, 594, 601–602, 602
hospitalization 606
imaging 594, 594, 596, 605
interpretation of specialized
tests 604–605
motility disorders 572
outpatient management
607–608
pancreas‐specific biochemistry
594, 604–605, 608
physical examination 601–602
prognosis 600
routine laboratory tests 593,
602–603
speciality diagnostic tests
603–605

specific pancreatic lipase
test 603–605, 608
treatment 597–600, 606–608, 607
pancytopenia 1219
panniculitis 1487
panosteitis 1549
papillary squamous cell
carcinoma 540
papillomas 1261
papillomaviruses (PV) 861–863
clinical signs 862, 862
diagnosis 862–863
epidemiology 861
etiology/pathophysiology 861
nonmelanoma skin cancers
1354, 1357
prevention 863
public health implications 863
signalment 862
treatment and prognosis 863
papules
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1383
atopic dermatitis 1404, 1406
miscellaneous skin diseases 1499
paradoxical breathing 335
paralytic ileus 497
parametric analysis 10, 11, 25
paraneoplastic syndromes
1217–1222
anemia/thrombocytopenia
1219–1220
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1488–1490
hypercalcemia 1217–1218
hypertrophic osteopathy 1220
hypoglycemia 1218
myasthenia gravis 1220–1221
paraneoplastic alopecia
1221–1222, 1293, 1433,
1489, 1489
paraneoplastic exfoliative
dermatitis 1488–1489
paraneoplastic pemphigus 1490
superficial necrolytic
dermatitis 1221
paraprostatic cysts 1160–1161, 1161
parasitic infections
endoscopy 519
feline bronchial asthma 298
forebrain disorders 783–784
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
ducts 721, 722, 725
gastritis and gastric ulceration 550

1625

VetBooks.ir

1626

Index

parasitic infections (cont’d)
otitis externa 1471, 1473–1474
principles of therapy of dermatologic
diseases 1401–1402
rectoanal diseases 615
parasitic skin diseases 1449–1460
cheyletiellosis 1456–1457
demodicosis 1449–1454
Dermanyssus gallinae 1458–1459
Lynxacarus radovsky 1457–1458
pediculosis 1459
scabies 1454–1456
ticks 1460
trombiculosis 1459–1460
parathyroid hormone (PTH)
endocrinology 31–32
metabolic bone diseases
1521–1523
paraneoplastic syndromes 1217
phosphorus homeostasis and
disorders 1079–1084
skeletal development and
homeostasis 1515
parathyroid hormone‐related peptide
(PTH‐rp) 1217, 1522
parenchymal disease 664–667,
665–666
parenchymal structure 664
parenteral nutrition (PN) 453
paresis/plegia
myelopathy 816–817, 821
neurologic assessment
731–734
protozoal and protozoa‐like
infections 1006, 1006
rabies 893
seizures and movement
disorders 770–771
paroxysmal ventricular
tachycardia 413–414
PARR see polymerase chain reaction for
antigen receptor rearrangement
parvoviral enteritis 571
Pasteurella spp. 340
patella luxation (PL) 1546–1547
patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
cardiovascular disease 123, 135,
149–151, 160
congenital heart disease 231,
235–237, 241–244
pulmonary hypertension 228
pathologic bone resorption
1517–1518
patient preparation/positioning
515, 517, 520, 522–525
Patnaik grading system 1361

patterned alopecia 1436, 1436
pattern recognition 731
pattern recognition receptors
(PRR) 422
PCCL see percutaneous cystolithotomy
PCD see plasma cell disorders
PCNL see percutaneous
nephrolithotomy
PCR see polymerase chain reaction
PDA see patent ductus arteriosus
PDH see pituitary‐dependent
hyperadrenocorticism
PDK4 mutation 253, 259
PE‐1 see pancreatic elastase
PE see pemphigus erythematosus
pediculosis 1459
PEEP see positive end‐expiratory
pressure
PEG see percutaneous endoscopic
gastrostomy
peliosis hepatis 673
PEM see polioencephalomyelopathy
pemphigus complex 1428–1430, 1429
pemphigus erythematosus (PE) 1430
pemphigus foliaceus (PF)
1429–1430, 1429
pemphigus vegetans (PV) 1430
pemphigus vulgaris (PV) 542, 1430
penetrating trauma
epidemiology 447–449, 454
oral cavity and salivary glands 542
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 294
penicillins 1045
penis 1313–1314
percutaneous cystolithotomy
(PCCL) 1147–1149, 1148
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy
(PEG) tubes 527–529, 560
percutaneous nephrolithotomy
(PCNL) 1155
percutaneous thrombogenic coil
embolization (PTCE) 718, 720
perforation
esophageal disorders 562
large intestine 501
small intestine 494, 497
perfusion
acute respiratory failure 384–385
cardiogenic shock 413
fluid therapy 360–361, 363–364
shock 406
perianal fistulae 613–614, 614, 615
pericardial disease 275–285
congenital 275–277, 276
constrictive pericarditis 284–285

intrapericardial cysts 275
pericardial effusion 277–284,
282–283
pericardiocentesis 280–284, 283
peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic
hernia 275–277, 276
pericardial effusion 277–284
cardiac neoplasia 1273
cardiogenic shock 414, 416
diagnosis 278–280, 279–282
etiology/pathophysiology
277–278
history and clinical signs 278
signalment 278
treatment and prognosis
280–284, 283
pericardial tamponade 413, 416,
418–419
pericardiocentesis 280–284, 283
pericarditis 343
perineal reflex 735
perinuclear antineutrophilic
cytoplasmic antibodies
(pANCA) 634
periodontitis 533–536, 535
period prevalence 18
periosteal capillaries 1514
periosteal trauma 1517
peripheral arterial pulsations
121–122
peripheral nervous system (PNS)
789–792
peritoneal dialysis 1175–1176
peritoneal‐pericardial diaphragmatic
hernia 139
peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic
hernia (PPDH) 275–277
diagnosis 275, 276
epidemiology 275
etiology/pathophysiology 275
history and clinical signs 275
signalment 275
treatment and prognosis
275–277
peritonitis 424–426
persistent atrial standstill 208–211
diagnosis 210, 210
epidemiology/signalment 209
etiology/pathophysiology
208–209
history and clinical signs 209
treatment and prognosis
210–211
persistent hyperinsulinemic
hypoglycemic syndrome
108–109

VetBooks.ir

Index

persistent right aortic arch
(PRAA) 562
personal protective equipment (PPE)
fungal infections 988
kennels and multicat
environments 1064–1066
leptospirosis 948–949
mycobacteriosis 984
nocosomial and multidrug‐resistant
infections 1061
yersiniosis 954
PET see positron emission tomography
PF see pemphigus foliaceus
P:F ratio 379
P‐glycoprotein 634
PH see portal hypertension; pulmonary
hypertension
pharmacocardiology 469
pharyngeal phase dysphagia 474
pharyngeal tumors 1258
pharynx
assessment of pharyngeal
function 473–474
gastrointestinal imaging 473–474
normal anatomy and examination
technique 473
ultrasonography 473
phlebotomy 1215
phosphate urolithiasis 1129–1130,
1142–1143
phosphaturic mesenchymal tumor,
mixed connective tissue variant
(PMT‐MCT) 1527
phosphorus homeostasis and
disorders 1079–1085
acute kidney injury 1097
anatomy and physiology
1079, 1080
chronic kidney disease
1171, 1171
clinical signs 1082–1083
epidemiology of
hyperphosphatemia 1084
etiology/pathophysiology 1082,
1084–1085, 1084
hyperphosphatemia 1083–1085,
1097, 1171, 1171
hypophosphatemia 1082–1083
laboratory assessment 1081–1082
metabolic bone diseases
1521–1527
regulation of phosphorus
1079–1081, 1080, 1081
treatment 1083, 1085
photodynamic therapy 1356
photopheresis 1370

PHPTH see primary
hyperparathyroidism
physiologic shunting 384–385
pilomatricoma 1355
pituitary–adrenal axis 55
pituitary‐dependent
hyperadrenocorticism
(PDH) 49–63
adrenal‐directed therapies
57–61, 58
baseline diagnostics 53
classification 49, 50
diagnosis 53–57, 53–54
diagnosis and
treatment 1213–1214
differential diagnosis 55, 56
etiology/pathophysiology 1213
etiology/pathophysiology and
epidemiology 49–52
feline acromegaly 45
history and clinical signs
52–53, 52
metabolic diseases 677–678
pathogenesis 50–52
pituitary‐directed therapies 58,
61–63
prevalence 49–50
prognosis 63
surgical treatment 57, 62–63
treatment 57–63, 58
pituitary gland 35–41, 36, 51
pituitary macroadenomas 779
PL see patella luxation
plague see yersiniosis
plantigrade stance 96, 96
plaques 1406, 1504, 1504
plasma aldosterone concentration
(PAC) 91
plasma‐based coagulation assays 317
plasma cell disorders
(PCD) 1241–1246
diagnosis 1243–1245,
1243–1244, 1243
epidemiology 1242
etiology/pathophysiology
1241–1242, 1242
history and clinical signs 1243
prognosis 1246
signalment 1242–1243
treatment 1245–1246
plasma cell leukemia 1241–1246
plasmapheresis 1370–1371
plasma proteins 649–650
plasma renin activity (PRA) 91
plateletpheresis 1369, 1372
Platynosomum spp. 721

PLE see protein‐losing enteropathy
pleocytosis 798
pleural effusion 333–344
airway and lung cancers 1279
anatomy and physiology
333–334, 334
bilothorax 343
canine myocardial disease 255
cardiovascular disease 125
chylothorax 338, 341–343, 342
clinical signs and physical
examination 335, 336
diagnosis 336–338
evaluation of pleural fluid
337–339, 337
hemothorax 343
imaging techniques 336–337, 340
monitoring pleural pressure 335,
338–339
pathophysiology of pleural fluid
accumulation 334–335, 335
pulmonary thromboembolism 313
pyothorax 337, 339–341, 340
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 291
specific pleural fluid tests 338
surgical approaches to thoracic
disease 326–327, 328, 330
thoracoscopy 339, 339
transudative and exudative
effusions 334, 337–338
pleural filling disorders 382, 387
pleural space 291–292
PLN see protein‐losing nephropathy
PLR see pupillary light reflex
PMI see point of maximum intensity
PMT‐MCT see phosphaturic
mesenchymal tumor, mixed
connective tissue variant
PN see parenteral nutrition
pneumatosis 484, 484
pneumocolonography 499
pneumocytosis 1020
pneumonia
mechanical ventilation 393, 400
nocosomial and multidrug‐resistant
infections 1058
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 292
pneumothorax
head trauma 750–751
mechanical ventilation 401
pleural effusion 338
pulmonary thromboembolism 314
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 291–292

1627

VetBooks.ir

1628

Index

pneumothorax (cont’d)
surgical approaches to thoracic
disease 326–327, 330
point‐of‐care (POC) tests 316,
417, 947
point of maximum intensity
(PMI) 124
point source epidemic curves
834, 835
poisoning see acute poisoning
polioencephalomyelopathy (PEM) 782
polycythemia 1214–1215
polycythemia vera (PV) 1228
polymerase chain reaction for antigen
receptor rearrangement
(PARR) 633, 1232
polymerase
chain reaction (PCR/RT‐PCR)
actinomycosis 978
acute kidney injury 1093
bacterial infections 845
bartonellosis 920, 923
canine brucellosis 964
canine infectious respiratory disease
complex 1036
canine influenza virus 866
canine parvovirus type 2 859
ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis
910–911
feline coronavirus 874–875
feline immunodeficiency virus 884
feline inflammatory liver
disease 690
feline leukemia virus 877,
879–880
feline viral upper respiratory tract
disease 888
fungal infections 847
hemotropic Mycoplasma 928
leptospirosis 947
Lyme borreliosis 941–942
meningoencephalitis and
meningomyelitis 799
nonhemotropic Mycoplasma,
Ureaplasma, and L‐form
bacteria 934
papillomaviruses 863
protozoal and arthropod‐borne
infections 843
protozoal and protozoa‐like
infections 1004, 1006, 1011,
1014–1015, 1017, 1019–1020
Q fever 960
rabies 894

salmon poisoning disease 914
spotted fever and typhus group
Rickettsia 939
tetanus 968–969
tularemia 957
viral infections 844
Wolbachia pipientis infection 918
polyphagia 94
polyps 616–617, 616
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA)
atopic dermatitis 1409–1410
chronic kidney disease 1169, 1172
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1487
feline bronchial asthma 303
miscellaneous skin diseases 1497,
1503, 1505
osteoarthritis 1535
polyuria and polydipsia (PU/PD)
65–68
diabetes mellitus 94, 96
diagnosis 66–68
etiology/pathophysiology
65–66, 66
first‐tier diagnostic tests 66–67
gastritis and gastric ulceration 551
history and clinical signs 66
hypoadrenocorticism 67, 86, 88
liver disease 645
physiology of water metabolism 65
portosystemic shunts and
microvascular dysplasia 714
rectoanal diseases 609
second‐tier diagnostic tests 67
signalment 66
treatment 68, 68
water deprivation test 67–68
POMC see proopiomelanocortin
portal hypertension (PH)
cirrhosis 705, 711
hepatobiliary disease 672–673
pathophysiology 643
portosystemic shunts and
microvascular dysplasia 715
portal thrombosis 673
portal venous hypoplasia/microvascular
dysplasia (PVH‐MVD) 713,
715–717
portosystemic shunts see acquired
portosystemic shunts; congenital
portosystemic shunts
portosystemic vascular anomalies
(PSVA) 103, 105
positive end‐expiratory pressure (PEEP)

acute respiratory failure 385–386,
388–389, 398
complications 401
fluid therapy 364
head trauma 756
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 292
settings 396
surgical approaches to thoracic
disease 326
positive inotropes
heart failure 187, 189–190, 194,
195, 196
septic shock 427
shock 410
positive pressure ventilation
(PPV) 320
positron emission tomography
(PET) 1210
postclipping hair follicle arrest
1436–1437, 1437
postoperative ileus 570–571
postural reactions 732–733, 818
see also gait and posture
potassium citrate
supplementation 1138
potassium homeostasis and disorders
acute kidney injury 1096–1098
acute respiratory failure 382
chronic kidney disease 1171
dialysis 1177–1178
feline inflammatory liver
disease 690
glomerular disease 1104–1105
hyperkalemia 85, 88, 209, 210,
1096–1098, 1104–1105,
1109–1112, 1112, 1177–1178
hypoadrenocorticism 85, 88, 90
hypokalemia 90, 382, 690, 1171
supraventricular arrhythmias
209, 210
urethral obstruction 1109–1112,
1112
potassium magnesium pyrophosphate
urolithiasis 1132
potentiated sulfonamides
1046–1047
power 10, 24
PPDH see peritoneopericardial
diaphragmatic hernia
PPE see personal protective equipment
PPI see proton pump inhibitors
PPV see positive pressure ventilation
PRA see plasma renin activity

VetBooks.ir

Index

PRAA see persistent right aortic arch
prebiotics 623–624
precipitation‐crystallization
theory 1123
precision 8
precordial thump 204
preload 176
prepuce 1313–1314
pressure support ventilation (PSV) 395
prevalence 12–13, 18
preventive nursing care 454–455
primary focal neoplasia 667, 667
primary hyperparathyroidism
(PHPTH) 1082
primary visceral mastocytosis 1359
primitive neuroectodermal tumors
(PTEN) 779
PRL see prolactin
probiotics 623–626, 637
proctoscopy 616
proinflammatory cytokines
445–446
prokinetics 574, 575, 579–580, 612
prolactin (PRL) 38, 41
prolapse 617–618, 617
proliferation markers 51
proliferative signaling 1209
proopiomelanocortin (POMC)
38–39, 52
propagating epidemic curves
835, 835
prophylactic antimicrobial
protocols 1194
prosenchephalon see forebrain
disorders
prostacyclins 225
prostate tumors 502, 503,
1312–1313
prostatic cysts 1157–1160
prostatic diseases 1157–1163
anatomy and physiology
1157, 1158
benign prostatic hyperplasia and
prostatic cysts 1157–1160, 1159,
1160
paraprostatic cysts
1160–1161, 1161
prostatitis and prostatic abscesses
1161–1163, 1162, 1162
squamous metaplasia of prostatic
epithelial cells 1163
prostatitis 1161–1163
diagnosis 1161–1162, 1162
etiology 1161

history and clinical signs 1161
prognosis 1162–1163
treatment 1162, 1162
protein catabolism 650
protein‐losing enteropathy (PLE)
627, 630, 632–633, 636–637
protein‐losing nephropathy
(PLN) 627, 942–943
protein/polypeptide hormones 29
proteinuria
chronic kidney disease 1165, 1166,
1168–1170, 1169
glomerular disease 1102–1103
polyuria and polydipsia 66
proton pump inhibitors (PPI)
esophageal disorders 560–561
exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency 589
gastritis and gastric
ulceration 553
pancreatitis 599
protoscopy 523–524
protozoal and protozoa‐like
infections 1003–1021
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1485, 1486
forebrain disorders 783–784
laboratory diagnosis 839–843
see also individual agents/diseases
PRR see pattern recognition receptors
PRT see palliative radiation therapy
pruritus
allergic skin diseases 1416–1417
alopecia 1437–1438
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1376
atopic dermatitis 1403–1412
bacterial pyodermas 1466
parasitic skin diseases 1450,
1453–1454, 1457
PS see pulmonary valve stenosis
pseudocoprostasis 614–615
pseudohyperparathyroidism 1522
Pseudomonas spp.
bacterial pyodermas 1465, 1465
nocosomial and multidrug‐resistant
infections 1060
otitis externa 1472
PSTI see pancreatic secretory trypsin
inhibitor
PSV see pressure support ventilation
PSVA see portosystemic vascular
anomalies
psychological etiologies 1574

PTCE see percutaneous thrombogenic
coil embolization
PTE see pulmonary thromboembolism
PTEN see primitive neuroectodermal
tumors
PTH see parathyroid hormone
PTH‐rp see parathyroid hormone‐
related peptide
ptosis 827, 827
public health
actinomycosis 979
anthrax 974
bartonellosis 924
botulism 970
canine brucellosis 965
canine distemper virus 853
canine herpesvirus 856
canine infectious respiratory disease
complex 1037–1038
canine influenza virus 867
canine parvovirus type 2 859
coccidia 1025, 1026
Ebola virus 902
ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis
911–912
feline coronavirus 875
feline immunodeficiency
virus 885
feline leukemia virus 881
feline parvovirus 870
feline viral upper respiratory tract
disease 889
fungal infections 987–990, 992,
994–995, 997–1000
hemotropic Mycoplasma 929
infectious disease 833–834, 836
kennels and multicat
environments 1065
leptospirosis 948–949
Lyme borreliosis 944
mycobacteriosis 983–984
nocardiosis 980
nonhemotropic Mycoplasma,
Ureaplasma, and L‐form
bacteria 934
One Health 3–5
papillomaviruses 863
Q fever 960
rabies 891, 895–897
salmon poisoning disease 914
surgical, traumatic, and bite wound
infections 1032, 1034
tetanus 968
tularemia 957

1629

VetBooks.ir

1630

Index

public health (cont’d)
West Nile virus 900
Wolbachia pipientis infection 918
yersiniosis 954
PUFA see polyunsaturated fatty acids
pulmonary edema
acute respiratory failure 382,
388–389
canine myocardial disease
254–255, 261
cardiogenic shock 416
feline myocardial disease 268
gastrointestinal imaging 475
heart failure 183
mechanical ventilation 393
pericardial disease 277
pulmonary thromboembolism 313
respiratory pattern‐based
approach to dyspnea 289,
292–293
valvular heart disease 246
pulmonary function testing
307–308
pulmonary hypertension (PH) 138,
154, 225–230
congenital heart disease
241–242
diagnosis 226–227
echocardiography 227, 228–229
electrocardiography 227, 228
epidemiology 225
etiology/pathophysiology 225, 226
heart failure 193–194
history and clinical signs 226
physical examination 226
prognosis 229
pulmonary thromboembolism 313,
319–320
right heart catheterization 227
signalment 226
thoracic radiography 227, 227
treatment 228–229
pulmonary infarction 313, 316
pulmonary neoplasia 229
pulmonary parenchyma 292–293, 293
pulmonary regurgitation 144, 147,
154–155
pulmonary thromboembolism
(PTE) 313–323
acute respiratory failure 386
antithrombic strategies 321–323
cardiac function testing
318–319, 318
clinical signs 314

computed tomography pulmonary
angiography 319, 319
definitive diagnostic imaging
319–320
diagnosis 314–320
etiology/pathophysiology 313, 314
heart failure 191–192
initial diagnostics 315–316, 316
magnetic resonance imaging and
clot‐labeling techniques 319
management 320–323
mechanical ventilation 393
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 293–294
risk profiling 316–317, 317
selective pulmonary angiography
319–320
suggested diagnostic approach/
algorithm 314–315, 315
supportive therapy 320
thrombolysis 320–321
pulmonary valve stenosis (PS) 231,
233–235, 238, 241, 243–244
pulmonary vascular resistance
(PVR) 227
pulse 405–406, 448
pulse oximetry 327
PU/PD see polyuria and polydipsia
pupillary light reflex (PLR) 823–824
pupils 736–737
purine urolithiasis 1128–1129, 1128
pustules 1384, 1429
PV see papillomaviruses; pemphigus
vegetans; pemphigus vulgaris;
polycythemia vera
P‐values 8–10, 25
PVH‐MVD see portal venous
hypoplasia/microvascular
dysplasia
PVR see pulmonary vascular
resistance
pyelography 1093
pyloric obstruction 485, 485–486
pyoderma 1461–1470
classifications and presentations
1461–1467
deep pyodermas 1465–1467,
1465–1467
etiology/pathophysiology 1461
methicillin‐resistant and
multidrug‐resistant
staphylococci 1467–1468
Staphylococcus aureus phage lysate
therapy 1470

superficial pyodermas 1463–1465,
1463–1464
surface pyodermas 1461–1463,
1462–1463
systemic therapy 1468–1469
topical therapy 1469
treatment 1468–1470
pyogenic granuloma 536, 537
pyogranulomatous disease 921, 922
pyothorax 337, 339–341, 340, 427
pyrexia
feline inflammatory liver
disease 688
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
ducts 722
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 292
surgical approaches to thoracic
disease 330
pythiosis 999–1000
diagnosis 1000
epidemiology and signalment 1000
etiology/pathophysiology
999–1000
history and clinical signs 1000
public health implications 1000
treatment and prognosis 1000
Pythium spp. 550

q
Q fever 959–961
diagnosis 960
epidemiology 959
etiology/pathophysiology 959
history and clinical signs 960
prognosis 960
public health implications 960
signalment 960
treatment 960
quality of life 1557–1561, 1557, 1558,
1559–1561

r
RAAS see renin‐angiotensin‐
aldosterone system
rabies 891–897
clinical signs 893–894
diagnosis 894
epidemiology 891–892
etiology/pathophysiology 891
history 892–893
preexposure/postexposure
prophylaxis 896–897
prevention 892–897

VetBooks.ir

Index

prognosis 894
public health implications 891,
895–897
signalment 892
soft tissue sarcomas 1333
surgical, traumatic, and bite wound
infections 1034
treatment 894
vaccination‐induced
vasculitis 1433, 1434
raccoons 892
radiation therapy (RT)
airway and lung cancers 1278, 1280
approach to the cancer
patient 1202–1203
bone and joint tumors 1331
cardiac neoplasia 1274
central nervous system
tumors 1250–1252
exocrine pancreatic cancer 1294
feline acromegaly 47
gynecologic cancers 1318–1319
male reproductive system
tumors 1312–1313, 1315
mast cell tumors 1362–1363
melanoma 1348
nasal tumors 1257–1258
oral tumors 1254–1256
orbital and optic nerve tumors 1269
plasma cell disorders 1245
soft tissue sarcomas 1335–1337
urinary tract tumors 1308
radioactive iodine therapy 77–78
radiofrequency catheter ablation
217–218
radiography
acute kidney injury 1093
airway and lung cancers 1277–1278
bartonellosis 923
bone and joint tumors 1328,
1329, 1331
canine chronic bronchitis 306, 307
canine inflammatory liver
disease 698, 703
canine myocardial disease
256–257, 256
cardiogenic shock 416
cardiovascular disease 127–134
central nervous system tumors
1248–1249
cirrhosis 708
common abnormal cardiac
radiographic patterns 130–132,
133, 134–139

congenital heart disease 237,
238, 239
contrast agents and
pharmacoradiology 469–471,
470, 480–483, 481, 490–491,
491, 499
developmental orthopedic
diseases 1539–1540,
1543–1548, 1550–1551
dorsoventral view 128–129, 132
esophageal and stomach
cancers 1284
esophageal disorders 558, 561–562
esophagus 474–479, 475–479
exocrine pancreatic cancer
1293–1294
feline acromegaly 44–45
feline bronchial asthma 298
feline hyperthyroidism 76–77
feline inflammatory liver
disease 688
feline myocardial disease 270
fungal infections 993–994, 996
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
ducts 724
gynecologic cancers 1317–1318
head trauma 750–751, 753, 754
hepatobiliary disease 659, 660–663,
661–662
hepatobiliary tumors 1305
hypoadrenocorticism 83–84, 89
large intestine 498–500, 501–505
lateral views 127–128, 128–130
leptospirosis 946
lymphomas 1233
male reproductive system tumors
1312–1313
metabolic bone diseases
1523–1524, 1523, 1526, 1526
motility disorders 564–565, 568,
572, 573, 576–577
myelopathy 819
normal thoracic radiography
127–130, 128–130, 128,
131, 132
osteoarthritis 1531, 1532
pancreatitis 594, 596, 605
paraneoplastic syndromes 1218
pericardial disease 275, 276, 278
pharynx 473
pituitary‐dependent
hyperadrenocorticism 56
plasma cell disorders 1244, 1244
pleural effusion 336, 340

prostatic diseases 1161
protozoal and protozoa‐like
infections 1020
pulmonary hypertension
227, 227
pulmonary thromboembolism
315–316, 316
rectoanal diseases 609
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 292–293, 293
septic shock 425
small intestine 489–498,
491–493
spinal cord injury 742–743, 743
stomach 480–486, 481, 483–486,
488, 497–498
ureteral obstruction 1119, 1120
urethral obstruction
1110–1111, 1111, 1114, 1116
urinary tract tumors 1308
urolithiasis 1134, 1134–1135, 1153,
1156
valvular heart disease 248
vertebral heart score 128–130,
130, 131
radioimmunoassay (RIA) 32–33
radiopharmaceuticals 1203
radioscintigraphy 568–569
randomized masked clinical
trials 23–24
RANK‐RANKL 1514–1515, 1515,
1521–1522
rapid slide agglutination test
(RSAT) 964
rapid volume expansion 360–361
RBC see red blood cells
RCM see restrictive cardiomyopathy
reactive oxygen species (ROS) 446
real‐time polymerase chain reaction see
polymerase chain reaction
receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)
1209
recombinant vector vaccines 1569
record keeping
critical care setting 348
endoscopy 508–510
neurologic assessment 730
rectal examination
micturition and associated
disorders 1183
prostatic diseases 1158
urinary tract tumors 1307
rectal prolapse 617–618, 617
rectal temperature 448

1631

VetBooks.ir

1632

Index

rectoanal diseases 609–620
anal sac adenocarcinoma 609–610
anal sac impaction 610–611
atresia ani and rectoanal
strictures 611–612, 611
constipation, obstipation, and
megacolon 612–613, 613
foreign bodies 615–616
perianal fistulae 613–614,
614, 615
polyps 616–617, 616
pseudocoprostasis 614–615
rectal prolapse 617–618, 617
rectal tumors 618–620, 619
tears and trauma 618
recumbent patient care 400
recurrent urinary tract infections
1191–1192
red blood cells (RBC) 350–351
reference ranges 9–10
referral
behavioral problems 1574–1577,
1575, 1576
critical care setting 348–349
motility disorders 568–569
reflexes
head trauma 752–753
myelopathy 818
neurologic assessment 732–733,
734–735
refractory head trauma 757–758
refractory heart failure 250
regulatory T cells (Treg) 1208
rehabilitation 455
reinduction chemotherapy 1234
renal disease 1242
renal failure 107
renal function 351
renal hemangiosarcoma 1341
renal lymphoma 1237–1239
renin‐angiotensin‐aldosterone system
(RAAS)
canine myocardial disease 260–261
feline myocardial disease 273
glomerular disease 1103–1105
heart failure 179–180, 186,
188–189, 196–197
shock 404–405
sodium and water
homeostasis 1070
systemic hypertension 219, 222
valvular heart disease 245–246
reperfusion 446
RER see resting energy requirement
RES see reticuloendothelial system

rescue chemotherapy 1234–1235
respiratory auscultation 124–125
respiratory disease
canine distemper virus
851–852
canine infectious respiratory disease
complex 1035–1038
feline viral upper respiratory tract
disease 887–889
nonhemotropic Mycoplasma,
Ureaplasma, and L‐form
bacteria 933
respiratory monitoring in critical
care 373–380
assessment of the adequacy of
alveolar ventilation
376–377, 376
assessment of the adequacy of
oxygenation 377–378
clinical signs of dyspnea
375–376
clinical signs of respiratory
distress 373–375, 374
determination of response to
specific or empiric
therapies 376
evaluation of gas exchange
efficiency 378–379
identifying respiratory distress and
dyspnea 373–376
purpose 373
use of pulmonary mechanics to
categorize disease 380
resting energy requirement
(RER) 453, 599
restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM)
cardiogenic shock 415
cardiovascular disease 124
feline myocardial disease 267,
269–270
heart failure 190
retained cartilaginous core
1545–1546
reticuloendothelial system (RES)
1049–1050
retinal toxicity 1046
retinoid therapy 1356
retrograde contrast
urethrocystography 1158
retrograde transit 567
retroperitoneal hemangiosarcoma
1341
return of spontaneous circulation
(ROSC) 365, 368–371
reverberation 664

rhabdomyosarcoma 1272
rhinosporidiosis 999–1000
diagnosis 1000, 1000
epidemiology and
signalment 1000
etiology/pathophysiology
999–1000
history and clinical signs 1000
public health implications 1000
treatment and prognosis 1000
RIA see radioimmunoassay
rickets and osteomalacia
1524–1527
diagnosis 1525–1526, 1526
etiology/pathophysiology 1524
history and clinical signs 1525
inherited rickets 1526–1527
signalment 1525
treatment and prognosis 1526
Rickettsia spp. 250, 937–940
RIFLE see Risk Injury Failure End Stage
Kidney Disease
right bundle branch block
(RBBB) 172–173, 173
right heart catheterization 227
right‐sided congestive heart
failure 132
right‐to‐left shunting 384, 389
right ventricular hypertrophy 132,
134, 138, 172, 173
rinses 1397–1398
Risk Injury Failure End Stage Kidney
Disease (RIFLE) 1091
risk ratios 20
RIT see rush immunotherapy
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
937–940
ROS see reactive oxygen species
ROSC see return of spontaneous
circulation
ROTEM see thromboelastometry
RSAT see rapid slide agglutination test
RT see radiation therapy
RTK see receptor tyrosine kinase
RT‐PCR see polymerase chain reaction
Rule of 20, 349–352
rush immunotherapy (RIT)
302–303

s
SA see sebaceous adenitis
salivary glands see oral cavity and
salivary glands
salivary staining 1404, 1405
Salmonella spp. 1060

VetBooks.ir

Index

salmon poisoning disease (SPD)
913–915
diagnosis 914
epidemiology 913
etiology/pathophysiology 913, 914
history and clinical signs 913–914
prognosis 914
public health implications 914
signalment 913
treatment 914
SAM see systolic anterior motion of the
mitral valve
sampling and sample size 7, 10, 24
SAPE see sentinel acute pancreatitis
event
saprophytic mycobacteriosis 980–984
sarcomas
hepatobiliary tumors 1304, 1306
mammary cancer 1323
orbital and optic nerve tumors 1267
soft tissue sarcomas 1333–1338
sarcoplasmic reticulum 175–176, 182
SARS see severe acute respiratory
syndrome
SAS see subaortic stenosis
SBA see serum bile acid
scabies 1454–1456
canine 1454–1455
diagnosis 1455–1456
etiology/pathophysiology 1454,
1454, 1456
feline 1456
history and clinical signs
1454–1456, 1455–1456
treatment and prognosis
1455–1456
scales
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1386
autoimmune and immune‐mediated
skin disease 1426
miscellaneous skin diseases 1496,
1500–1503, 1501–1502
scatterplots 12, 13
SCC see squamous cell carcinoma
SCFE see slipped capital femoral
epiphysis
Schiff–Sherrington posture 818
schistocytes 1219
schistocytosis 317
Schmidt syndrome 113–114
SCI see spinal cord injury
scintigraphy
biology of cancer and cancer
genetics 1210

bone and joint tumors 1329
cirrhosis 708
gastrointestinal imaging 472–473
hepatobiliary disease 659, 674
motility disorders 568–569
portosystemic shunts and
microvascular dysplasia
716, 719
screening tests 10, 1385–1394
scrotal tumors 1313–1314
SD see sudden death
sebaceous adenitis (SA) 1495–1498
diagnosis 1496–1497
etiology/pathophysiology 1495
history and clinical signs
1495–1496, 1496
prognosis 1498
signalment 1495
treatment 1497–1498
sebaceous benign tumors 1354
secondary orbital tumors 1269
secondary uveal neoplasms 1267
sedation
heart failure 197
rectoanal diseases 616
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 290–291
spinal cord injury 743
surgical, traumatic, and bite wound
infections 1031, 1034
trauma and burns 451–452
seizures/epilepsy 759–766
axis 1: seizure phenomenology
759–760
axis 2: seizure type 761
axis 3: etiology 761
axis 4: syndrome 761
axis 5: impairment from
epilepsy 761
cardiogenic shock 415
diagnosis 762
head trauma 756–757
history and clinical signs
759–761, 760
hyperthermia 434
meningoencephalitis and
meningomyelitis 801
pathophysiology 759, 760
portosystemic shunts and
microvascular dysplasia 718
treatment 762–766, 767
see also movement disorders
selection bias 23–24
selective pulmonary angiography
319–320

seminomas 1311–1312
senile osteoporosis 1527
SENL see surgically assisted endoscopic
nephrolithotomy
sensory neuropathies 1488
sentinel acute pancreatitis event (SAPE)
hypothesis 592
sentinel lymph node (SNL) 1210
sepsis/septic shock 421–429
antimicrobial therapy 427–428
diagnosis 425–426
dysregulated immunity 422
epidemiology 424
etiology/pathophysiology
421–424, 422
feline inflammatory liver disease 690
history and clinical signs
424–425
hypoglycemia 108
innate immunity 421–422
motility disorders 571–572
physiologic consequences
422–424
prognosis 428
response to infection or injury
421–424
resuscitation 426–427
signalment 424
source control 427
supportive care 428
trauma and burns 454
treatment 426–428
septal defects 151, 160
septal flattening 229
serology see blood chemistry/serology
serotonergic 5‐HT4 agonists
575, 579
serotonin receptor agonists 302
Sertoli cell tumors 1311
Sertoli‐Leydig cell tumors 1319
serum albumin concentration
630–632
serum bile acid (SBA) 652
serum cobalamin concentration 632
serum protein electrophoresis
(SPE) 1243–1244, 1243
severe acidemia 1178
severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS) 4–5, 1037–1038
severe fibrosing pleuritis 343
severe pulmonic stenosis 138
sex hormone dermatoses 1483
SGPS see sterile granuloma/
pyogranuloma syndrome
SH see systemic histiocytosis

1633

VetBooks.ir

1634

Index

shampoos
atopic dermatitis 1408–1409
bacterial pyodermas 1469
miscellaneous skin diseases
1497, 1503
principles of therapy of dermatologic
diseases 1397
Shapiro–Wilk test 10
shock 403–412
blood pressure 405–406, 411
cellular effects of hypoxia 404
classification 403, 406–407
compensatory mechanisms
404–405
diagnosis 405–406
etiology 403–404
lactate 406, 411
macro‐ and microcirculation 405
metabolic diseases 680
mixed venous or central venous
oxygen saturation
411–412
oxygen delivery 403–405,
407–408
pathophysiology and effect on organ
systems 404–405
reevaluation and endpoints of
resuscitation 410–412
sensors of cardiovascular
homeostasis 404
sodium and water homeostasis
1076
trauma and burns 448, 450,
453–454
treatment 409–410, 410
see also cardiogenic shock;
septic shock
short bowel syndrome 570–571
short‐chain fatty acids
(SCFA) 621–623
SIADH see syndrome of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone secretion
sialadenosis 545
sialoceles 546
SIBO see small intestinal dysbiosis and/
or bacterial overgrowth
sick sinus syndrome 207–208
diagnosis 207, 208
epidemiology/signalment 207
etiology/pathophysiology 207
history and clinical signs 207
treatment and prognosis
208, 209
silicate urolithiasis 1131, 1143

SIMV see synchronized intermittent
mandatory ventilation
single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) 43–44
sinonasal aspergillosis 995–997, 996
sinus bradycardia 205–207
diagnosis 205, 207
etiology/pathophysiology 205
history and clinical signs 205
signalment 205
treatment and prognosis 205–207
SIRS see systemic inflammatory
response syndrome
six‐minute walk test (6MWT) 308
skeletal development and
homeostasis 1509–1519
bone healing after fracture 1518
bone morphology 1512–1514
bone pathophysiology
1516–1518
bone physiology 1514–1516
complications with fracture
healing 1518–1519
composition of bone 1512–1513
epiphysis‐associated growth 1509,
1510, 1511–1512
growth plate‐associated
growth 1509–1511, 1510
inflammation/repair/remodeling
response to injury 1516
intramembranous and endochondrial
ossification 1509–1511
modeling and remodeling of
bone 1514–1515, 1515
pathologic bone resorption
1517–1518
periosteal trauma 1517
reactive new bone formation
1517
skeletal development 1509, 1510
structure of bone 1513
thermal injury to bone 1516
vascular injury to bone
1516–1517
vascular supply to bone 1513–1514
skin scrapes 1391–1393, 1451, 1455,
1457, 1459–1460
skin turgor 361
skull fractures 749, 757–758
SLC2A9 gene mutations 1129
SLC3A1 gene mutations 1130–1131
SLC7A9 gene mutations 1131
SLE see systemic lupus erythematosus
sliding hiatal hernia 479, 479

slipped capital femoral epiphysis
(SCFE) 1550–1551
SLO see symmetric lupoid onychitis/
onychodystrophy
small cell lymphoma 1238
small intestinal dysbiosis and/or
bacterial overgrowth
(SIBO) 583, 588
small intestine
adhesions 495–496, 496
endoscopy 522–526
foreign bodies and linear foreign
bodies 493–494, 494
gastrointestinal imaging
489–498, 490–496, 492–493
herniation 496
inflammatory disorders
491–492, 492
intestinal cancers 1287–1292
intussusception 494–495, 495, 571
motility disorders 569–574
obstruction/mechanical ileus
492–493, 492–496, 493
paralytic/functional ileus 497
postoperative appearance 497–498
radiography 489–498, 491–496
tumors of the small intestine
491–492, 495, 496
ulceration/perforation 497
ultrasonography 489–498, 490,
492, 495–496
volvulus and/or torsion 496–497
small‐volume resuscitation 361
SMRA see steroid‐responsive
meningitis‐arteritis
snake bites see venomous snake bites
SNARE proteins 803
SND see superficial necrolytic
dermatitis
SNP see single nucleotide
polymorphism; sterile nodular
panniculitis
SNS see sympathetic nervous system
sodium and water homeostasis
1069–1077
acute kidney injury 1092,
1097–1098
anatomy and physiology
1069–1070, 1070
causes/classification of
hypernatremia 1074, 1075
causes/classification of hyponatremia
1071–1072, 1071, 1072
cirrhosis 710

VetBooks.ir

Index

clinical manifestations of
hypernatremia 1074–1075
clinical manifestations of
hyponatremia 1072–1073
concepts and definitions 1069
consequences of chronic
hypernatremia 1075
consequences of chronic
hyponatremia 1073
endocrine manifestations of
cancer 1214
fluid therapy 362
forebrain disorders 777–778
heart failure 193
hypernatremia 777–778, 1069,
1074–1076
hypoadrenocorticism 82, 85
hyponatremia 193, 778, 1069,
1071–1074, 1097–1098
management of hypernatremia
1075–1076
management of hyponatremia
1073–1074
osmoregulation and volume
regulation 1070–1071
polyuria and polydipsia 65–68
syndrome of inappropriate ADH
secretion 1072–1073, 1072
see also dehydration
sodium bicarbonate infusion 1096
sodium–calcium exchanger 177
sodium–potassium exchanger
179–180
soft tissue sarcomas (STS)
1333–1338
canine 1334–1337
diagnosis 1334
epidemiology 1333
etiology/pathophysiology 1333
feline 1337–1338
history and clinical signs 1334
prognosis 1337–1338
signalment 1334
treatment 1334–1337
solid tumors 1207–1208
solitary osseous plasmacytoma
(SOP) 1241–1246
somatomammotropic hormones 38
SOP see solitary osseous plasmacytoma
source control 427
SPD see salmon poisoning disease
Spec‐fPL assay 603–605, 608
speckle tracking echocardiography
(STE) 152, 162

spinal cord dysfunction 818–819
spinal cord injury (SCI) 741–748
clinical assessment 742–744,
743–744
instability of the vertebral
column 742, 742
myelopathy 815–822
pathophysiology 741–742, 742
prognosis 748
trauma and burns 446
treatment 744–747, 745,
745–746, 747
spinal cord neoplasia see central
nervous system tumors
spinal reflexes 732–733, 818
spinal shock 818
spinning‐disc interferometry 910
spirocercosis 319, 1283–1284, 1333
splenectomy 1366
splenomegaly 707
splints 747
sporotrichosis 998–999
diagnosis 999
epidemiology and signalment 998
etiology/pathophysiology 998
history and clinical signs 999
public health implications 999
treatment and prognosis 999
spot‐on lotions 1398
spotted fever and typhus group
Rickettsia 937–940
clinical signs 938–939
diagnosis 938–939
epidemiology 938
etiology/pathophysiology
937–938
laboratory testing 939
signalment 938
sprays 1398, 1469
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
esophageal and stomach
cancers 1283
male reproductive system
tumors 1313–1314
nonmelanoma skin
cancers 1354–1356
ocular adnexal tumors 1261–1263,
1262
oral cavity and salivary glands
539–541, 540
oral tumors 1253–1256
papillomaviruses 861–863
squamous metaplasia of prostatic
epithelial cells 1163

SRD see steroid‐responsive diarrhea
SRS see stereotactic radiosurgery
SRT see stereotactic radiation
therapy
SSI see surgical site infections
stabilization techniques 744–745,
745, 746–747, 746, 747
Staphylococcus spp. 1059
bacterial pyodermas 1461–1465,
1462, 1465, 1467–1470
urolithiasis 1136
valvular heart disease 250
S. aureus phage lysate therapy 1470
Starling’s law 176, 333–334, 334,
357, 413
statins 599
statistical analysis 7–16
clinical decision making 25
cumulative incidence 13–14
describing data
distributions 10–12, 11–13
external validity 7–8
hypothesis testing 8–10
incidence odds and incidence odds
ratios 15–16
incidence rates 14–15
internal validity 8
measures of association and effect
12–15
parametric versus nonparametric
tests 10, 11
prevalence 12–13
STE see speckle tracking
echocardiography
stents
ureteral obstruction
1120–1121, 1120
urethral obstruction 1115–1117,
1116
urolithiasis 1153–1155,
1153, 1154
stereotactic radiation therapy
(SRT) 47
stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS)
approach to the cancer
patient 1203
bone and joint tumors 1331
central nervous system
tumors 1250
sterile granuloma/pyogranuloma
syndrome (SGPS) 1446–1447
clinical signs 1446, 1446
diagnosis 1446–1447
pathogenesis 1446

1635

VetBooks.ir

1636

Index

sterile granuloma/pyogranuloma
syndrome (SGPS) (cont’d)
signalment 1446
treatment and prognosis 1447
sterile neutrophilic dermatosis 1500
sterile nodular panniculitis
(SNP) 1444–1446
clinical signs 1445, 1445
diagnosis 1445
pathogenesis 1444
signalment 1444
treatment and prognosis
1445–1446
sterilization (reproductive)
964–965
see also cleaning and disinfection
steroid‐responsive diarrhea
(SRD) 627, 629, 634
steroid‐responsive meningitis‐arteritis
(SMRA) 797–798, 800–801
stomach
chronic gastric outlet/pyloric
obstruction 485, 485–486
computed tomography 488–489
foreign bodies 486–487, 486–487
gastric dilation 483, 483
gastric dilation volvulus
483–485, 484
gastric ulcers 487
gastrography 480–483
gastrointestinal bleeding 489
gastrointestinal imaging
479–489, 481–488
inflammatory conditions of the
stomach and duodenum
487, 488
motility disorders 565–569
postoperative appearance
497–498
radiography 480–486, 481,
483–486, 488, 497–498
tumors of the stomach
487–489, 488
ultrasonography 480, 482,
485–488, 486–488, 498
stomatitis 536–538, 537–538
feline immunodeficiency
virus 884–885
feline leukemia virus 879
storage disorders
detrusor hyperreflexia/overactive
bladder 1186
lower motor neuron
bladder 1184–1186

micturition and associated
disorders 1181–1186
urethral sphincter mechanism
incompetence 1182–1184, 1184,
1185
see also copper storage diseases
strabismus 737–738
strain and strain rate imaging 152, 161
Streptococcus spp. 250, 1035–1038,
1065–1066
stress 96, 549
strictures
esophageal disorders 478, 530, 561
gastrointestinal imaging 478, 530
rectoanal diseases 611–612
stroke volume 413
struvite urolithiasis 1127–1128, 1127,
1136, 1139–1141
STS see soft tissue sarcomas
Student’s t‐test 8–10
SUB see subcutaneous ureteral bypass
subaortic stenosis (SAS) 231, 233,
237, 243
subcutaneous fluids 1559, 1559
subcutaneous ureteral bypass
(SUB) 1155–1156, 1156
subepidermal blistering
diseases 1427–1428, 1427
sublumbar lymphadenopathy
502–503, 503
subtotal colectomy 613
sudden death (SD)
canine myocardial disease 254
cardiogenic shock 414
leptospirosis 946
sulfonamides
canine hypothyroidism 72–73
coccidia 1024–1025
side‐effects and drug–drug
interactions 1046–1047
toxic diseases of the liver 684
superficial bacterial folliculitis
1463–1464, 1463–1464
superficial necrolytic dermatitis
(SND) 1491–1493
clinical signs 1491–1492, 1492
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1483
diagnosis 1492
etiology/pathophysiology 1491
paraneoplastic syndromes 1221
signalment 1491
treatment and
prognosis 1492–1493

supraventricular arrhythmias 205–218
anatomy and physiology 205, 206
atrial fibrillation 212–215, 214
atrioventricular block
211–212, 212
differential diagnosis 206
other forms of supraventricular
tachyarrhythmia 215–218, 215
pacemaker therapy 208,
210–212, 210
persistent atrial standstill
208–211, 210
sick sinus syndrome 207–208,
208, 209
sinus bradycardia 205–207, 207
supraventricular tachycardias
(SVT) 215–218
canine myocardial disease 263
cardiogenic shock 419
diagnosis 216
epidemiology/signalment 216
etiology/pathophysiology
215–216, 215
history and clinical signs 216
treatment and prognosis
216–218
surgical biopsy 657
surgically assisted endoscopic
nephrolithotomy (SENL) 1155
surgical management
airway and lung cancers
1278, 1280
approach to the cancer patient 1202
bone and joint tumors 1330–1331
cardiac neoplasia 1273
central nervous system
tumors 1250
congenital heart disease 243, 243
developmental orthopedic
diseases 1540, 1543, 1545–1548
esophageal and stomach
cancers 1285
exocrine pancreatic cancer 1294
feline acromegaly 46
feline inflammatory liver
disease 691
fungal infections 1000
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
ducts 725
gynecologic cancers 1318
head trauma 757–758
hemangiosarcoma 1342–1343
hepatobiliary tumors 1306
hypoadrenocorticism 91

VetBooks.ir

Index

intestinal cancers 1289–1290
male reproductive system
tumors 1312, 1314–1315
mammary cancer 1322–1324
mast cell tumors 1362, 1366
melanoma 1348
micturition and associated
disorders 1184
nonmelanoma skin cancers 1356
ocular adnexal tumors 1263–1264
oral tumors 1254, 1256
orbital and optic nerve
tumors 1268
osteoarthritis 1535
pancreatic endocrine tumors 1298,
1300
papillomaviruses 863
pericardial disease 280–285, 283
pharyngeal tumors 1258
pituitary‐dependent
hyperadrenocorticism 57, 62–63
plasma cell disorders 1245–1246
pleural effusion 342–343
portosystemic shunts and
microvascular dysplasia 718
prostatic diseases 1162
rectoanal diseases 609–611,
613–614, 616–620
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 291–292
soft tissue sarcomas 1334–1337
spinal cord injury 746–747,
746, 747
thoracotomy 325–330
ureteral obstruction 1120–1121,
1120–1121
urethral obstruction 1115–1117,
1116
urinary tract tumors 1309–1310
urolithiasis 1144, 1150–1151
surgical site infections
(SSI) 1029–1032
diagnosis 1030–1031, 1030–1031
epidemiology 1029–1030
etiology/pathophysiology 1029
history and clinical signs 1030
nocosomial and multidrug‐resistant
infections 1058, 1060
public health implications 1032
signalment 1030
treatment and prognosis
1031–1032
suture‐induced urolithiasis
1131, 1131–1132, 1144

SVT see supraventricular tachycardias
swelling 461
symmetric lupoid onychitis/
onychodystrophy (SLO)
1505–1506, 1505
sympathetic nervous system (SNS)
heart failure 179
systemic hypertension 219
valvular heart disease 245–246
synbiotics 623–624
synchronized intermittent mandatory
ventilation (SIMV) 394, 396, 401
syncope
canine myocardial disease 255, 264
cardiogenic shock 415
cardiovascular disease 120–121
congenital heart disease 240
valvular heart disease 246
syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic
hormone secretion (SIADH)
1072–1073, 1072, 1214
synovial cell sarcoma 1327
synoviocentesis 1531
synthetic colloids 359–360, 409
acute kidney injury 1095
glomerular disease 1106
head trauma 755
septic shock 426
systemic histiocytosis (SH)
1442–1443
systemic hypertension (HT)
219–224
classifications 219
diagnosis 221–222
epidemiology 220
etiology/pathophysiology
219–220, 220
history and clinical signs 221
patient selection and set‐up 221
prognosis 223–224
signalment 220–221
target organ damage 219–221, 220,
223–224
treatment and monitoring
222–223
systemic inflammatory response
syndrome (SIRS)
Ebola virus 901
fluid therapy 358
septic shock 421–422, 422, 425
trauma and burns 445
systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) 542, 1487
systemic therapy

bacterial pyodermas 1468–1469
miscellaneous skin diseases
1497–1498, 1503
principles of therapy of dermatologic
diseases 1399
systemic medications for hormonal
disorders 1402
systemic veins 121
systolic anterior motion of the mitral
valve (SAM) 265, 268–269

t
T3/T4 see thyroid hormones
tachycardia 405, 410, 448
see also supraventricular
tachycardias; ventricular
tachycardia
tachypnea
cardiogenic shock 416
cardiovascular disease 120
feline bronchial asthma 297
feline myocardial disease 270, 271
pleural effusion 338
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 293, 295
target organ damage (TOD)
219–221, 220, 223–224
TAT see tube agglutination test
taurine deficiency
canine myocardial disease 259
heart failure 188, 192
metabolic diseases 678–679
TB see tuberculosis
T‐box transcription factor (Tpit) 51
TBSA see total body surface area
TBW see total body water
TDI see tissue Doppler imaging
TEG see thromboelastography
telogen defluxion 1437
TEN see toxic epidermal necrolysis
tender loving care 352
teratogenicity 1051
testicular tumors 1311–1312, 1488
tetanus/tetany 967–968
diagnosis 968
epidemiology 967
etiology/pathophysiology 967
history and clinical signs
967–968
hyperkinetic movement disorders
768–769
public health implications 968
signalment 967
treatment and prognosis 968

1637

VetBooks.ir

1638

Index

tetracyclines
hemotropic Mycoplasma 929
salmon poisoning disease 914
side‐effects and drug–drug
interactions 1047–1048
tetralogy of Fallot (ToF) 234, 243
tFAST3 see trauma, triage, and
tracking
TFAST see thoracic focused
assessment with sonography
for trauma
Th see helper T lymphocytes
therapeutic plan 1396
therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE)
1179–1180, 1370–1371
thermoregulation
fever 434–435
heat stroke 435–436
normal thermoregulation 431
see also hyperthermia; hypothermia
thiamine deficiency 780
thiazide diuretics 1138–1139
third eyelid 737, 1261–1262, 1262
thoracic focused assessment with
sonography for trauma
(TFAST) 336, 406
thoracocentesis
acute respiratory failure 389
monitoring pleural pressure 335,
339, 343
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 291–292
thoracoscopy 339, 339
thoracotomy 325–330
arrhythmias 326, 329
arterial blood gas analysis 328
arterial blood pressure 327
complications 329–330
continual effusion and pneumothorax
326–327, 330, 335, 343
dyspnea 329
electrocardiography 327
fluid therapy 328–329
hypotension 326
hypothermia 326, 329
hypoxemia and hypoventilation
325–326
nursing care 329
oxygen supplementation 329
pain and pain management
326, 328
pathophysiology of
thoracotomy 325–327
postoperative
management 328–330

postoperative
monitoring 327–328
pulse oximetry and end‐tidal
CO2 327
thoracotomy tubes and pleural
drainage 327, 328, 330,
335, 343
THR see total hip replacement
three‐dimensional
echocardiography 152
thrombocytopenia
cirrhosis 706
ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis
903–905, 911
essential thrombocytopenia
1228–1229
paraneoplastic syndromes
1219–1220
plasma cell disorders 1241
pulmonary thromboembolism 317
thromboelastography (TEG) 315,
316–317, 317
thromboelastometry (ROTEM)
316–317, 317
thrombolysis 320–321
thrombophlebitis 356
through‐the‐needle catheters 355
thymoma 559
thyroid hormones (T3/T4)
autoimmune polyglandular
syndromes 114
canine hypothyroidism 71–73
diabetes mellitus 97
endocrinology 30–31, 30, 33
feline hyperthyroidism 78–79
neuroendocrinology 36
thyroid‐stimulating hormone (TSH)
autoimmune polyglandular
syndromes 114
canine hypothyroidism 71–73
endocrinology 29, 32–33
neuroendocrinology 36, 40, 40
thyrotropin receptor (TSHR) 76
thyrotropin‐releasing hormone
(TRH) 40, 40, 71
thyroxine see thyroid hormones
tick‐borne diseases
ehrlichiosis and
anaplasmosis 903–912
Lyme borreliosis 941–944
neuromuscular junction
diseases 807
parasitic skin diseases 1460
protozoal and protozoa‐like
infections 1011–1018

spotted fever and typhus group
Rickettsia 937–940
TIMP see tissue inhibitors of matrix
metalloproteinases
TIO see tumor‐induced osteomalacia
tissue Doppler imaging
(TDI) 152, 161
tissue inhibitors of matrix
metalloproteinases
(TIMP) 182, 245
tissue plasminogen activator (t‐PA)
320–321
TKI see tyrosine kinase inhibitors
TLI see trypsin‐like immunoreactivity
TLR see toll‐like receptors
TMT see transient myocardial
thickening
TNM see tumor‐node‐metastasis
tobacco smoking 7
ToF see tetralogy of Fallot
toll‐like receptors (TLR) 422
tooth resorption 14–15
topical decontamination 441
topical therapy
antifungal therapy 1052
atopic dermatitis 1408–1409
bacterial pyodermas 1469
common formulations of topical
agents 1397–1399
miscellaneous skin
diseases 1497, 1503
principles of therapy of dermatologic
diseases 1397–1399
total body surface area (TBSA)
446, 449
total body water (TBW)
1069–1070, 1070
total hip replacement (THR) 1540
tourniquets 462
toxic diseases
liver 683–684
nonspecific reactive hepatitis due to
endotoxins 683
vestibular disease 792–794
see also drug toxicity
toxic epidermal necrolysis
(TEN) 1424
toxoplasmosis 1003–1005
diagnosis 1004–1005, 1004
epidemiology 1003
etiology/pathophysiology 1003
history and clinical signs 1004
signalment 1003
treatment and prognosis 1005
t‐PA see tissue plasminogen activator

VetBooks.ir

Index

TPE see therapeutic plasma exchange
Tpit see T‐box transcription factor
tracheobronchomalacia 290–291
traction injury 819
transesophageal echocardiography 152
transient myocardial thickening
(TMT) 273
transmissible venereal tumor
(TVT) 1314–1315
transsphenoidal hypophysectomy
(TSH) 62–63
transtentorial herniation 750, 750
transtracheal wash (TTW) 307, 309
transudative effusions 334, 337–338
trauma and burns 445–457
acute phase response 446
alopecia 1433
burns 446–447, 449, 455–457,
544, 545
central nervous system
trauma 741–758
coagulation and inflammation 445
developmental orthopedic
diseases 1541
diagnosis 448–449
epidemiology 447
etiology/pathophysiology 445–447
history and clinical signs 447–448
intraocular tumors 1266
ischemia and reperfusion 446
myelopathy 821
oral cavity and salivary
glands 544, 545
primary phase 449–450
prognosis 455–457, 456
rectoanal diseases 618
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 294
secondary phase 450–455
septic shock 424
signalment 447
skeletal development and
homeostasis 1516–1519
surgical, traumatic, and bite wound
infections 1029–1034
systemic inflammatory
response 445
traumatic brain injury/spinal cord
injury 446, 455
treatment 449–455
vestibular disease 792
see also wound care
traumatic brain injury 446, 455
traumatic diaphragmatic herniation/
avulsion 382

trauma, triage, and tracking
(tFAST3) 291–293, 293
treatment trials 1394
Treg see regulatory T cells
tremor syndromes 769–770
Treppe effect 177
triage
Animal Trauma Triage
Score 455, 456
behavioral problems 1572–1574,
1573
critical care setting 347
trauma, triage, and tracking
291–293, 293
triceps reflex 735
trichoblastoma 1354
trichoepithelioma 1355
trichography 1392, 1438
trichomoniasis 1019–1020, 1019
Trichophyton mentagrophytes
1428, 1430
trichoscopy 1451, 1457–1458, 1458
tricuspid regurgitation 227, 228
tricuspid valve dysplasia (TVD) 231,
234, 237
trigeminal nerve 738–739,
825–826, 826
triglycerides
liver disease 650–651
metabolic diseases 678–679
pleural effusion 342
urolithiasis 1127
triiodothyronine see thyroid
hormones
trombiculosis 1459–1460
diagnosis 1460
history and clinical signs
1459–1460, 1460
treatment and prognosis 1460
troponin 239–240
trypanosomiasis 1006–1009
African trypanosomiasis and
T. evansi 1008–1009
American trypanosomiasis
1007–1008
diagnosis 1008–1009, 1009
epidemiology 1007–1008
etiology/pathophysiology 1007
history and clinical signs
1007–1008
signalment 1007–1008
treatment and prognosis
1008–1009
trypsin‐like immunoreactivity
(TLI) 585–586, 603, 608

TSH see thyroid‐stimulating
hormone; transsphenoidal
hypophysectomy
TSHR see thyrotropin receptor
TTW see transtracheal wash
tube agglutination test (TAT) 964
tuberculosis (TB) 980–984
tularemia 955–957
diagnosis 956–957
epidemiology 955–956, 956
etiology/pathophysiology 955
history and clinical signs 956
public health implications 957
signalment 956
treatment and prognosis 957
tumor‐induced osteomalacia
(TIO) 1527
tumor‐node‐metastasis (TNM)
staging 1200
hemangiosarcoma 1341–1342,
1342
mammary cancer 1322, 1322, 1324,
1324
mast cell tumors 1361
melanoma 1352, 1352
TVD see tricuspid valve dysplasia
TVT see transmissible venereal tumor
type 1 errors see false positives
type 2 errors see false negatives
typhlitis 500, 501
typhus group Rickettsia see
spotted fever and typhus group
Rickettsia
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI)
atopic dermatitis 1411
biology of cancer and cancer
genetics 1209
cardiac neoplasia 1274
hemangiosarcoma 1344
mast cell tumors 1364, 1366

u
UACR see urine aldosterone to
creatinine ratio
UAP see ununited anconeal process
UCCR see urine cortisol to creatinine
ratio
UCM see unclassified cardiomyopathy
UES see upper esophageal sphincter
UFH see unfractionated heparin
ulceration
allergic skin diseases 1416
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1385
atopic dermatitis 1406

1639

VetBooks.ir

1640

Index

ulceration (cont’d)
autoimmune and immune‐mediated
skin disease 1426
cirrhosis 706, 710–711
cutaneous adverse food
reactions 1420
endoscopy 518–519, 519
gastritis and gastric
ulceration 547–555
liver disease 644
miscellaneous skin diseases
1504–1505, 1504
oral cavity and salivary glands
536, 541–542
small intestine 497
ultrasonography
acute kidney injury 1093
acute respiratory failure 389
bone and joint tumors
1328–1329
canine hypothyroidism 73
canine inflammatory liver
disease 698, 703
cardiogenic shock 419
central nervous system
tumors 1248–1249
chronic enteropathies 635
cirrhosis 708, 708
endocrine manifestations of
cancer 1213–1216
esophageal and stomach
cancers 1284
esophagus 478
exocrine pancreatic cancer 1294
feline inflammatory liver
disease 688–689, 690
fungal infections 991
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
ducts 724
gastritis and gastric ulceration 552
gastrointestinal tract 471
glomerular disease 1102–1103
gynecologic cancers 1319
head trauma 751
hepatobiliary disease
659, 663–674, 663, 665–671,
673–674, 673
hepatobiliary tumors 1305
hypoadrenocorticism 83–84, 91
intestinal cancers 1289
large intestine 498–500, 501, 503
liver disease 653, 656–657
lymphomas 1233
male reproductive system
tumors 1313
mast cell tumors 1360–1361, 1366

motility disorders 568, 572–574
orbital and optic nerve
tumors 1268
pancreatic endocrine tumors 1300
pancreatitis 594, 594, 596, 605
paraneoplastic syndromes 1218
pericardial disease 275
pharynx 473
pituitary‐dependent
hyperadrenocorticism 56–57
pleural effusion 336, 340
polyuria and polydipsia 67
portosystemic shunts and
microvascular dysplasia 719
prostatic diseases 1158–1161,
1158–1159, 1161–1162
rectoanal diseases 619
respiratory pattern‐based approach
to dyspnea 292–293, 293
septic shock 425
shock 406
small intestine 489–498, 490, 492,
495–496
spinal cord injury 744
stomach 480, 482, 485–488,
486–488, 498
superficial necrolytic
dermatitis 1492
ureteral obstruction 1117–1118,
1118
urethral obstruction 1111
urinary tract tumors 1308–1309
urolithiasis 1135
see also echocardiography; focused
assessment with sonography
for trauma
ultrasound‐guided biopsy 656–657
ultraviolet/sunlight exposure 1354,
1424–1425, 1427
UMN see upper motor neuron
unclassified cardiomyopathy
(UCM) 267, 270
uncomplicated urinary tract
infections 1191, 1193–1194
unfractionated heparin (UFH) 321
United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) 896
ununited anconeal process
(UAP) 1543–1544
UO see urethral obstruction
UPC see urine protein:creatinine ratio
upper airway 289–290, 290
upper esophageal sphincter
(UES) 563–564
upper motor neuron (UMN)
731–735, 816

upper urinary tract (UUT) 1124,
1149–1156, 1152, 1153,
1154, 1156
urate urolithiasis 1128–1129, 1128,
1141–1142
Ureaplasma spp. 931–935
uremia
dialysis 1176–1177
oral cavity and salivary glands 544
urethral obstruction 1109
uremic encephalopathy 776–777
ureteral obstruction 1117–1122
diagnosis 1119
epidemiology and signalment 1118
etiology/pathophysiology
1117–1118, 1118
history and clinical signs 1118
prognosis 1122
treatment 1119–1121, 1120–1121
urolithiasis 1137,
1149–1156, 1152
ureteroscopy 1155
urethral obstruction (UO)
1109–1117
diagnosis 1110–1111, 1110–1111
epidemiology and signalment
1109–1110
etiology/pathophysiology 1109
history and clinical signs 1110
micturition and associated
disorders 1186–1187
prognosis 1117
treatment 1111–1117, 1112, 1113,
1116
urinary tract tumors 1309
urolithiasis 1137
urethral sphincter mechanism
incompetence (USMI)
1182–1184, 1184, 1185
urethral tumors 1309
urinalysis
acute kidney injury 1092–1093
acute poisoning 438
cirrhosis 707
feline inflammatory liver
disease 688
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
ducts 723
glomerular disease 1102–1105
leptospirosis 946
liver disease 653
lymphomas 1233
plasma cell disorders 1243–1244
prostatic diseases 1159
spotted fever and typhus group
Rickettsia 939

VetBooks.ir

Index

surgical, traumatic, and bite wound
infections 1031
urinary tract infections 1190, 1192
urolithiasis 1132
urinary antiseptics 1194
urinary incompetence 1182–1184,
1184, 1185
urinary tract 744
urinary tract infections
(UTI) 1189–1195
ancillary therapies 1194
asymptomatic bacteriuria 1191
classifications of UTI 1191–1192
complicated UTIs 1194
diagnosis 1190
epidemiology/signalment 1189
etiology/pathophysiology
1189, 1191
fungal infections 997–998
history and clinical
signs 1189–1190
micturition and associated
disorders 1187
nocosomial and multidrug‐resistant
infections 1058–1060
prognosis 1195, 1195
recurrent UTIs or
reinfections 1191–1192
spinal cord injury 747
treatment 1192–1195
uncomplicated UTIs 1191,
1193–1194
urethral obstruction 1114
urolithiasis 1124, 1128, 1133, 1136,
1149–1150
urinary tract tumors 1307–1310
bladder tumors 1307–1308, 1309
diagnosis/staging
1307–1309, 1309
epidemiology 1307, 1309
etiology/pathophysiology
1307, 1309
history and clinical signs
1307, 1309
renal tumors 1309–1310
signalment 1307, 1309
treatment and prognosis
1308–1309
urethral tumors 1309
urine aldosterone to creatinine ratio
(UACR) 91
urine cortisol to creatinine ratio
(UCCR) 53–54, 54–56
urine protein:creatinine ratio
(UPC) 1102–1105, 1165, 1166
urine sediment 1132, 1190

urine specific gravity (USG) 66–68
urinology 351
urogenital Mycoplasma
infections 933
urolithiasis 1123–1156
acute kidney injury 1093
bloodwork 1133
calcium phosphate urolithiasis
1129–1130, 1142–1143
concepts and definitions 1123
cystine urolithiasis 1130–1131,
1134, 1136, 1143
diagnosis 1132–1136
educated guesses 1135–1136, 1136
history and physical
examination 1123–1124
imaging of the urinary tract
1134–1135, 1134–1135
mechanisms of urolith
formation 1123, 1124
medical management of lower
urinary tract stones
1136–1144, 1140
medical management of
upper urinary tract
stones 1149–1150
mixed/compound
uroliths 1143–1144
other types of urolithiasis
1131–1132, 1131–1132,
1143–1144
oxalate urolithiasis 1093,
1124–1127, 1126, 1137–1139
purine urolithiasis 1128–1129,
1128
recurrence prevention
strategies 1138–1144, 1140
removal of lower urinary tract
uroliths 1144–1149,
1145–1146, 1146, 1148
removal of upper urinary tract
uroliths 1149–1156, 1152, 1153,
1154, 1156
signalment by stone type
1124–1132, 1125, 1126
silicate urolithiasis 1131, 1143
specific tests to detect cystinuric
dogs 1134
stone analysis 1133–1134, 1133
struvite urolithiasis 1127–1128,
1127, 1136, 1139–1141
ureteral obstruction 1117–1119,
1121–1122
urethral obstruction 1109–1110,
1115
urinalysis 1132

urine culture 1132–1133
urticaria 1413–1414, 1414, 1414
USDA see United States Department of
Agriculture
USG see urine specific gravity
USMI see urethral sphincter
mechanism incompetence
uterine tumors 1317–1318
UTI see urinary tract infections
UUT see upper urinary tract
uveal melanocytoma/melanoma
1264, 1264
uveitis 909
uveodermatologic syndrome
1430–1431, 1487–1488

v
VA see ventricular arrhythmias
vaccination 1567–1570
anthrax 974–975
antigen delivery systems
1568–1569
canine distemper virus 853
canine herpesvirus 856
canine infectious respiratory disease
complex 1037
canine parvovirus type 2 859
clinical decision making 21–23
feline coronavirus 875
feline immunodeficiency virus 884
feline leukemia virus 880–881
feline parvovirus 870
feline viral upper respiratory tract
disease 889
immune system response to
disease 1567–1568
infectious vaccines 1568–1569
kennels and multicat
environments 1064
leptospirosis 948
Lyme borreliosis 942, 943
melanoma 1349–1350, 1350
modified live vaccines 1569
noninfectious vaccines 1568
oral cavity and salivary glands 539
oral tumors 1255
papillomaviruses 863
protozoal and protozoa‐like
infections 1011
rabies 892–897
reasons for failures 1569–1570
recombinant vector vaccines 1569
soft tissue sarcomas 1333,
1337–1338
West Nile virus 900
yersiniosis 953–954

1641

VetBooks.ir

1642

Index

vacuolar hepatology 665, 665
vacuolar hepatopathy 677–678
vaginal tumors 1318–1319
VAKI see Veterinary Acute
Kidney Injury
validity see external validity; internal
validity
valvular heart disease 245–252
canine degenerative myxomatous
mitral valve disease 245–250,
247–248, 247
classification/staging of
MMVD 247
diagnosis 247–248, 247,
251, 251
epidemiology 246, 250
etiology/pathophysiology
245–246, 250
history and clinical signs
246–247, 250–251
infectious endocarditis 250–251
prognosis 248, 248, 251
treatment 248–250, 251
valvular interstitial cells (VIC) 245
vancomycin‐resistant enterococci
(VRE) 1059–1060
VAP see ventilator‐associated
pneumonia
vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) 539, 1208–1209
vascular occlusive disorders 821–822
vascular ring anomalies (VRA)
congenital heart disease 234
esophageal disorders 562
gastrointestinal imaging
476, 477
vasculature
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1487
forebrain disorders 785–788
hepatobiliary disease 660, 664,
670–673, 671–673
neuroendocrinology 41
skeletal development and
homeostasis 1513–1514,
1516–1517
vestibular disease 792–793
vasculitis 1433, 1434, 1487
vasodilation
cardiogenic shock 418
heart failure 186, 187, 188–189,
193–194, 195, 196–197
hypothermia 433
pulmonary thromboembolism 320

septic shock 423
valvular heart disease 250
vasopressin (VP) see antidiuretic
hormone
vasopressors 410, 427
VCLE see vesicular cutaneous lupus
erythematosus
VEGF see vascular endothelial growth
factor
venomous snake bites 459–465
antivenin therapy 462–464
diagnosis 461–462
epidemiology 460–461
etiology/pathophysiology 459–460
first aid 462
history and clinical signs 461
neuromuscular junction
diseases 808
prognosis 464, 465
signalment 461
snake bite severity score 464, 465
treatment 462–464
venous admixture 383–384, 389
ventilation
cardiopulmonary resuscitation 367,
371
critical care setting 350
head trauma 756
respiratory monitoring in critical
care 376–377, 376
see also mechanical ventilation
ventilation–perfusion (V–Q) mismatch
acute respiratory failure 385–386,
385, 389
pulmonary thromboembolism 320
respiratory monitoring in critical
care 377–378
surgical approaches to thoracic
disease 325–326
ventilator‐associated pneumonia
(VAP) 400
ventilator‐induced lung injury
(VILI) 390, 401
ventricular arrhythmias
(VA) 199–204
acute therapy 203–204
canine myocardial disease
255–256, 260–265
chronic therapy 204
diagnosis 200, 201–203
etiology/pathophysiology 199
feline myocardial disease
270–271, 273
history and clinical signs 199–200

idioventricular rhythm 200, 203
signalment 199
surgical approaches to thoracic
disease 326, 329
treatment 200–204, 203
ventricular fibrillation 200,
202–204, 202, 204
ventricular premature
depolarizations/contractions
199–200, 202
ventricular fibrillation 200,
202–204, 202
ventricular premature depolarizations/
contractions (VPC) 199–200, 202
ventricular septal defect (VSD) 231,
232, 237, 241–243
ventricular synchrony 177
ventricular tachycardia (VT) 200, 202,
204, 413–414, 419
vertebral heart score (VHS)
128–130, 130, 131
vesicles 1384
vesicular cutaneous lupus
erythematosus (VCLE)
1426–1427, 1426
vestibular ataxia 732
vestibular disease 789–794
anatomy/physiology 789
anomalous/congenital causes
790, 792
central vestibular disease
789–790, 792–794
differentiating peripheral from
central disease 789–790
etiology 790–794
idiopathic causes 791
infectious causes 791
inflammatory causes 791–794
peripheral vestibular disease
790–792
vascular causes 792–793
Veterinary Acute Kidney Injury (VAKI)
staging scheme 1091
veterinary bedside lung ultrasound
examination (VetBLUE)
292–293, 293
VHS see vertebral heart score
VIC see valvular interstitial cells
videotoscopy 1473, 1473, 1478, 1478
VILI see ventilator‐induced lung injury
viral infections
cutaneous manifestations of systemic
disease 1484–1485, 1484
laboratory diagnosis 843–844

VetBooks.ir

Index

see also individual agents/diseases
viral papillomas 1261
viremia 878–880
virtual endoscopy 500, 500
virulent babesiosis 108
visceral hemangiosarcoma 1340, 1344
visceral myopathy 570
viscoelastic coagulation testing
315, 316–317, 317
vision 736–738
vitamin D deficiency 1524–1527
vitamin D‐dependent rickets type I/
II 1527
vitamin K1 antagonists 438–439
vitamin K agonists 322
vitamin supplementation 693,
702, 1487
vocalization 893
Vogt–Koyanagi–Harada‐like
syndrome 1430–1431
voiding urohydropropulsion
(VUH) 1144–1145, 1146
volvulus/torsion 496–497, 504, 505
see also gastric dilation‐volvulus
vomiting
acute kidney injury 1097–1098
acute poisoning 441–442
chronic kidney disease 1167–1168
endocrine manifestations of cancer
1215–1216
feline inflammatory liver disease
688, 693
feline parvovirus 870
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
ducts 723
metabolic diseases 679–680
motility disorders 565–567,
570–572, 580
von Willebrand factor (vWF) 460
VPC see ventricular premature
depolarizations/contractions
V–Q see ventilation–perfusion
VRA see vascular ring anomalies
VRE see vancomycin‐resistant
enterococci
VSD see ventricular septal defect
VT see ventricular tachycardia
VUH see voiding urohydropropulsion
vWF see von Willebrand factor

w
Walchia americana 1459–1460
Waldenström macroglobulinemia
(WM) 1241–1246

wash‐out 24
water balance see sodium and water
homeostasis
water deprivation test (WDT)
67–68
weight change/management
cardiovascular disease
120–121
diabetes mellitus 94
osteoarthritis 1532–1533
Westermark sign 316, 316
western immunoblotting 910
West Nile virus (WNV) 899–900
diagnosis 900
epidemiology 899
etiology/pathophysiology 899
prognosis 900
public health implications 900
signalment 899
treatment 900
wheals 1384, 1407
wheezes 125
WHO see World Health Organization
wild mammals
leptospirosis 945–946
rabies 891–895
yersiniosis 951–952
wipes 1398, 1469
withdrawal‐flexor reflex 734–735
WM see Waldenström
macroglobulinemia
WNV see West Nile virus
Wolbachia pipientis
infection 917–918
diagnosis 918
epidemiology 918
etiology/pathophysiology 917
history and clinical signs 918
prognosis 918
public health implications 918
signalment 918
treatment 918
Wolff–Parkinson–White
syndrome 414
Wood’s lamp examination
439–440, 987
World Health Organization (WHO)
approach to the cancer
patient 1200
hemangiosarcoma 1341–1342,
1342
kennels and multicat
environments 1064
lymphomas 1231–1232, 1232

mammary cancer 1322, 1322,
1324, 1324
mast cell tumors 1361
melanoma 1352, 1352
oral tumors 1254
World Small Animal Veterinary
Association (WSAVA)
canine inflammatory liver
disease 695
chronic enteropathies 635
endoscopy 508
feline inflammatory liver
disease 687
hepatobiliary disease 659, 667
kennels and multicat
environments 1064
wounds and wound management
bandaging 1032
critical care setting 352
exploration and initial
debridement 1031
lavage 1032
nocosomial and multidrug‐resistant
infections 1058
surgical and traumatic wound
infections 1029–1032, 1030–1031
surgical, traumatic, and bite wound
infections 1032
trauma and burns 450, 455
venomous snake bites 462, 463
wound closure 1032
wound preparation 1031
see also bite wounds
WSAVA see World Small Animal
Veterinary Association

x
xanthine urolithiasis 1128–1129, 1128
xanthomas 1483
xenogeneic DNA vaccination
1349–1350, 1350
xylitol toxicity 109–110

y
yersiniosis 951–954
diagnosis 953
epidemiology 952
etiology/pathophysiology 951
history and clinical signs 952–953
prevention 953–954
prognosis 953
public health implications 954
signalment 952
treatment 953

1643

VetBooks.ir

1644

Index

z
zinc‐responsive dermatosis
1486–1487, 1486
Zollinger–Ellison syndrome
1215–1216
zoonotic infections
approach to the dermatologic
patient 1381
canine brucellosis 965

canine infectious respiratory disease
complex 1037–1038
kennels and multicat
environments 1065–1066
leptospirosis 945–949
mycobacteriosis 980–984
nocosomial and multidrug‐resistant
infections 1061–1062

nonhemotropic Mycoplasma,
Ureaplasma, and L‐form
bacteria 934
One Health 3–5
rabies 891–897
tularemia 955–957
West Nile virus 899–900

VetBooks.ir

WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.

